Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Cold War era 1.1.1 Post-Apollo era 1.2 US / Russian cooperation 1.3 China 1.4 Abandoned programs of other nations 1.5 United States "Shuttle gap" 1.6 Commercial private spaceflight 2 Passenger travel via spacecraft 3 Human representation and participation Toggle Human representation and participation subsection 3.1 Women 4 Milestones Toggle Milestones subsection 4.1 By country 4.2 Notes 4.3 By achievement 4.4 By nationality or sex 5 Space programs Toggle Space programs subsection 5.1 Current programs 5.2 Planned future programs 5.3 National spacefaring attempts 6 Safety concerns Toggle Safety concerns subsection 6.1 Environmental hazards 6.1.1 Life support 6.1.2 Medical issues 6.1.2.1 Microgravity 6.1.2.2 Radiation 6.1.2.3 Isolation 6.1.2.4 Sensory systems 6.2 Equipment hazards 6.2.1 Launch 6.2.2 Extravehicular activity 6.2.3 Reentry and landing 6.2.4 Artificial atmosphere 6.2.5 Reliability 6.3 Fatality risk 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Human spaceflight 40 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia עברית کٲشُر ລາວ Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский کوردی Suomi Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spaceflight with a crew or passengers Part of a series on Spaceflight History History of spaceflight Space Race Timeline of spaceflight Space probes Lunar missions Mars missions Applications Communications Earth observation Exploration Espionage Military Navigation Colonization Habitation Exploration Telescopes Tourism Spacecraft Robotic spacecraft Satellite Space probe Cargo spacecraft Crewed spacecraft Apollo Lunar Module Space capsules Space Shuttle Space stations Spaceplanes Vostok Space launch Spaceport Launch pad Expendable and reusable launch vehicles Escape velocity Non-rocket spacelaunch Spaceflight types Sub-orbital Orbital Interplanetary Interstellar Intergalactic List of space organizations Space agencies Space forces Companies Spaceflight portal v t e Apollo 11 astronaut Buzz Aldrin on the Moon, 1969 Voskhod 2 cosmonaut Alexei Leonov , first in open space, 1965 Gemini 4 astronaut Ed White in open space, 1965 Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency astronaut Akihiko Hoshide taking a space selfie in 2012 International Space Station crewmember Tracy Caldwell Dyson views the Earth, 2010 Human spaceflight (also referred to as manned spaceflight or crewed spaceflight ) is spaceflight with a crew or passengers aboard a spacecraft , often with the spacecraft being operated directly by the onboard human crew. Spacecraft can also be remotely operated from ground stations on Earth, or autonomously , without any direct human involvement. People trained for spaceflight are called astronauts (American or other), cosmonauts (Russian), or taikonauts (Chinese); and non-professionals are referred to as spaceflight participants or spacefarers .

[ 1 ] The first human in space was Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin , who launched as part of the Soviet Union's Vostok program on 12 April 1961 at the beginning of the Space Race . On 5 May 1961, Alan Shepard became the first American in space, as part of Project Mercury . Humans traveled to the Moon nine times between 1968 and 1972 as part of the United States' Apollo program , and have had a continuous presence in space for 24 years and 289 days on the International Space Station (ISS).

[ 2 ] On 15 October 2003, the first Chinese taikonaut, Yang Liwei , went to space as part of Shenzhou 5 , the first Chinese human spaceflight. As of March 2025, humans have not traveled beyond low Earth orbit since the Apollo 17 lunar mission in December 1972.

Currently, the United States , Russia, and China are the only countries with public or commercial human spaceflight-capable programs .

Non-governmental spaceflight companies have been working to develop human space programs of their own, e.g. for space tourism or commercial in-space research . The first private human spaceflight launch was a suborbital flight on SpaceShipOne on June 21, 2004. The first commercial orbital crew launch was by SpaceX in May 2020, transporting NASA astronauts to the ISS under United States government contract.

[ 3 ] History Main article: History of spaceflight Cold War era Main article: Space Race Replica of the Vostok space capsule, which carried the first human into orbit, at Technik Museum Speyer Mercury space capsule, which carried the first Americans into orbit, on display at the Astronaut Hall of Fame , Titusville, Florida North American X-15 , hypersonic rocket-powered aircraft, which reached the edge of space Neil Armstrong , one of the first two people to land on the Moon and the first to walk on the lunar surface, July 1969 Human spaceflight capability was first developed during the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union (USSR). These nations developed intercontinental ballistic missiles for the delivery of nuclear weapons , producing rockets large enough to be adapted to carry the first artificial satellites into low Earth orbit .

After the first satellites were launched in 1957 and 1958 by the Soviet Union, the US began work on Project Mercury , with the aim of launching men into orbit. The USSR was secretly pursuing the Vostok program to accomplish the same thing, and launched the first human into space, the cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin . On 12 April 1961, Gagarin was launched aboard Vostok 1 on a Vostok 3KA rocket and completed a single orbit. On 5 May 1961, the US launched its first astronaut , Alan Shepard , on a suborbital flight aboard Freedom 7 on a Mercury-Redstone rocket . Unlike Gagarin, Shepard manually controlled his spacecraft's attitude .

[ 4 ] On 20 February 1962, John Glenn became the first American in orbit, aboard Friendship 7 on a Mercury-Atlas rocket . The USSR launched five more cosmonauts in Vostok capsules , including the first woman in space, Valentina Tereshkova , aboard Vostok 6 on 16 June 1963. Through 1963, the US launched a total of two astronauts in suborbital flights and four into orbit. The US also made two North American X-15 flights ( 90 and 91 , piloted by Joseph A. Walker ), that exceeded the Kármán line , the 100 kilometres (62 mi) altitude used by the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale (FAI) to denote the edge of space.

In 1961, US President John F. Kennedy raised the stakes of the Space Race by setting the goal of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth by the end of the 1960s.

[ 5 ] That same year, the US began the Apollo program of launching three-man capsules atop the Saturn family of launch vehicles . In 1962, the US began Project Gemini , which flew 10 missions with two-man crews launched by Titan II rockets in 1965 and 1966. Gemini's objective was to support Apollo by developing American orbital spaceflight experience and techniques to be used during the Moon mission.

[ 6 ] Meanwhile, the USSR remained silent about their intentions to send humans to the Moon and proceeded to stretch the limits of their single-pilot Vostok capsule by adapting it to a two or three-person Voskhod capsule to compete with Gemini. They were able to launch two orbital flights in 1964 and 1965 and achieved the first spacewalk , performed by Alexei Leonov on Voskhod 2 , on 8 March 1965. However, the Voskhod did not have Gemini's capability to maneuver in orbit, and the program was terminated. The US Gemini flights did not achieve the first spacewalk, but overcame the early Soviet lead by performing several spacewalks, solving the problem of astronaut fatigue caused by compensating for the lack of gravity, demonstrating the ability of humans to endure two weeks in space, and performing the first space rendezvous and docking of spacecraft.

The US succeeded in developing the Saturn V rocket necessary to send the Apollo spacecraft to the Moon, and sent Frank Borman , James Lovell , and William Anders into 10 orbits around the Moon in Apollo 8 in December 1968. In 1969, Apollo 11 accomplished Kennedy's goal by landing Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the Moon on 21 July and returning them safely on 24 July, along with Command Module pilot Michael Collins . Through 1972, a total of six Apollo missions landed 12 men to walk on the Moon, half of which drove electric powered vehicles on the surface. The crew of Apollo 13 — Jim Lovell , Jack Swigert , and Fred Haise —survived an in-flight spacecraft failure, they flew by the Moon without landing, and returned safely to Earth.

Soyuz , most serial spacecraft Salyut 1 , first crewed space station, with docked Soyuz spacecraft During this time, the USSR secretly pursued crewed lunar orbiting and landing programs . They successfully developed the three-person Soyuz spacecraft for use in the lunar programs, but failed to develop the N1 rocket necessary for a human landing, and discontinued their lunar programs in 1974.

[ 7 ] Upon losing the Moon race they concentrated on the development of space stations , using the Soyuz as a ferry to take cosmonauts to and from the stations. They started with a series of Salyut sortie stations from 1971 to 1986.

Post-Apollo era Artist's rendering of an Apollo CSM about to dock with a Soyuz spacecraft In 1969, Nixon appointed his vice president, Spiro Agnew , to head a Space Task Group to recommend follow-on human spaceflight programs after Apollo. The group proposed an ambitious Space Transportation System based on a reusable Space Shuttle , which consisted of a winged, internally fueled orbiter stage burning liquid hydrogen, launched with a similar, but larger kerosene -fueled booster stage, each equipped with airbreathing jet engines for powered return to a runway at the Kennedy Space Center launch site. Other components of the system included a permanent, modular space station; reusable space tug ; and nuclear interplanetary ferry, leading to a human expedition to Mars as early as 1986 or as late as 2000, depending on the level of funding allocated. However, Nixon knew the American political climate would not support congressional funding for such an ambition, and killed proposals for all but the Shuttle, possibly to be followed by the space station.

Plans for the Shuttle were scaled back to reduce development risk, cost, and time, replacing the piloted fly-back booster with two reusable solid rocket boosters , and the smaller orbiter would use an expendable external propellant tank to feed its hydrogen-fueled main engines . The orbiter would have to make unpowered landings.

Space Shuttle orbiter , first crewed orbital spaceplane In 1973, the US launched the Skylab sortie space station and inhabited it for 171 days with three crews ferried aboard an Apollo spacecraft. During that time, President Richard Nixon and Soviet general secretary Leonid Brezhnev were negotiating an easing of Cold War tensions known as détente . During the détente, they negotiated the Apollo–Soyuz program, in which an Apollo spacecraft carrying a special docking adapter module would rendezvous and dock with Soyuz 19 in 1975. The American and Soviet crews shook hands in space, but the purpose of the flight was purely symbolic.

The two nations continued to compete rather than cooperate in space, as the US turned to developing the Space Shuttle and planning the space station, which was dubbed Freedom . The USSR launched three Almaz military sortie stations from 1973 to 1977, disguised as Salyuts. They followed Salyut with the development of Mir , the first modular, semi-permanent space station, the construction of which took place from 1986 to 1996.

Mir orbited at an altitude of 354 kilometers (191 nautical miles), at an orbital inclination of 51.6°. It was occupied for 4,592 days and made a controlled reentry in 2001.

The Space Shuttle started flying in 1981, but the US Congress failed to approve sufficient funds to make Space Station Freedom a reality. A fleet of four shuttles was built: Columbia , Challenger , Discovery , and Atlantis . A fifth shuttle, Endeavour , was built to replace Challenger , which was destroyed in an accident during launch that killed 7 astronauts on 28 January 1986. From 1983 to 1998, twenty-two Shuttle flights carried components for a European Space Agency sortie space station called Spacelab in the Shuttle payload bay.

[ 8 ] Buran -class orbiter, Soviet equivalent of the Space Shuttle orbiter The USSR copied the US's reusable Space Shuttle orbiter , which they called Buran -class orbiter or simply Buran , which was designed to be launched into orbit by the expendable Energia rocket, and was capable of robotic orbital flight and landing. Unlike the Space Shuttle, Buran had no main rocket engines, but like the Space Shuttle orbiter, it used smaller rocket engines to perform its final orbital insertion. A single uncrewed orbital test flight took place in November 1988. A second test flight was planned by 1993, but the program was canceled due to lack of funding and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. Two more orbiters were never completed, and the one that performed the uncrewed flight was destroyed in a hangar roof collapse in May 2002.

US / Russian cooperation International Space Station, assembled in orbit by US and Russia The dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 brought an end to the Cold War and opened the door to true cooperation between the US and Russia. The Soviet Soyuz and Mir programs were taken over by the Russian Federal Space Agency, which became known as the Roscosmos State Corporation . The Shuttle-Mir Program included American Space Shuttles visiting the Mir space station, Russian cosmonauts flying on the Shuttle, and an American astronaut flying aboard a Soyuz spacecraft for long-duration expeditions aboard Mir .

In 1993, President Bill Clinton secured Russia's cooperation in converting the planned Space Station Freedom into the International Space Station (ISS). Construction of the station began in 1998. The station orbits at an altitude of 409 kilometers (221 nmi) and an orbital inclination of 51.65°. Several of the Space Shuttle's 135 orbital flights were to help assemble, supply, and crew the ISS. Russia has built half of the International Space Station and has continued its cooperation with the US.

China Main article: China Manned Space Program Chinese Shenzhou , first non-USSR and non-USA crewed spacecraft China was the third nation in the world, after the USSR and US, to send humans into space. During the Space Race between the two superpowers, which culminated with Apollo 11 landing humans on the Moon, Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai decided on 14 July 1967 that China should not be left behind, and initiated their own crewed space program: the top-secret Project 714, which aimed to put two people into space by 1973 with the Shuguang spacecraft. Nineteen PLAAF pilots were selected for this goal in March 1971. The Shuguang-1 spacecraft, to be launched with the CZ-2A rocket, was designed to carry a crew of two. The program was officially canceled on 13 May 1972 for economic reasons.

In 1992, under China Manned Space Program (CMS), also known as "Project 921", authorization and funding was given for the first phase of a third, successful attempt at crewed spaceflight. To achieve independent human spaceflight capability, China developed the Shenzhou spacecraft and Long March 2F rocket dedicated to human spaceflight in the next few years, along with critical infrastructures like a new launch site and flight control center being built. The first uncrewed spacecraft, Shenzhou 1 , was launched on 20 November 1999 and recovered the next day, marking the first step of the realization of China's human spaceflight capability. Three more uncrewed missions were conducted in the next few years in order to verify the key technologies. On 15 October 2003 Shenzhou 5 , China's first crewed spaceflight mission, put Yang Liwei in orbit for 21 hours and returned safely back to Inner Mongolia , making China the third nation to launch a human into orbit independently.

[ 9 ] The goal of the second phase of CMS was to make technology breakthroughs in extravehicular activities (EVA, or spacewalk), space rendezvous , and docking to support short-term human activities in space.

[ 10 ] On 25 September 2008 during the flight of Shenzhou 7 , Zhai Zhigang and Liu Boming completed China's first EVA.

[ 11 ] In 2011, China launched the Tiangong 1 target spacecraft and Shenzhou 8 uncrewed spacecraft. The two spacecraft completed China's first automatic rendezvous and docking on 3 November 2011.

[ 12 ] About 9 months later, Tiangong 1 completed the first manual rendezvous and docking with Shenzhou 9 , which carried China's first female astronaut Liu Yang .

[ 13 ] In September 2016, Tiangong 2 was launched into orbit. It was a space laboratory with more advanced functions and equipment than Tiangong 1 . A month later, Shenzhou 11 was launched and docked with Tiangong 2 . Two astronauts entered Tiangong 2 and were stationed for about 30 days, verifying the viability of astronauts' medium-term stay in space.

[ 14 ] In April 2017, China's first cargo spacecraft, Tianzhou 1 docked with Tiangong 2 and completed multiple in-orbit propellant refueling tests, which marked the successful completion of the second phase of CMS.

[ 14 ] The third phase of CMS began in 2020. The goal of this phase is to build China's own space station, Tiangong .

[ 15 ] The first module of Tiangong , the Tianhe core module , was launched into orbit by China's most powerful rocket Long March 5B on 29 April 2021.

[ 16 ] It was later visited by multiple cargo and crewed spacecraft and demonstrated China's capability of sustaining Chinese astronauts' long-term stay in space.

According to CMS announcement, all missions of Tiangong Space Station are scheduled to be carried out by the end of 2022.

[ 17 ] Once the construction is completed, Tiangong will enter the application and development phase, which is poised to last for no less than 10 years.

[ 17 ] Abandoned programs of other nations The European Space Agency began development of the Hermes shuttle spaceplane in 1987, to be launched on the Ariane 5 expendable launch vehicle. It was intended to dock with the European Columbus space station . The projects were canceled in 1992 when it became clear that neither cost nor performance goals could be achieved. No Hermes shuttles were ever built. The Columbus space station was reconfigured as the European module of the same name on the International Space Station.

[ 18 ] Japan ( NASDA ) began the development of the HOPE-X experimental shuttle spaceplane in the 1980s, to be launched on its H-IIA expendable launch vehicle. A string of failures in 1998 led to funding reductions, and the project's cancellation in 2003 in favor of participation in the International Space Station program through the Kibō Japanese Experiment Module and H-II Transfer Vehicle cargo spacecraft. As an alternative to HOPE-X, NASDA in 2001 proposed the Fuji crew capsule for independent or ISS flights, but the project did not proceed to the contracting stage.

[ citation needed ] From 1993 to 1997, the Japanese Rocket Society [ ja ] , Kawasaki Heavy Industries , and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries worked on the proposed Kankoh-maru vertical-takeoff-and-landing single-stage-to-orbit reusable launch system. In 2005, this system was proposed for space tourism.

[ 19 ] According to a press release from the Iraqi News Agency dated 5 December 1989, there was only one test of the Al-Abid space launcher, which Iraq intended to use to develop its own crewed space facilities by the end of the century. These plans were put to an end by the Gulf War of 1991 and the economic hardships that followed.

[ 20 ] United States "Shuttle gap" STS-135 (July 2011), the final human spaceflight of the United States until 2018 VSS Unity Flight VP-03 December 2018, the first human spaceflight from the United States since STS-135 Under the George W. Bush administration, the Constellation program included plans for retiring the Space Shuttle program and replacing it with the capability for spaceflight beyond low Earth orbit. In the 2011 United States federal budget , the Obama administration canceled Constellation for being over budget and behind schedule, while not innovating and investing in critical new technologies.

[ 21 ] As part of the Artemis program , NASA is developing the Orion spacecraft to be launched by the Space Launch System . Under the Commercial Crew Development plan, NASA relies on transportation services provided by the private sector to reach low Earth orbit, such as SpaceX Dragon 2 , the Boeing Starliner or Sierra Nevada Corporation 's Dream Chaser . The period between the retirement of the Space Shuttle in 2011 and the first launch into space of SpaceShipTwo Flight VP-03 on 13 December 2018 is similar to the gap between the end of Apollo in 1975 and the first Space Shuttle flight in 1981, and is referred to by a presidential Blue Ribbon Committee as the U.S. human spaceflight gap.

Commercial private spaceflight This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( September 2024 ) SpaceShipOne , first private sub-orbital spaceplane Crew Dragon , first private orbital spacecraft Since the early 2000s, a variety of private spaceflight ventures have been undertaken. As of November 2024, [update] SpaceX [ 22 ] and Boeing [ 23 ] have launched humans to orbit, [ note 1 ] while Blue Origin has launched 8 crewed flights, six of which crossed the Kármán line .

[ 24 ] [ note 2 ] Virgin Galactic has launched crew to a height above 80 km (50 mi) on a suborbital trajectory.

[ 26 ] Several other companies, including Sierra Nevada and Copenhagen Suborbitals , have developed crewed spacecraft.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] SpaceX, Boeing, Blue Origin, and Virgin Galactic plan to fly commercial passengers in the emerging space tourism market.

[ 29 ] SpaceX has developed Crew Dragon flying on Falcon 9 . It first launched astronauts to orbit and to the ISS in May 2020 as part of the Demo-2 mission. Developed as part of NASA's Commercial Crew Development program, the capsule is also available for flights with other customers. A first tourist mission, Inspiration4 , launched in September 2021.

[ 30 ] Boeing developed the Starliner capsule as part of NASA's Commercial Crew Development program, which is launched on a United Launch Alliance Atlas V launch vehicle.

[ 31 ] Starliner made an uncrewed flight in December 2019. A second uncrewed flight attempt was launched in May 2022.

[ 32 ] A crewed flight to fully certify Starliner was launched in June 2024.

[ 33 ] Similar to SpaceX, development funding has been provided by a mix of government and private funds.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Virgin Galactic is developing SpaceshipTwo , a commercial suborbital spacecraft aimed at the space tourism market. It reached space in December 2018.

[ 26 ] Blue Origin is in a multi-year test program of their New Shepard vehicle and has carried out thirty one launches as of May 2025, including twenty uncrewed test flights and eleven crewed flights. The first crewed flight, carrying founder Jeff Bezos , his brother Mark Bezos , aviator Wally Funk , and 18-year old Oliver Daemen launched on July 20, 2021.

[ 36 ] Passenger travel via spacecraft Over the decades, a number of spacecraft have been proposed for spaceliner passenger travel. Somewhat analogous to travel by airliner after the middle of the 20th century, these vehicles are proposed to transport large numbers of passengers to destinations in space, or on Earth via suborbital spaceflights . To date, none of these concepts have been built, although a few vehicles that carry fewer than 10 persons are currently in the test flight phase of their development process.

[ citation needed ] One large spaceliner concept currently in early development is the SpaceX Starship , which, in addition to replacing the Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy launch vehicles in the legacy Earth-orbit market after 2020, has been proposed by SpaceX for long-distance commercial travel on Earth, flying 100+ people suborbitally between two points in under one hour, also known as "Earth-to-Earth".

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Small spaceplane or small capsule suborbital spacecraft have been under development for the past decade or so; as of 2017 [update] , at least one of each type is under development. Both Virgin Galactic and Blue Origin have craft in active development : the SpaceShipTwo spaceplane and the New Shepard capsule, respectively. Both would carry approximately a half-dozen passengers up to space for a brief time of zero gravity before returning to the launch location.

XCOR Aerospace had been developing the Lynx single-passenger spaceplane since the 2000s, [ 40 ] [ 41 ] but development was halted in 2017.

[ 42 ] Human representation and participation See also: Space law , Human presence in space , Space colonization , and Human outpost Participation and representation of humanity in space has been an issue ever since the first phase of space exploration.

[ 43 ] Some rights of non-spacefaring countries have been secured through international space law , declaring space the " province of all mankind ", though the sharing of space by all humanity is sometimes criticized as imperialist and lacking.

[ 43 ] In addition to the lack of international inclusion, the inclusion of women and people of color has also been lacking. To make spaceflight more inclusive, organizations such as the Justspace Alliance [ 43 ] and IAU -featured Inclusive Astronomy [ 44 ] have been formed in recent years.

Women Main article: Women in space The first woman to ever enter space was Valentina Tereshkova . She flew in 1963, but it was not until the 1980s that another woman entered space. At the time, all astronauts were required to be military test pilots; women were not able to enter this career, which is one reason for the delay in allowing women to join space crews.

[ 45 ] After the rules were changed, Svetlana Savitskaya became the second woman to enter space; she was also from the Soviet Union .

Sally Ride became the next woman to enter space and the first woman to enter space through the United States program.Since then, eleven other countries have allowed women astronauts. The first all-female spacewalk occurred in 2018, by Christina Koch and Jessica Meir . These two women had both participated in separate spacewalks with NASA. The first mission to the Moon with a woman aboard is planned for 2024.

Despite these developments, women are still underrepresented among astronauts and especially cosmonauts. More than 600 people have flown in space but only 75 have been women.

[ 46 ] Issues that block potential applicants from the programs, and limit the space missions they are able to go on, are, for example: agencies limit women to half as much time in space as men, due to suppositions that women are at greater potential risk for cancer.

[ 47 ] a lack of space suits sized appropriately for female astronauts.

[ 48 ] Milestones Map of countries (and successor states) whose citizens have flown in space as of June 2025. Countries represented only by suborbital space flyers are shaded.

Note: citizens from the now-defunct East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and Soviet Union have also flown in space.

By country This is a list of major milestones achieved by country. Recorded is the first citizen and first spacecraft from each respective country to accomplish each milestone, regardless of mission type or intended outcome.

Country Citizen to space (Spaceflight) Crewed spaceflight launch Citizen to land on moon Soviet Union Yuri Gagarin , ( Vostok 1 , 1961 ) Vostok 1 , 1961 United States Alan Shepard , ( Freedom 7 , 1961 ) Freedom 7 , 1961 Neil Armstrong ( Apollo 11 , 1969 ) Czechoslovakia Vladimír Remek ( Soyuz 28 , 1978 ) Poland Mirosław Hermaszewski ( Soyuz 30 , 1978 ) East Germany Sigmund Jähn ( Soyuz 31 , 1978 ) Bulgaria Georgi Ivanov ( Soyuz 33 , 1979 ) Hungary Bertalan Farkas ( Soyuz 36 , 1980 ) Vietnam Phạm Tuân ( Soyuz 37 , 1980 ) Cuba Arnaldo Tamayo Méndez ( Soyuz 38 , 1980 ) Mongolia Jügderdemidiin Gürragchaa ( Soyuz 39 , 1981 ) Romania Dumitru Prunariu ( Soyuz 40 , 1981 ) France Jean-Loup Chrétien ( Soyuz T-6 , 1982 ) West Germany Ulf Merbold ( STS-9 , 1983 ) India Rakesh Sharma ( Soyuz T-11 , 1984 ) Canada Marc Garneau ( STS-41-G , 1984 ) Saudi Arabia Sultan Al-Saud ( STS-51-G , 1985 ) Netherlands Wubbo Ockels ( STS-61-A , 1985 ) Mexico Rodolfo Neri Vela ( STS-61-B , 1985 ) Syria Muhammed Faris ( Soyuz TM-3 , 1987 ) Afghanistan Abdul Mohmand ( Soyuz TM-6 , 1988 ) Japan Toyohiro Akiyama ( Soyuz TM-11 , 1990 ) United Kingdom Helen Sharman ( Soyuz TM-12 , 1991 ) Austria Franz Viehböck ( Soyuz TM-13 , 1991 ) Germany Klaus-Dietrich Flade ( Soyuz TM-14 , 1992 ) Russia Aleksandr Kaleri [ a ] ( Soyuz TM-14 , 1992 ) Soyuz TM-14 , 1992 Italy Franco Malerba ( STS-46 , 1992 ) Switzerland Claude Nicollier ( STS-46 , 1992 ) Kazakhstan Talgat Musabayev ( Soyuz TM-19 , 1994 ) Ukraine Leonid Kadeniuk ( STS-87 , 1997 ) Spain Pedro Duque ( STS-95 , 1998 ) Slovakia Ivan Bella ( Soyuz TM-29 , 1999 ) South Africa Mark Shuttleworth ( Soyuz TM-34 , 2002 ) Israel Ilan Ramon ( STS-107 , 2003 ) China Yang Liwei ( Shenzhou 5 , 2003 ) Shenzhou 5 , 2003 Brazil Marcos Pontes ( Soyuz TMA-8 , 2006 ) Sweden Christer Fuglesang ( STS-116 , 2006 ) Malaysia Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor ( Soyuz TMA-11 , 2007 ) South Korea Yi So-Yeon ( Soyuz TMA-12 , 2008 ) Denmark Andreas Mogensen ( Soyuz TMA-18M , 2015 ) Kazakhstan Aidyn Aimbetov ( Soyuz TMA-18M , 2015 ) UAE Hazza Al Mansouri ( Soyuz MS-15 , 2019 ) Australia Chris Boshuizen ( Blue Origin NS-18 , 2021 ) Portugal Mário Ferreira ( Blue Origin NS-22 , 2022 ) Egypt Sara Sabry ( Blue Origin NS-22 , 2022 ) Turkey Alper Gezeravcı ( Axiom Mission 3 , 2024 ) Belarus Marina Vasilevskaya ( Soyuz MS-25 , 2024 ) Notes ^ Aleksandr Viktorenko , making his third spaceflight, flew for the first time as a Russian citizen as opposed to a citizen of the Soviet Union which was the case of his first two spaceflights.

By achievement 12 April 1961 Yuri Gagarin was the first human in space and the first in Earth orbit, on Vostok 1 .

17 July 1962 or 19 July 1963 Either Robert M. White or Joseph A. Walker (depending on the definition of the space border ) was the first to pilot a spaceplane , the North American X-15 , on 17 July 1962 (White) or 19 July 1963 (Walker).

18 March 1965 Alexei Leonov was first to walk in space .

15 December 1965 Walter M. Schirra and Tom Stafford were first to perform a space rendezvous , piloting their Gemini 6A spacecraft to achieve station-keeping one foot (30 cm) from Gemini 7 for over 5 hours.

16 March 1966 Neil Armstrong and David Scott were first to rendezvous and dock , piloting their Gemini 8 spacecraft to dock with an uncrewed Agena Target Vehicle .

21–27 December 1968 Frank Borman , Jim Lovell , and William Anders were the first to travel beyond low Earth orbit (LEO) and the first to orbit the Moon, on the Apollo 8 mission, which orbited the Moon ten times before returning to Earth.

26 May 1969 Apollo 10 reaches the fastest speed ever traveled by a human: 39,897 km/h (11.08 km/s or 24,791 mph), or roughly 1/27,000 of lightspeed .

20 July 1969 Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin were first to land on the Moon, during Apollo 11 .

14 April 1970 The crew of Apollo 13 attained pericynthion above the Moon, setting the current record for the highest absolute altitude attained by a crewed spacecraft: 400,171 kilometers (248,655 miles) from Earth.

Longest time in space Valeri Polyakov performed the longest single spaceflight, from 8 January 1994 to 22 March 1995 (437 days, 17 hours, 58 minutes, and 16 seconds).

Oleg Kononenko has spent the most total time in space on multiple missions, 1,110 days, 14 hours, 57 minutes.

[ 49 ] Longest-duration crewed space station The International Space Station has the longest period of continuous human presence in space, 2 November 2000 to present (24 years and 289 days). This record was previously held by Mir , from Soyuz TM-8 on 5 September 1989 to the Soyuz TM-29 on 28 August 1999, a span of 3,644 days (almost 10 years).

By nationality or sex 12 April 1961 Yuri Gagarin became the first Soviet and the first human to reach space, on Vostok 1 .

5 May 1961 Alan Shepard became the first American to reach space, on Freedom 7 .

20 February 1962 John Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth.

16 June 1963 Valentina Tereshkova became the first woman to go into space and to orbit the Earth.

2 March 1978 Vladimír Remek , a Czechoslovakian , became the first non-American and non-Soviet in space, as part of the Interkosmos program.

2 April 1984 Rakesh Sharma , became the first Indian in space and to orbit the Earth, on Soyuz T-11 .

25 July 1984 Svetlana Savitskaya became the first woman to perform a spacewalk.

15 October 2003 Yang Liwei became the first Chinese in space and to orbit the Earth, on Shenzhou 5 .

18 October 2019 Christina Koch and Jessica Meir conducted the first woman-only spacewalk.

[ 50 ] Sally Ride became the first American woman in space, in 1983.

Eileen Collins was the first female Shuttle pilot, and with Shuttle mission STS-93 in 1999 she became the first woman to command a U.S. spacecraft.

For many years, the USSR (later Russia) and the United States were the only countries whose astronauts flew in space. That ended with the 1978 flight of Vladimir Remek. As of 2010 [update] , citizens from 38 nations (including space tourists ) have flown in space aboard Soviet, American, Russian, and Chinese spacecraft.

Space programs For a more comprehensive list, see List of human spaceflight programs .

"Astronaut corps" redirects here. For subdivision of NASA, see NASA Astronaut Corps .

Human spaceflight programs have been conducted by the Soviet Union–Russian Federation, the United States, Mainland China , and by American private spaceflight companies.

This graph was using the legacy Graph extension , which is no longer supported. It needs to be converted to the new Chart extension .

Currently have human spaceflight programs.

Confirmed and dated plans for human spaceflight programs.

Confirmed plans for human spaceflight programs.

Plans for human spaceflight on the simplest form (suborbital spaceflight, etc.

).

Plans for human spaceflight on the extreme form (space stations, etc.

).

Once had official plans for human spaceflight programs, but have since been abandoned.

Current programs The image above contains clickable links Size comparisons between current and past space stations as they appeared most recently. Solar panels in blue, heat radiators in red. Stations have different depths not shown by silhouettes.

The following space vehicles and spaceports are currently used for launching human spaceflights: Soyuz program / spacecraft (Russia): Launched on Soyuz launch vehicle from Baikonur Cosmodrome . The first crewed flight was in 1967. As of March 2025 [update] , there have been 153 crewed flights, all of them orbital except one suborbital flight abort and one atmospheric flight abort. The first 66 flights were launched by the Soviet Union .

China Manned Space Program / Shenzhou spacecraft (China): Launched on Long March launch vehicle from Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center . The first crewed flight was in 2003. As of March 2025 [update] , there have been 14 crewed orbital flights.

SpaceX Crew Dragon (US): Launched on Falcon 9 launch vehicle from either Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39A or Cape Canaveral Space Launch Complex 40 . The first crewed flight was in 2020. As of March 2025 [update] , there have been 16 crewed orbital flights.

[ 51 ] [ 30 ] New Shepard (US): Launched on New Shepard launch vehicle from Corn Ranch spaceport. The first crewed flight was in 2021. As of March 2025 [update] , there have been ten crewed suborbital flights.

Boeing Starliner (US): Launched on Atlas V N22 launch vehicle from Cape Canaveral Space Launch Complex 41 . The first crewed launch was in 2024. As of March 2025 [update] , there have been 1 crewed orbital launch, with the crew of the first launch transferring to SpaceX Crew-9 while in orbit.

The following space stations are currently maintained in Earth orbit for human occupation: International Space Station (US, Russia, Europe, Japan, Canada) assembled in orbit: altitude 409 kilometers (221 nautical miles), 51.65° orbital inclination; crews transported by Soyuz or Crew Dragon spacecraft Tiangong Space Station (China) assembled in orbit: 41.5° orbital inclination; [ 52 ] crews transported by Shenzhou spacecraft Most of the time, the only humans in space are those aboard the ISS, which generally has a crew of 7, and those aboard Tiangong, which generally has a crew of 3.

NASA and ESA use the term "human spaceflight" to refer to their programs of launching people into space. These endeavors have also formerly been referred to as "manned space missions", though this is no longer official parlance according to NASA style guides, which call for gender-neutral language .

[ 53 ] Planned future programs Under the Indian Human Spaceflight Program , India was planning to send humans into space on its orbital vehicle Gaganyaan before August 2022, but it has been delayed to 2024, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) began work on this project in 2006.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] The initial objective is to carry a crew of two or three to low Earth orbit (LEO) for a 3-to-7-day flight in a spacecraft on a LVM 3 rocket and return them safely for a water landing at a predefined landing zone. On 15 August 2018, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi , declared India will independently send humans into space before the 75th anniversary of independence in 2022.

[ 56 ] In 2019, ISRO revealed plans for a space station by 2030, followed by a crewed lunar mission. The program envisages the development of a fully-autonomous orbital vehicle capable of carrying 2 or 3 crew members to an about 300 km (190 mi) low Earth orbit and bringing them safely back home.

[ 57 ] Since 2008, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency had developed the H-II Transfer Vehicle cargo-spacecraft-based crewed spacecraft and Kibō Japanese Experiment Module –based small space laboratory.

NASA is developing a plan to land humans on Mars by the 2030s. The first step has begun with Artemis I in 2022, sending an uncrewed Orion spacecraft to a distant retrograde orbit around the Moon and returning it to Earth after a 25-day mission.

SpaceX is developing Starship , a fully reusable two-stage system, with near-Earth and cislunar applications and an ultimate goal of landing on Mars. The upper stage of the Starship system, also called Starship, has had 9 atmospheric test flights as of September 2021. The first test flight of the fully integrated two-stage system occurred in April 2023. A modified version of Starship is being developed for the Artemis program .

Several other countries and space agencies have announced and begun human spaceflight programs using natively developed equipment and technology, including Japan ( JAXA ), Iran ( ISA ), and North Korea ( NADA ). The plans for the Iranian crewed spacecraft are for a small spacecraft and space laboratory.

North Korea 's space program has plans for crewed spacecraft and small shuttle systems.

National spacefaring attempts This section lists all nations which have attempted human spaceflight programs. This is not to be confused with nations with citizens who have traveled into space , including space tourists, flown or intending to fly by a foreign country's or non-domestic private company's space systems – who are not counted in this list toward their country's national spacefaring attempts.

Nation/Organization Space agency Term(s) for space traveler First launched astronaut Date Spacecraft Launcher Type Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (1922–1991) Soviet space program ( OKB-1 Design Bureau ) космонавт (same word in:) (in Russian and Ukrainian) kosmonavt cosmonaut Ғарышкер (in Kazakh) Yuri Gagarin 12 April 1961 Vostok spacecraft Vostok Orbital United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) astronaut spaceflight participant Alan Shepard (suborbital) 5 May 1961 Mercury spacecraft Redstone Suborbital United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) astronaut spaceflight participant John Glenn (orbital) 20 February 1962 Mercury spacecraft Atlas LV-3B Orbital People's Republic of China Space program of the People's Republic of China 宇航员 ( Chinese ) yǔhángyuán 航天员 ( Chinese ) hángtiānyuán — 1973 (abandoned) Shuguang Long March 2A Orbital People's Republic of China Space program of the People's Republic of China 宇航员 ( Chinese ) yǔhángyuán 航天员 ( Chinese ) hángtiānyuán — 1981 (abandoned) Piloted FSW Long March 2 Orbital European Space Agency CNES / European Space Agency (ESA) spationaute (in French) astronaut — 1992 (abandoned) Hermes Ariane V Orbital Russia Roscosmos космонавт (in Russian) kosmonavt cosmonaut Alexander Viktorenko , Alexander Kaleri 17 March 1992 Soyuz TM-14 to MIR Soyuz-U2 Orbital Ba'athist Iraq (1968–2003) [ note 3 ] — رجل فضاء ( Arabic ) rajul faḍāʼ رائد فضاء ( Arabic ) rāʼid faḍāʼ ملاح فضائي ( Arabic ) mallāḥ faḍāʼiy — 2001 (abandoned) — Tammouz 2 or 3 — Japan National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA) 宇宙飛行士 ( Japanese ) uchūhikōshi or アストロノート asutoronoto — 2003 (abandoned) HOPE H-II Orbital People's Republic of China China Manned Space Agency (CMSA) 宇航员 ( Chinese ) yǔhángyuán 航天员 ( Chinese ) hángtiānyuán taikonaut ( 太空人 ; tàikōng rén ) Yang Liwei 15 October 2003 Shenzhou spacecraft Long March 2F Orbital Japan Japanese Rocket Society [ ja ] , Kawasaki Heavy Industries and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 宇宙飛行士 ( Japanese ) uchūhikōshi or アストロノート asutoronoto — 2000s (abandoned) Kankoh-maru Kankoh-maru Orbital Japan Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) 宇宙飛行士 ( Japanese ) uchūhikōshi or アストロノート asutoronoto — 2003 (abandoned) Fuji H-II Orbital India Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) Vyomanaut (in Sanskrit) — 2024 [ 58 ] Gaganyaan LVM 3 Orbital [ 59 ] [ 60 ] European Space Agency European Space Agency (ESA) astronaut — 2020 (concept approved in 2009; but full development not begun) [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] CSTS , ARV phase-2 Ariane V Orbital Japan Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) 宇宙飛行士 ( Japanese ) uchūhikōshi or アストロノート asutoronoto — TBD HTV-based spacecraft H3 Orbital Iran Iranian Space Agency (ISA) — — 2019 (on hold) ISA spacecraft TBD Orbital North Korea National Aerospace Development Administration (NADA) — — 2020s NADA spacecraft Unha 9 Orbital Denmark Copenhagen Suborbitals astronaut — 2020s Tycho Brahe SPICA Suborbital Safety concerns There are two main sources of hazard in space flight: those due to the hostile space environment, and those due to possible equipment malfunctions. Addressing these issues is of great importance for NASA and other space agencies before conducting the first extended crewed missions to destinations such as Mars.

[ 65 ] Environmental hazards See also: Bioastronautics , Space habitat , Effect of spaceflight on the human body , and Locomotion in Space Planners of human spaceflight missions face a number of safety concerns.

Life support Main article: Life support system The basic needs for breathable air and drinkable water are addressed by the life support system of the spacecraft.

See also: Astronautical hygiene Medical issues See also: Effect of spaceflight on the human body , Sleep in space , and Space medicine Astronauts may not be able to quickly return to Earth or receive medical supplies, equipment, or personnel if a medical emergency occurs. The astronauts may have to rely for long periods on limited resources and medical advice from the ground.

The possibility of blindness and of bone loss have been associated with human space flight .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] On 31 December 2012, a NASA -supported study reported that spaceflight may harm the brains of astronauts and accelerate the onset of Alzheimer's disease .

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] In October 2015, the NASA Office of Inspector General issued a health hazards report related to space exploration , which included the potential hazards of a human mission to Mars .

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] On 2 November 2017, scientists reported, based on MRI studies , that significant changes in the position and structure of the brain have been found in astronauts who have taken trips in space . Astronauts on longer space trips were affected by greater brain changes.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Researchers in 2018 reported, after detecting the presence on the International Space Station (ISS) of five Enterobacter bugandensis bacterial strains, none pathogenic to humans, that microorganisms on ISS should be carefully monitored to assure a healthy environment for astronauts .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] In March 2019, NASA reported that latent viruses in humans may be activated during space missions, possibly adding more risk to astronauts in future deep-space missions.

[ 77 ] On 25 September 2021, CNN reported that an alarm had sounded during the Inspiration4 Earth-orbital journey on the SpaceX Dragon 2 . The alarm signal was found to be associated with an apparent toilet malfunction.

[ 78 ] Microgravity See also: Weightlessness The effects of microgravity on fluid distribution around the body (greatly exaggerated) Medical data from astronauts in low Earth orbits for long periods, dating back to the 1970s, show several adverse effects of a microgravity environment: loss of bone density, decreased muscle strength and endurance, postural instability, and reductions in aerobic capacity. Over time these deconditioning effects can impair astronauts' performance or increase their risk of injury.

[ 79 ] In a weightless environment, astronauts put almost no weight on the back muscles or leg muscles used for standing up, which causes the muscles to weaken and get smaller. Astronauts can lose up to twenty per cent of their muscle mass on spaceflights lasting five to eleven days. The consequent loss of strength could be a serious problem in case of a landing emergency.

[ 80 ] Upon returning to Earth from long-duration flights, astronauts are considerably weakened and are not allowed to drive a car for twenty-one days.

[ 81 ] Astronauts experiencing weightlessness will often lose their orientation, get motion sickness , and lose their sense of direction as their bodies try to get used to a weightless environment. When they get back to Earth, they have to readjust and may have problems standing up, focusing their gaze, walking, and turning. Importantly, those motor disturbances only get worse the longer the exposure to weightlessness.

[ 82 ] These changes can affect the ability to perform tasks required for approach and landing, docking, remote manipulation, and emergencies that may occur while landing.

[ 83 ] In addition, after long space flight missions, male astronauts may experience severe eyesight problems, which may be a major concern for future deep space flight missions, including a crewed mission to the planet Mars .

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] Long space flights can also alter a space traveler's eye movements.

[ 90 ] Radiation See also: Health threat from cosmic rays Comparison of Radiation Doses – includes the amount detected on the trip from Earth to Mars by the RAD on the MSL (2011–2013) [ 91 ] Without proper shielding, the crews of missions beyond low Earth orbit might be at risk from high-energy protons emitted by solar particle events (SPEs) associated with solar flares . If estimated correctly, the amount of radiation that astronauts would be exposed to from a solar storm similar to that of the most powerful in recorded history, the Carrington Event , would result in acute radiation sickness at least, and could even be fatal "in a poorly shielded spacecraft".

[ 92 ] [ better source needed ] Another storm that could have inflicted a potentially lethal dose of radiation on astronauts outside Earth's protective magnetosphere occurred during the Space Age , shortly after Apollo 16 landed and before Apollo 17 launched.

[ 93 ] This solar storm, which occurred in August 1972 , could potentially have caused any astronauts who were exposed to it to suffer from acute radiation sickness, and may even have been lethal for those engaged in extravehicular activity or on the lunar surface.

[ 94 ] Another type of radiation, galactic cosmic rays , presents further challenges to human spaceflight beyond low Earth orbit.

[ 95 ] There is also some scientific concern that extended spaceflight might slow down the body's ability to protect itself against diseases, [ 96 ] resulting in a weakened immune system and the activation of dormant viruses in the body.

Radiation can cause both short- and long-term consequences to the bone marrow stem cells from which blood and immune-system cells are created. Because the interior of a spacecraft is so small, a weakened immune system and more active viruses in the body can lead to a fast spread of infection.

[ 97 ] Isolation Further information: Effect of spaceflight on the human body § Psychological effects , and Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight During long missions, astronauts are isolated and confined in small spaces.

Depression , anxiety, cabin fever , and other psychological problems may occur more than for an average person and could impact the crew's safety and mission success.

[ 98 ] NASA spends millions of dollars on psychological treatments for astronauts and former astronauts.

[ 99 ] To date, there is no way to prevent or reduce mental problems caused by extended periods of stay in space.

Due to these mental disorders, the efficiency of astronauts' work is impaired; and sometimes they are brought back to Earth, incurring the expense of their mission being aborted.

[ 100 ] A Russian expedition to space in 1976 was returned to Earth after the cosmonauts reported a strong odor that resulted in a fear of fluid leakage; but after a thorough investigation, it became clear that there was no leakage or technical malfunction. It was concluded by NASA that the cosmonauts most likely had hallucinated the smell .

It is possible that the mental health of astronauts can be affected by the changes in the sensory systems while in prolonged space travel.

Sensory systems During astronauts' spaceflight, they are in an extreme environment. This, and the fact that little change is taking place in the environment, will result in the weakening of sensory input to the astronauts' seven senses.

Hearing – In the space station and spacecraft there are no noises from the outside, as there is no medium that can transmit sound waves. Although there are other team members who can talk to each other, their voices become familiar and do not stimulate the sense of hearing as much. Mechanical noises become familiar, as well.

Sight – Because of weightlessness, the body's liquids attain an equilibrium that is different from what it is on the Earth. For this reason, an astronaut's face swells and presses on the eyes; and therefore their vision is impaired. The landscape surrounding the astronauts is constant, which lessens visual stimulations. Due to cosmic rays, astronauts may see flashes, even with their eyelids closed.

Smell – The space station has a permanent odor described as the smell of gunpowder. Due to the zero gravity, the bodily fluids rise to the face and prevent the sinuses from drying up, which dulls the sense of smell.

Taste – The sense of taste is directly affected by the sense of smell and therefore when the sense of smell is dulled, the sense of taste is also. The astronauts' food is bland, and there are only certain foods that can be eaten. The food comes only once every few months, when supplies arrive, and there is little or no variety.

Touch – There are almost no stimulating changes in physical contact. There is almost no human physical contact during the journey.

The vestibular system (motion and equilibrium system) – Due to the lack of gravity, all the movements required of the astronauts are changed, and the vestibular system is damaged by the extreme change.

The proprioception system (the sense of the relative position of one's own parts of the body and strength of effort being employed in movement) – As a result of weightlessness, few forces are exerted on the astronauts' muscles; and there is less stimulus to this system.

Equipment hazards Space flight requires much higher velocities than ground or air transportation, and consequently requires the use of high energy density propellants for launch, and the dissipation of large amounts of energy, usually as heat, for safe reentry through the Earth's atmosphere.

Launch See also: Launch escape system There was no practical way for the Space Shuttle Challenger 's crew to safely abort before the vehicle's violent disintegration Since rockets have the potential for fire or explosive destruction, space capsules generally employ some sort of launch escape system , consisting either of a tower-mounted solid-fuel rocket to quickly carry the capsule away from the launch vehicle (employed on Mercury , Apollo , and Soyuz , the escape tower being discarded at some point after launch, at a point where an abort can be performed using the spacecraft's engines), or else ejection seats (employed on Vostok and Gemini ) to carry astronauts out of the capsule and away for individual parachute landings.

Such a launch escape system is not always practical for multiple-crew-member vehicles (particularly spaceplanes ), depending on the location of egress hatch(es). When the single-hatch Vostok capsule was modified to become the 2 or 3-person Voskhod , the single-cosmonaut ejection seat could not be used, and no escape tower system was added. The two Voskhod flights in 1964 and 1965 avoided launch mishaps. The Space Shuttle carried ejection seats and escape hatches for its pilot and copilot in early flights; but these could not be used for passengers who sat below the flight deck on later flights, and so were discontinued.

There have been only two in-flight launch aborts of a crewed flight. The first occurred on Soyuz 18a on 5 April 1975. The abort occurred after the launch escape system had been jettisoned when the launch vehicle's spent second stage failed to separate before the third stage ignited and the vehicle strayed off course. The crew finally managed to separate the spacecraft, firing its engines to pull it away from the errant rocket, and both cosmonauts landed safely. The second occurred on 11 October 2018 with the launch of Soyuz MS-10 . Again, both crew members survived.

In the first use of a launch escape system on the launchpad, before the start of a crewed flight, happened during the planned Soyuz T-10a launch on 26 September 1983, which was aborted by a launch vehicle fire 90 seconds before liftoff. Both cosmonauts aboard landed safely.

The only crew fatality during launch occurred on 28 January 1986, when the Space Shuttle Challenger broke apart 73 seconds after liftoff, due to the failure of a solid rocket booster seal, which caused the failure of the external fuel tank , resulting in an explosion of the fuel and separation of the boosters. All seven crew members were killed.

Extravehicular activity Main article: Extravehicular activity Tasks outside a spacecraft require use of a space suit . Despite the risk of mechanical failures while working in open space, there have been no spacewalk fatalities. Spacewalking astronauts routinely remain attached to the spacecraft with tethers and sometimes supplementary anchors. Un-tethered spacewalks were performed on three missions in 1984 using the Manned Maneuvering Unit , and on a flight test in 1994 of the Simplified Aid For EVA Rescue (SAFER) device.

Reentry and landing See also: Atmospheric reentry The single pilot of Soyuz 1 , Vladimir Komarov , was killed when his capsule's parachutes failed during an emergency landing on 24 April 1967, causing the capsule to crash.

On 1 February 2003, the crew of seven aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia were killed on reentry after completing a successful mission in space . A wing-leading-edge reinforced carbon-carbon heat shield had been damaged by a piece of frozen external tank foam insulation that had broken off and struck the wing during launch. Hot reentry gasses entered and destroyed the wing structure, leading to the breakup of the orbiter vehicle .

Artificial atmosphere There are two basic choices for an artificial atmosphere: either an Earth-like mixture of oxygen and an inert gas such as nitrogen or helium, or pure oxygen, which can be used at lower than standard atmospheric pressure. A nitrogen–oxygen mixture is used in the International Space Station and Soyuz spacecraft, while low-pressure pure oxygen is commonly used in space suits for extravehicular activity .

The use of a gas mixture carries the risk of decompression sickness (commonly known as "the bends") when transitioning to or from the pure oxygen space suit environment. There have been instances of injury and fatalities caused by suffocation in the presence of too much nitrogen and not enough oxygen.

In 1960, McDonnell Aircraft test pilot G.B. North passed out and was seriously injured when testing a Mercury cabin–space suit atmosphere system in a vacuum chamber, due to nitrogen-rich air leaking from the cabin into his space suit feed.

[ 101 ] This incident led NASA to decide on a pure oxygen atmosphere for the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft.

In 1981, three pad workers were killed by a nitrogen-rich atmosphere in the aft engine compartment of the Space Shuttle Columbia at the Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39 .

[ 102 ] In 1995, two pad workers were similarly killed by a nitrogen leak in a confined area of the Ariane 5 launch pad at Guiana Space Centre .

[ 103 ] A pure oxygen atmosphere carries the risk of fire. The original design of the Apollo spacecraft used pure oxygen at greater than atmospheric pressure prior to launch. An electrical fire started in the cabin of Apollo 1 during a ground test at Cape Kennedy Air Force Station Launch Complex 34 on 27 January 1967, and spread rapidly. The high pressure, increased by the fire, prevented removal of the plug door hatch cover in time to rescue the crew. All three astronauts— Gus Grissom , Ed White , and Roger Chaffee —were killed.

[ 104 ] This led NASA to use a nitrogen–oxygen atmosphere before launch, and low-pressure pure oxygen only in space.

Reliability See also: Reliability engineering The March 1966 Gemini 8 mission was aborted in orbit when an attitude control system thruster stuck in the on position, sending the craft into a dangerous spin that threatened the lives of Neil Armstrong and David Scott . Armstrong had to shut the control system off and use the reentry control system to stop the spin. The craft made an emergency reentry and the astronauts landed safely. The most probable cause was determined to be an electrical short due to a static electricity discharge, which caused the thruster to remain powered even when switched off. The control system was modified to put each thruster on its own isolated circuit.

The third lunar landing expedition, Apollo 13 , in April 1970, was aborted and the lives of the crew— James Lovell , Jack Swigert , and Fred Haise —were threatened after the failure of a cryogenic liquid oxygen tank en route to the Moon. The tank burst when electrical power was applied to internal stirring fans in the tank, causing the immediate loss of all of its contents, and also damaging the second tank, causing the gradual loss of its remaining oxygen over a period of 130 minutes. This in turn caused a loss of electrical power provided by fuel cells to the command spacecraft . The crew managed to return to Earth safely by using the lunar landing craft as a "life boat". The tank failure was determined to be caused by two mistakes: the tank's drain fitting had been damaged when it was dropped during factory testing, necessitating the use of its internal heaters to boil out the oxygen after a pre-launch test; which in turn damaged the fan wiring's electrical insulation because the thermostats on the heaters did not meet the required voltage rating due to a vendor miscommunication.

The crew of Soyuz 11 were killed on 30 June 1971 by a combination of mechanical malfunctions; the crew were asphyxiated due to cabin decompression following the separation of their descent capsule from the service module. A cabin ventilation valve had been jolted open at an altitude of 168 kilometres (104 mi) by the stronger-than-expected shock of explosive separation bolts, which were designed to fire sequentially, but in fact had fired simultaneously. The loss of pressure became fatal within about 30 seconds.

[ 105 ] Fatality risk Further information: List of spaceflight-related accidents and incidents As of December 2015 [update] , 23 crew members have died in accidents aboard spacecraft. Over 100 others have died in accidents during activities directly related to spaceflight or testing.

Date Mission Accident cause Deaths Cause of death 27 January 1967 Apollo 1 Electrical fire in the cabin, spread quickly by 16.7 psi (1.15 bar) pure oxygen atmosphere and flammable nylon materials in cabin and space suits, during pre-launch test; inability to remove plug door hatch cover due to internal pressure; rupture of cabin wall allowed outside air to enter, causing heavy smoke and soot 3 Cardiac arrest from carbon monoxide poisoning 24 April 1967 Soyuz 1 Malfunction of primary landing parachute, and entanglement of reserve parachute; loss of 50% electrical power and spacecraft control problems necessitating emergency abort 1 Trauma from crash landing 15 November 1967 X-15 Flight 3-65-97 The accident board found that the cockpit instrumentation had been functioning properly, and concluded that pilot Michael J. Adams had lost control of the X-15 as a result of a combination of distraction, misinterpretation of his instrumentation display, and possible vertigo . The electrical disturbance early in the flight degraded the overall effectiveness of the aircraft's control system and further added to pilot workload.

1 Vehicle breakup 30 June 1971 Soyuz 11 Loss of cabin pressurization due to valve opening upon Orbital Module separation before re-entry 3 Asphyxia 28 January 1986 STS-51L Space Shuttle Challenger Failure of O-ring inter-segment seal in one Solid Rocket Booster in extreme cold launch temperature, allowing hot gases to penetrate casing and burn through a strut connecting booster to the External Tank ; tank failure; rapid combustion of fuel; orbiter breakup from abnormal aerodynamic forces 7 Asphyxia from cabin breach, or trauma from water impact [ 106 ] 1 February 2003 STS-107 Space Shuttle Columbia Damaged reinforced carbon-carbon heat shield panel on wing's leading edge, caused by a piece of External Tank foam insulation broken off during launch; penetration of hot atmospheric gases during re-entry, leading to structural failure of the wing, loss of control and disintegration of the orbiter 7 Asphyxia from cabin breach, trauma from dynamic load environment as orbiter broke up [ 107 ] 31 October 2014 SpaceShipTwo VSS Enterprise powered drop-test Copilot error: premature deployment of " feathering " descent air-braking system caused the disintegration of the vehicle in flight; pilot survived, copilot died 1 Trauma from crash See also Spaceflight portal List of human spaceflight programs List of human spaceflights 1961–1970 1971–1980 1981–1990 1991–2000 2001–2010 2011–2020 2021–present List of spaceflight records List of crewed spacecraft Animals in space Monkeys and apes in space Crewed Mars rover Commercial astronaut Mars to Stay NewSpace Space medicine Tourism on the Moon Women in space Notes ^ Both missions were to the International Space Station .

^ There is no internationally recognized definition for the boundary of space; although the Kármán line (100 kilometres (62 mi)) is commonly used, distances ranging from 30 kilometres (19 mi) to 1,600,000 kilometres (990,000 mi) have been proposed.

[ 25 ] ^ According to a press release of Iraqi News Agency of 5 December 1989 about the first (and last) test of the Tammouz space launcher, Iraq intended to develop crewed space facilities by the end of the century. These plans were put to an end by the Gulf War of 1991 and the economic hard times that followed.

References ^ Mars, Kelli (27 March 2018).

"5 Hazards of Human Spaceflight" .

NASA . Archived from the original on 28 April 2022 . Retrieved 9 February 2022 .

^ "Counting the Many Ways the International Space Station Benefits Humanity" . 5 April 2019 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 .

^ "SpaceX Astronauts Reach Space Station After Milestone Voyage" .

Bloomberg.com . 30 May 2020 . Retrieved 16 June 2020 .

^ Furniss, Tim (2007).

Praxis manned spaceflight log, 1961–2006 . New York: Springer. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0387341750 .

^ Kennedy, John F. (25 May 1961).

Special Message to Congress on Urgent National Needs (Motion picture (excerpt)). Boston, MA: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Accession Number: TNC:200; Digital Identifier: TNC-200-2 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 .

^ Loff, Sarah (21 October 2013).

"Gemini: Stepping Stone to the Moon" .

Gemini: Bridge to the Moon . Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Archived from the original on 21 December 2014 . Retrieved 4 January 2015 .

^ Siddiqi, Asif.

Challenge To Apollo The Soviet Union and The Space Race, 1945–1974 . NASA. p. 832.

^ David Michael Harland (2004).

The Story of the Space Shuttle .

Springer Praxis. p.

444 .

ISBN 978-1-85233-793-3 .

^ "Shenzhou V" .

China Manned Space . Archived from the original on 17 July 2021 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ "About CMS" .

China Manned Space . Archived from the original on 20 May 2021 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ "Shenzhou VII" .

China Manned Space . Archived from the original on 19 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ "Shenzhou VIII" .

China Manned Space . Archived from the original on 17 July 2021 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ "Shenzhou IX" .

China Manned Space . Archived from the original on 17 July 2021 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ a b "Space Laboratory Missions" .

China Manned Space . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ "China launches new Long March-5B rocket for space station program" .

China Manned Space . 5 May 2020. Archived from the original on 17 June 2021 . Retrieved 26 July 2021 .

^ "Core Module Tianhe Launch a Complete Success – Construction of China Space Station in Full Swing" .

China Manned Space . 30 April 2021 . Retrieved 26 July 2021 .

^ a b "空间站天和核心舱飞行任务新闻发布会召开" .

China Manned Space (in Chinese). 29 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 13 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 July 2021 .

^ "Columbus laboratory" .

www.esa.int . The European Space Agency . Retrieved 26 October 2022 .

^ Magazin, Sia (2 December 2022).

"Kankoh-maru Japan's Space Tourism Single Stage Reusable Rocket" .

Sia Magazin . Retrieved 17 October 2023 .

^ Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to the DCI on Iraq's WMD (PDF) (Report). U.S. Government Publishing Office. 30 September 2004. p. 12.

^ Congressional watchdog finds NASA's new rocket is in trouble Archived 29 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Orlando Sentinel blog summary of official reports. 3 November 2008 ^ Wall, Mike (2 August 2020).

"SpaceX's Historic Demo-2 Crew Dragon Astronaut Test Flight: Full Coverage" .

Space.com .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 14 November 2024 .

^ "NASA's Boeing Crew Flight Test" .

Nasa.gov .

Archived from the original on 16 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 November 2024 .

^ Wall, Mike (29 August 2024).

" 'One of the Cleanest Flights I've Seen.' Blue Origin Launches 6 People to Space, Lands Safely on NS-26 Flight (Video)" .

Space.com .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 14 November 2024 .

^ Betz, Eric (27 November 2023).

"The Kármán Line: Where Space Begins" .

Astronomy .

Archived from the original on 9 November 2024 . Retrieved 14 November 2024 .

^ a b Malik, Tariq (13 December 2018).

"Virgin Galactic's 4th Powered Test Flight of SpaceShipTwo Unity in Twitter Posts" .

Space.com . Archived from the original on 27 April 2021 . Retrieved 13 May 2021 .

^ Messier, Douglas (7 September 2023).

"Sierra Space Working with NASA on Crewed Dream Chaser" .

SpaceRef . Retrieved 14 November 2024 .

^ "Spica" .

Copenhagen Suborbitals . Archived from the original on 2 October 2024 . Retrieved 14 November 2024 .

^ Sheetz, Michael (26 September 2020).

"Investing in Space How SpaceX, Virgin Galactic, Blue Origin and others compete in the growing space tourism market" .

CNBC . Retrieved 4 January 2025 .

^ a b Atkinson, Ian (15 September 2021).

"SpaceX launches Inspiration4, first all-private orbital mission" .

NASASpaceflight.com . Retrieved 16 September 2021 .

^ Bolden, Charlie (16 September 2014).

"American Companies Selected to Return Astronaut Launches to American Soil" .

NASA.gov . Retrieved 16 September 2014 .

^ Clark, Stephen.

"NASA official says Starliner demo mission not likely to launch until next year" .

Spaceflight Now . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ Berger, Eric (13 August 2021).

"Boeing to ground Starliner indefinitely until valve issue solved" .

Ars Technica . Retrieved 16 September 2021 .

^ Foust, Jeff (19 September 2014).

"NASA Commercial Crew Awards Leave Unanswered Questions" .

Space News . Archived from the original on 21 September 2014 . Retrieved 21 September 2014 .

"We basically awarded based on the proposals that we were given", Kathy Lueders, NASA commercial crew program manager, said in a teleconference with reporters after the announcement. "Both contracts have the same requirements. The companies proposed the value within which they were able to do the work, and the government accepted that".

^ "Release 14-256 NASA Chooses American Companies to Transport U.S. Astronauts to International Space Station" .

www.nasa.gov . NASA . Retrieved 29 October 2014 .

^ Wattles, Jackie; Sangal, Aditi; Macaya, Melissa; Mahtani, Melissa; Wagner, Meg; Vogt, Adrienne (20 July 2021).

"Jeff Bezos goes to space: Live updates | CNN Business" .

CNN . Retrieved 10 May 2025 .

^ Strauss, Neil (15 November 2017).

"Elon Musk: The Architect of Tomorrow" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved 15 November 2017 .

^ Starship Earth to Earth , SpaceX, 28 September 2017, accessed 23 December 2017.

^ Foust, Jeff (15 October 2017).

"Musk offers more technical details on BFR system" .

SpaceNews . Retrieved 15 October 2017 .

[the] spaceship portion of the BFR, which would transport people on point-to-point suborbital flights or on missions to the moon or Mars, will be tested on Earth first in a series of short hops. ... a full-scale Ship doing short hops of a few hundred kilometers altitude and lateral distance ... fairly easy on the vehicle, as no heat shield is needed, we can have a large amount of reserve propellant and don't need the high area ratio, deep space Raptor engines.

^ (2012) SXC - Buying your tickets into space!

Archived 6 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine SXC web page, Retrieved 5 April 2013 ^ Staff writers (6 October 2010).

"Space Expedition Corporation Announces Wet Lease of XCOR Lynx Suborbital" .

Space Media Network Promotions . Space-Travel.com . Retrieved 6 October 2010 .

^ Foust, Jeff (9 November 2017).

"XCOR Aerospace Files for Bankruptcy" .

SpaceNews . Retrieved 13 May 2021 .

^ a b c Haris Durrani (19 July 2019).

"Is Spaceflight Colonialism?" .

The Nation . Retrieved 2 October 2020 .

^ "Website of the IAU100 Inclusive Astronomy project" . Archived from the original on 22 December 2021 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ Sinelschikova, Yekaterina (3 December 2020).

"Why NASA astronauts would not pass the Soviet and Russian selection process" .

www.rbth.com . Retrieved 23 May 2021 .

^ "Celebrating Women's History Month" .

NASA . 21 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 May 2022 . Retrieved 14 May 2022 .

^ Kramer, Miriam (27 August 2013).

"Female Astronauts Face Discrimination from Space Radiation Concerns, Astronauts Say" .

Space.com . Purch . Retrieved 7 January 2017 .

^ Sokolowski, Susan L. (5 April 2019).

"Female astronauts: How performance products like space suits and bras are designed to pave the way for women's accomplishments" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 10 May 2020 .

^ "Cosmonaut Biography: Oleg D. Kononenko" .

spacefacts.de . Retrieved 23 September 2024 .

^ Garcia, Mark (18 October 2019).

"NASA Astronauts Wrap Up Historic All-Woman Spacewalk" . NASA . Retrieved 23 January 2020 .

^ Potter, Sean (30 May 2020).

"NASA Astronauts Launch from America in Test of SpaceX Crew Dragon" .

NASA . Retrieved 31 May 2020 .

^ McDowell, Jonathan.

"Jonathan's Space Report No. 792" . Retrieved 12 July 2021 .

^ "Style Guide" .

NASA . Retrieved 6 January 2016 .

^ "Scientists Discuss Indian Manned Space Mission" . Indian Space Research Organisation. 7 November 2006. Archived from the original on 13 January 2020 . Retrieved 21 June 2020 .

^ Rao, Mukund Kadursrinivas; Murthi, Sridhara K. R.; Prasad, M. Y. S.

"The Decision for Indian Human Spaceflight Programme – Political Perspectives, National Relevance and Technological Challenges" (PDF) . International Astronautical Federation.

^ "Independence Day 2018 Live Updates: 'We will put an Indian on space before 2022,' says Narendra Modi at Red Fort" .

Firstpost.com . 15 August 2018 . Retrieved 21 June 2020 .

^ "ISRO Stalls Launch of Uncrewed Gaganyaan Mission and Chandrayaan-3 Due to COVID-19" .

The Weather Channel . 11 June 2020 . Retrieved 13 June 2020 .

^ Surendra Singh (17 February 2021).

"Gaganyaan manned mission not before 2023: Minister" .

the Times of India .

^ ETtech.com.

"Four years is tight, but can achieve the human spaceflight: ISRO's K Sivan - ETtech" .

The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 15 August 2018 . Retrieved 15 August 2018 .

^ IANS (15 August 2018).

"India will put man in space for seven days: ISRO Chairman" .

Business Standard India . Retrieved 15 August 2018 .

^ Amos, Jonathan (7 July 2009).

"Europe targets manned spaceship" .

BBC News . Retrieved 27 March 2010 .

^ Apollo-like capsule chosen for Crew Space Transportation System , 22 May 2008 ^ "Jules Verne" Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) Re-entry . Information Kit (PDF). Updated September 2008. European Space Agency. Retrieved on 7 August 2011.

^ Amos, Jonathan (26 November 2008).

"Europe's 10bn-euro space vision" .

BBC News . Retrieved 27 March 2010 .

^ Williams, Matt (4 February 2021).

"Every Challenge Astronauts Will Face on a flight to Mars" .

Universe Today . Retrieved 5 February 2021 .

^ Chang, Kenneth (27 January 2014).

"Beings Not Made for Space" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 27 January 2014 .

^ Mann, Adam (23 July 2012).

"Blindness, Bone Loss, and Space Farts: Astronaut Medical Oddities" .

Wired . Retrieved 23 July 2012 .

^ Cherry, Jonathan D.; Frost, Jeffrey L.; Lemere, Cynthia A.; Williams, Jacqueline P.; Olschowka, John A.; O'Banion, M. Kerry (2012).

"Galactic Cosmic Radiation Leads to Cognitive Impairment and Increased Aβ Plaque Accumulation in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer's Disease" .

PLoS ONE .

7 (12): e53275.

Bibcode : 2012PLoSO...753275C .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0053275 .

PMC 3534034 .

PMID 23300905 .

^ "Study Shows that Space Travel is Harmful to the Brain and Could Accelerate Onset of Alzheimer's" . SpaceRef. 1 January 2013. Archived from the original on 21 May 2020 . Retrieved 7 January 2013 .

^ Cowing, Keith (3 January 2013).

"Important Research Results NASA Is Not Talking About (Update)" . NASA Watch . Retrieved 7 January 2013 .

^ Dunn, Marcia (29 October 2015).

"Report: NASA needs better handle on health hazards for Mars" . Associated Press . Retrieved 30 October 2015 .

^ Staff (29 October 2015).

"NASA's Efforts to Manage Health and Human Performance Risks for Space Exploration (IG-16-003)" (PDF) .

NASA . Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 29 October 2015 .

^ Roberts, Donna R.; et al. (2 November 2017).

"Effects of Spaceflight on Astronaut Brain Structure as Indicated on MRI" .

New England Journal of Medicine .

377 (18): 1746– 1753.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa1705129 .

PMID 29091569 .

S2CID 205102116 .

^ Foley, Katherine Ellen (3 November 2017).

"Astronauts who take long trips to space return with brains that have floated to the top of their skulls" .

Quartz . Retrieved 3 November 2017 .

^ BioMed Central (22 November 2018).

"ISS microbes should be monitored to avoid threat to astronaut health" .

EurekAlert!

. Archived from the original on 26 November 2018 . Retrieved 25 November 2018 .

^ Singh, Nitin K.; et al. (23 November 2018).

"Multi-drug resistant Enterobacter bugandensis species isolated from the International Space Station and comparative genomic analyses with human pathogenic strains" .

BMC Microbiology .

18 (1) 175.

Bibcode : 2018BMCMb..18..175S .

doi : 10.1186/s12866-018-1325-2 .

PMC 6251167 .

PMID 30466389 .

^ Staff (15 March 2019).

"Dormant viruses activate during spaceflight – NASA investigates - The stress of spaceflight gives viruses a holiday from immune surveillance, putting future deep-space missions in jeopardy" .

EurekAlert!

. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019 . Retrieved 16 March 2019 .

^ Wattles, Jackie (25 September 2021).

"An alarm went off on SpaceX's all-tourist space flight. The problem was the toilet" .

CNN . Retrieved 25 September 2021 .

^ "Exploration Systems Human Research Program – Exercise Countermeasures" .

NASA . Archived from the original on 11 October 2008.

^ "NASA Information: Muscle Atrophy" (PDF) .

NASA . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2020 . Retrieved 20 November 2015 .

^ "Earth Living Is Tough for Astronaut Used to Space" .

Space.com . 3 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2015 .

^ Watson, Traci (11 November 2007).

"Readjusting to gravity anti-fun for astronauts" . ABC News . Retrieved 14 February 2020 .

^ Eddy, D. R.; Schiflett, S. G.; Schlegel, R. E.; Shehab, R. L. (August 1998). "Cognitive performance aboard the life and microgravity spacelab".

Acta Astronautica .

43 ( 3– 6): 193– 210.

Bibcode : 1998AcAau..43..193E .

doi : 10.1016/s0094-5765(98)00154-4 .

ISSN 0094-5765 .

PMID 11541924 .

^ Mader, T. H.; et al. (2011).

"Optic Disc Edema, Globe Flattening, Choroidal Folds, and Hyperopic Shifts Observed in Astronauts after Long-duration Space Flight" .

Ophthalmology .

118 (10): 2058– 2069.

doi : 10.1016/j.ophtha.2011.06.021 .

PMID 21849212 .

S2CID 13965518 .

^ Puiu, Tibi (9 November 2011).

"Astronauts' vision severely affected during long space missions" . zmescience.com . Retrieved 9 February 2012 .

^ News (CNN-TV, 02/09/2012) – Video (02:14) – Male Astronauts Return With Eye Problems . CNN (9 February 2012). Retrieved on 22 November 2016.

^ "Spaceflight Bad for Astronauts' Vision, Study Suggests" .

Space.com . 13 March 2012 . Retrieved 14 March 2012 .

^ Kramer, Larry A.; et al. (13 March 2012). "Orbital and Intracranial Effects of Microgravity: Findings at 3-T MR Imaging".

Radiology .

263 (3): 819– 27.

doi : 10.1148/radiol.12111986 .

PMID 22416248 .

^ Kevin Fong MD (12 February 2014).

"The Strange, Deadly Effects Mars Would Have on Your Body" .

Wired . Retrieved 12 February 2014 .

^ Alexander, Robert; Macknik, Stephen; Martinez-Conde, Susana (2020).

"Microsaccades in applied environments: Real-world applications of fixational eye movement measurements" .

Journal of Eye Movement Research .

12 (6).

doi : 10.16910/jemr.12.6.15 .

PMC 7962687 .

PMID 33828760 .

^ Kerr, Richard (31 May 2013). "Radiation Will Make Astronauts' Trip to Mars Even Riskier".

Science .

340 (6136): 1031.

Bibcode : 2013Sci...340.1031K .

doi : 10.1126/science.340.6136.1031 .

PMID 23723213 .

^ Battersby, Stephen (21 March 2005).

"Superflares could kill unprotected astronauts" .

New Scientist .

^ Mike Lockwood; M. Hapgood (2007).

"The Rough Guide to the Moon and Mars" .

Astron. Geophys .

48 (6): 11– 17.

Bibcode : 2007A&G....48f..11L .

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-4004.2007.48611.x .

^ Jennifer L. Parsons; L. W. Townsend (2000). "Interplanetary Crew Dose Rates for the August 1972 Solar Particle Event".

Radiat. Res .

153 (6): 729– 733.

Bibcode : 2000RadR..153..729P .

doi : 10.1667/0033-7587(2000)153[0729:ICDRFT]2.0.CO;2 .

PMID 10825747 .

S2CID 25250687 .

^ Space Radiation Hazards and the Vision for Space Exploration . NAP. 2006.

doi : 10.17226/11760 .

ISBN 978-0-309-10264-3 .

^ Gueguinou, N.; Huin-Schohn, C.; Bascove, M.; Bueb, J.-L.; Tschirhart, E.; Legrand-Frossi, C.; Frippiat, J.-P. (2009). "Could spaceflight-associated immune system weakening preclude the expansion of human presence beyond Earth's orbit".

Journal of Leukocyte Biology .

86 (5): 1027– 1038.

doi : 10.1189/jlb.0309167 .

PMID 19690292 .

^ Sohn, Rebecca (7 March 2022).

"How do viruses affect astronauts in space?" .

Space.com . Future US . Retrieved 20 October 2022 .

^ Flynn, Christopher F. (1 June 2005).

"An Operational Approach to Long-Duration Mission Behavioral Health and Performance Factors" .

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

76 (6): B42 – B51 .

PMID 15943194 .

^ Kanas, Nick; Manzey, Dietrich (2008).

Space psychology and psychiatry (2nd ed.). Dordrecht: Springer.

ISBN 9781402067709 .

OCLC 233972618 .

^ Bell, Vaughan (5 October 2014).

"Isolation and hallucinations: the mental health challenges faced by astronauts" .

The Observer .

ISSN 0029-7712 . Retrieved 1 February 2019 .

^ Giblin, Kelly A. (Spring 1998).

"Fire in the Cockpit!" .

American Heritage of Invention & Technology .

13 (4). American Heritage Publishing. Archived from the original on 20 November 2008 . Retrieved 23 March 2011 .

^ 1981 KSC Chronology Part 1 – pages 84, 85, 100; Part 2 – pages 181, 194, 195 , NASA ^ "Fatal accident at the Guiana Space Centre" , ESA Portal , 5 May 1993 ^ Orloff, Richard W. (September 2004) [First published 2000].

"Apollo 1 – The Fire: 27 January 1967" .

Apollo by the Numbers: A Statistical Reference . NASA History Series. Washington, D.C.: NASA.

ISBN 978-0-16-050631-4 .

LCCN 00061677 . NASA SP-2000-4029 . Retrieved 12 July 2013 .

^ "The Partnership: A History of the Apollo–Soyuz Test Project" . NASA. 1974. Archived from the original on 23 August 2007 . Retrieved 20 October 2007 .

^ "Report from Joseph P. Kerwin, biomedical specialist from the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, relating to the deaths of the astronauts in the Challenger accident" .

NASA . Archived from the original on 3 January 2013.

^ "Columbia Crew Survival Investigation Report" (PDF) .

NASA.gov . NASA.

Further reading Darling, David.

The complete book of spaceflight. From Apollo 1 to Zero gravity . Wiley, Hoboken NJ 2003, ISBN 0-471-05649-9 .

Haeuplik-Meusburger: Architecture for Astronauts – An Activity based Approach . Springer Praxis Books, 2011, ISBN 978-3-7091-0666-2 .

Larson, Wiley J. (ed.).

Human spaceflight – mission analysis and design . McGraw-Hill, New York NY 2003, ISBN 0-07-236811-X .

Pyle, Rod.

Space 2.0: How Private Spaceflight, a Resurgent NASA, and International Partners are Creating a New Space Age (2019), overview of space exploration excerpt Spencer, Brett. "The Book and the Rocket: The Symbiotic Relationship between American Public Libraries and the Space Program, 1950–2015." Reneau, Allyson (ed.).

Moon First and Mars Second: A Practical Approach to Human Space Exploration (2020) excerpt Smith, Michael G.; Michelle Kelley; Mathias Basner (2020).

"A brief history of spaceflight from 1961 to 2020: An analysis of missions and astronaut demographics" .

Acta Astronautica .

175 : 290– 299.

Bibcode : 2020AcAau.175..290S .

doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.06.004 .

PMC 7422727 .

PMID 32801403 .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Human spaceflight .

NASA Human Space Flight (United States of America) Human Spaceflight Profile by NASA's Solar System Exploration Transitioning to the NASA Constellation Program U.S. Spaceflight History v t e Future spaceflights Crewed 2025 Shenzhou 21 (October) Soyuz MS-28 (November) 2026 SpaceX Crew-12 Artemis II (April) Soyuz MS-29 (June) Boeing Starliner-1 Vast-1 Axiom Mission 5 2027+ Soyuz MS-30 (February 2027) Gaganyaan-4 (Q1 2027) Gaganyaan-5 (2027) Artemis III (2027) Artemis IV (2028) Artemis V (2030) Chinese Crewed Lunar Landing Mission (~2030) Uncrewed 2025 Bion-M No.2 Cygnus NG-22 Cygnus NG-23 (Q4) ESCAPADE Gaganyaan-1 (Q4) Garatéa-L GOSAT-GW IMAP / SWFO-L1 (September) HTV-X1 (September) IM-3 (October) LOXSAT1 MetOp-SG Series A MetOp-SG Series B PETREL Progress MS-32 (August) Progress MS-33 (October) SMILE (Q3) SPARCS SSC Demo-1 2026 ALTIUS / FLEX Chang'e 7 / Rashid 2 Gaganyaan-2 Gaganyaan-3 ispace M3 MMX MULA Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope (2026–2027) Xuntian PLATO ULTRASAT 2027 Chandrayaan-4 FORUM Luna 26 NEO Surveyor (September) PPE / HALO Space Rider Superbird-9 2028 Chang'e 8 DESTINY + Dragonfly JASMINE Luna 27 LUPEX MBR Explorer MSR Rosalind Franklin rover SAOCOM-2A Solar-C EUVST Tianwen-3 Venus Orbiter Mission 2029 ARIEL / Comet Interceptor Harmony Tianwen-4 Solar Polar Orbit Observatory 2030+ ISS Deorbit Vehicle (2030) Luna 28 (2030) SAOCOM-2B (2030) Spektr-UV (2030) Spektr-M (2030+) EnVision (2031) Venera-D (2031) VERITAS (2031) DAVINCI (2031–2032) LiteBIRD (2032) Athena (2035) LISA (2035) TBA DISHA Janus MOM 2 TEREX-1 (mid 2020s) Uranus Orbiter and Probe Habitable Worlds Observatory List of proposed missions to the Moon List of proposed space observatories List of proposed Solar System probes v t e Crewed spacecraft ( programs ) Active China Shenzhou Russia Soyuz United States Crew Dragon Starliner New Shepard Retired Soviet Union Vostok Voskhod Buran United States X-15 Mercury Gemini Apollo Command and service module Apollo Lunar Module Space Shuttle SpaceShipOne SpaceShipTwo In development China Mengzhou Lanyue India Gaganyaan Russia Orel United States Orion Starship Starship HLS Blue Moon Dream Chaser Cancelled United States SpaceShip III v t e Public-sector space agencies Africa Pan-African and pan-Arab RASCOM Arabsat National ASAL EgSA NARSS ESSTI GSSTC KSA NASRDA SANSA Americas North America CSA NASA NESDIS OSC FAA/AST FCC USSF USSPACECOM NRO Latin America and the Caribbean ALCE AEM CONAE ABE AEB DCTA INPE ITA CCE ABAE IVIC Asia Pan-Asian APSCO Central Asia KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VK TNSA 1 East Asia CNSA SASTIND CASC CALT CAST CCF CGWIC PLAASF CASIC JAXA ISAS JSS NICT NATA KASA KARI KASI SaTReC TASA South Asia SPARRSO ISRO 2 Antrix Corp DoS NRSC DSA SUPARCO Southeast Asia BRIN ORPA INASA MYSA PhilSA SSTL GISTDA VNSC West Asia ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 NSSA NEHSA ISA ISRC ISA NCSR SSA KACST-SRI SSA 2 GORS TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY UAESA ( MBRSC ) Europe Pan-European CEN / CENELEC CEPT ETSI Eurocontrol ECAC ESA ECSS ESTEC EAC ESRIN ECSAT ESAC ESOC ESTRACK Guiana Space Centre EUMETSAT EUTELSAT IGO ESO EU and EEA DG DEFIS EUSPA EU SatCen EASA BEREC ALR 2 BELSPO BIRA-IASB SRTI 2 CSO 2 DTU Space ESO 1 CNES 2 AAE CdE DLR 2 HSA HSO 2 ASI LSA LSO 1 SRON NSO NOSA POLSA 2 CBK PAN UKE KRRiT ORO ULC PTSPACE ROSA 2 INTA AEC EAE AEE SNSA Other ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 BSA 1 KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VVKO SSO TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY SSAU 1 UKSA 2 Oceania ASA CSIRO NZSA World CCSDS CEOS COSPAR IPDA Cospas-Sarsat GEO GSC IADC ICSMD IMSO ISECG ISS MCB ITSO Intersputnik ODCWG ITU-R UNCOPUOS UNOOSA UNOSAT Former BNSC KCST LAPAN NAL NASDA SSP MOM Interkosmos See also: Timeline of first orbital launches by country 1 Preceded by the Soviet space program 2 Preceded by Interkosmos participation v t e Spaceflight General Astrodynamics History Timeline Space Race Records Accidents and incidents Space launch Space policy Australia China European Space Agency European Union India Japan North Korea South Korea Russia Soviet Union United States Space law Outer Space Treaty Rescue Agreement Space Liability Convention Registration Convention Moon Treaty Space warfare Space command Space force Militarisation of space Private spaceflight Billionaire space race Applications Astronomy Earth observation Archaeology Imagery and mapping Reconnaissance Weather and environment monitoring Communications satellite Internet Radio Telephone Television Satellite navigation Commercial use of space Space launch market competition Space architecture Space exploration Space research Space technology Space weather Human spaceflight General Astronaut commercial Life-support system Animals in space Bioastronautics Space suit Extravehicular activity Overview effect Weightlessness Space toilet Space tourism Space colonization Space diving Programs Vostok Mercury Voskhod Gemini Soyuz Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz Space Shuttle Mir Shuttle–Mir International Space Station Shenzhou Tiangong New Shepard Artemis Health issues Effect of spaceflight on the human body Space adaptation syndrome Health threat from cosmic rays Space psychology Psychological and sociological effects Space and survival Space medicine Space nursing Space sexology Spacecraft Launch vehicle Rocket Space capsule Orbital module Reentry capsule Service module Spaceplane Robotic spacecraft Satellite Space probe Lander Rover Self-replicating spacecraft Space telescope Spacecraft propulsion Rocket engine Electric propulsion Solar sail Gravity assist Destinations Sub-orbital Orbital Geocentric Geosynchronous Interplanetary Interstellar Intergalactic Space launch Direct ascent Escape velocity Expendable and reusable launch systems Launch pad Non-rocket spacelaunch Spaceport Ground segment Flight controller Ground station Pass Mission control center Category Portal v t e NASA Policy and history History ( creation ) NACA (1915) National Aeronautics and Space Act (1958) Space Task Group (1958) Paine (1986) Rogers (1986) Ride (1987) Space Exploration Initiative (1989) Augustine (1990) U.S. National Space Policy (1996) CFUSAI (2002) CAIB (2003) Vision for Space Exploration (2004) Aldridge (2004) Augustine (2009) General Space Race Administrator and Deputy Administrator Chief Scientist Astronaut Corps Ranks and positions Chief Budget NASA research spinoff technologies NASA+ NASA TV NASA Social Launch Services Program Mercury Control Center Manned Space Flight Network Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building Launch Complex 39 Launch Complex 48 Launch Control Center Operations and Checkout Building Johnson Space Center Mission Control Lunar Sample Laboratory Science Mission Directorate Human spaceflight programs Past X-15 ( suborbital ) Mercury Gemini Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz (with the Soviet space program ) Space Shuttle Shuttle– Mir (with Roscosmos ) Constellation Current International Space Station Commercial Orbital Transportation Services Commercial Crew Orion Artemis Lunar Gateway Robotic programs Past Hitchhiker Mariner Mariner Mark II MESUR Mars Surveyor '98 New Millennium Lunar Orbiter Pioneer Planetary Observer Ranger Surveyor Viking Project Prometheus Mars Exploration Mars Exploration Rover Current Living With a Star Lunar Precursor Robotic Program Earth Observing System Great Observatories program Explorers Voyager Discovery New Frontiers Solar Terrestrial Probes Commercial Lunar Payload Services SIMPLEx Individual featured missions (human and robotic) Past Apollo 11 COBE Mercury 3 Mercury-Atlas 6 Magellan Pioneer 10 Pioneer 11 Galileo timeline GALEX GRAIL WMAP Space Shuttle Spitzer Space Telescope Sojourner rover Spirit rover LADEE MESSENGER Aquarius Cassini Dawn Kepler space telescope Opportunity rover timeline observed RHESSI InSight Ingenuity helicopter flights Currently operating Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter 2001 Mars Odyssey New Horizons International Space Station Hubble Space Telescope Chandra X-ray Observatory Swift THEMIS Mars Exploration Rover Curiosity rover timeline GOES 14 Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter GOES 15 SDO Juno Mars Science Laboratory timeline NuSTAR Voyager 1 Voyager 2 MAVEN MMS OSIRIS-APEX TESS Mars 2020 Perseverance rover timeline James Webb Space Telescope timeline PACE Europa Clipper Future NISAR Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope DAVINCI VERITAS Communications and navigation Near Earth Network Space Network Deep Space Network ( Goldstone Madrid Canberra Space Flight Operations Facility ) Deep Space Atomic Clock NASA lists Astronauts by name by year Gemini astronauts Apollo astronauts Space Shuttle crews NASA aircraft NASA missions uncrewed missions Apollo missions Space Shuttle missions United States rockets NASA cancellations NASA cameras on spacecraft NASA images and artwork Earthrise The Blue Marble Family Portrait Pale Blue Dot Pillars of Creation Mystic Mountain Solar System Family Portrait The Day the Earth Smiled Fallen Astronaut Deep fields Lunar plaques Pioneer plaques Voyager Golden Record Apollo 11 goodwill messages NASA insignia Gemini and Apollo medallions Mission patches Astronomy Picture of the Day Hubble Space Telescope anniversary images Related " We choose to go to the Moon " Apollo 8 Genesis reading Apollo 15 postal covers incident Apollo Lunar Module Space Mirror Memorial The Astronaut Monument Lunar sample displays Moon rocks stolen or missing U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame Space program on U.S. stamps Apollo 17 Moon mice Moon tree Other primates in space NASA International Space Apps Challenge Astronauts Day National Astronaut Day Nikon NASA F4 Category Commons v t e Soviet and Russian space program Roscosmos Launch sites Baikonur Cosmodrome (in Kazakhstan ) Dombarovsky Kapustin Yar Plesetsk Cosmodrome Svobodny Cosmodrome (defunct) Vostochny Cosmodrome Launch vehicles Angara Proton Soyuz Human spaceflight programs Past Vostok Voskhod Salyut Almaz (incorporated into Salyut program) / TKS Soyuz-Apollo (joint) Mir Shuttle–Mir (joint) Energia / Buran Cancelled Zond (7K-L1) (Moon flyby) Soviet crewed lunar programs (Moon landing) Zvezda (moonbase) TMK (Mars/Venus flyby) Spiral Zvezda Zarya MAKS Kliper Active International Space Station (joint) Russian Orbital Segment Soyuz In development Orel Robotic programs Past Dnepropetrovsk Sputnik (1961–1982) Prognoz (1972–1996) Luna (1958–1976) Venera (1961–1985) Zond (1964–1970) Astron (1983–1991) Vega (1984–1987) Phobos (failed) (1988–1989) Granat (1989–1998) Gamma (1990–1992) Mars 96 (failed) (1996) Resurs-DK No.1 (2006–2016) CORONAS (1994–2009) Fobos-Grunt (failed) (2011) Spektr-R (2011–2019) Luna 25 (failed) (2023) Cancelled Kazachok Active Bion-M Elektro–L Trace Gas Orbiter (joint) Meteor-M Resurs-P Spektr-RG In development Luna-Glob Luna 26 Luna 27 Luna 28 Spektr-UV Communications Sputnik (begun 1957) Sputnik 1 Sputnik 2 Sputnik 3 Sputnik 41 Sputnik 99 Luch Deep Space Network Concepts Baikal-Angara Laplace-P Mars-Grunt Mercury-P OPSEK Spektr-M Venera-D Sfera Images and artwork Mission patches Related List of cosmonauts Cosmonaut ranks and positions Pilot-Cosmonaut of the Russian Federation Soviet space dogs Laika Belka and Strelka Veterok and Ugolyok Ivan Ivanovich Soviet space exploration history on Soviet stamps Cosmonauts Alley Monument to the Conquerors of Space Memorial Museum of Cosmonautics Out of the Present (1995 documentary) Mission to Mir (1997 documentary) See also: Space industry of Russia Russian Aerospace Defence Forces v t e ... in space Biology Human The human body Hygiene Locomotion Medicine Neuroscience Psychology Psychological and sociological effects Sex Sleep Non-human Animals Cats Cockroaches Dogs Frogs Fruit flies Mice Primates Tardigrades Tortoises Extraterrestrial life Microorganisms Plants Astrobotany Environment Climate Corrosion Debris Dust Magnetosphere Weather Weathering Society Advertising Alcohol Archaeology of Earth of items in space Art Burial Colonization Economy Mining Trade Ethics Exploration Food Law Military Music Religion Christmas Selfies Tourism Voting War Women Technology Human spaceflight Accidents Architecture Farming Food Carbonated drinks Toilets Writing Other technologies Logistics Manufacturing Mining Power Batteries Nuclear Solar for Earth for spacecraft Radar Telescopes Weapons Outer space portal v t e Spaceflight lists and timelines Timeline of spaceflight General Space exploration outline timeline Spacecraft Spaceflight records Space Race Rocket and missile technology Human spaceflight General Crewed spacecraft timeline by program Spaceflights 1961–1970 1971–1980 1981–1990 1991–2000 2001–2010 2011–2020 2021–present Soviet Russian Vostok and Voskhod Soyuz Mercury Gemini Apollo Skylab Shenzhou Gaganyaan Spacelab Artemis Civilian spaceflight Orbital Suborbital Salyut Expeditions Spaceflights crewed uncrewed Spacewalks Visitors Mir Expeditions ESA Spaceflights crewed uncrewed Spacewalks Visitors ISS Expeditions ESA Visiting Spaceflights crewed uncrewed Spacewalks Visitors Deployed Tiangong Expeditions Crewed Spaceflights Spacewalks Shuttle Crews Missions Rollbacks People Astronauts by name by year of selection Apollo Gemini Mercury Chinese Asian European Cosmonauts women Muslim Arab African American Ibero-America Space scientists Space travelers by name by first flight by nationality billionaires timeline by nationality Spaceflight-related human fatalities EVA 1965–1999 2000–2014 2015–2024 2025–present Cumulative spacewalk records Longest spacewalks Spacewalkers Solar System exploration Timeline Interplanetary voyages Landings on other planets rovers artificial objects Objects at Lagrange points Probes active future orbiters leaving the Solar System lunar probes Missions to the Moon Timeline of satellites Sample-return mission Mars Earth-orbiting satellites Communications satellite firsts CubeSats PocketQube Earth observation satellites Timeline of first Earth observation satellites Geosynchronous orbit GOES GPS Kosmos Magnetospheric NRO TDRS USA Vehicles Orbital launch systems Comparison Sounding rocket list Spacecraft uncrewed crewed heaviest Upper stages Sounding rocket Small-lift launch vehicle Medium-lift launch vehicle Heavy-lift launch vehicle Super heavy-lift launch vehicle Launches by rocket type Ariane Antares Atlas Atlas LV3B Atlas LV3C Black Brant Electron Delta DM-19 Delta 1 Delta II Delta III Delta IV Heavy Delta IV Medium Delta IV Falcon 9 and Heavy 2010–2019 2020–2022 2023 GSLV H-II and H3 Kosmos Long March Minotaur New Glenn Proton PSLV R-7 (including Semyorka, Molniya, Vostok, Voskhod and Soyuz) Scout SLS Starship Thor and Delta Thor-Agena Thor DM-18 Able Thor DM-18 Agena-A Thor DM-18 Thor DM-21 Agena-B Titan Tsyklon V-2 tests Vega Vulcan Zenit Launches by spaceport Satish Dhawan Agencies, companies and facilities Communications satellite companies comparison Private spaceflight companies Rocket launch sites Space agencies Spacecraft manufacturers Other mission lists and timelines First orbital launches by country First satellites by country NASA missions Constellation missions Timeline of first images of Earth from space Timeline of longest spaceflights Timeline of private spaceflight v t e Solar System Sun Mercury Venus Earth Mars Ceres Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Orcus Pluto Haumea Quaoar Makemake Gonggong Eris Sedna Planets , dwarfs , minors Terrestrials Mercury Venus Earth Mars Giants Gas Jupiter Saturn Ice Uranus Neptune Dwarfs Ceres Orcus Pluto Haumea Quaoar Makemake Gonggong Eris Sedna Large Minor Planets Salacia Varuna Ixion List Moons Earth Moon Claimed Mars Phobos Deimos Jupiter Ganymede Callisto Io Europa all 97 Saturn Titan Rhea Iapetus Dione Tethys Enceladus Mimas Hyperion Phoebe all 274 Uranus Titania Oberon Umbriel Ariel Miranda all 28 Neptune Triton Proteus Nereid all 16 Pluto Charon Nix Hydra Kerberos Styx Orcus Vanth Haumea Hiʻiaka Namaka Quaoar Weywot Makemake S/2015 (136472) 1 Gonggong Xiangliu Eris Dysnomia Exploration ( outline ) Colonization Discovery astronomy historical models timeline Space probes timeline list Human spaceflight space stations list programs Mercury Venus Moon mining Mars Ceres Asteroids mining Comets Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto Deep space Hypothetical objects Bagby's moon Chiron Coatlicue Counter-Earth Chrysalis Fifth Giant Hyperion Lilith Mercury's moon Neith Nemesis Nibiru Petit's moon Phaeton Planet Nine Effects Planet Ten Planet V Planet X Subsatellites Synestia Theia Themis Tyche Vulcan Vulcanoids Waltemath's moons Lists Comets Possible dwarf planets Gravitationally rounded objects Minor planets Natural satellites Solar System models Solar System objects by size by discovery date Interstellar and circumstellar molecules Rings Planetary Jovian Saturnian ( Rhean ?) Uranian Neptunian Minor objects' Charikloan Chironean Haumean Quaoarian Formation, evolution , contents, and History Star formation Accretion Accretion disk Excretion Capture theory Capture of Triton Circumplanetary disk Circumstellar disc Circumstellar envelope Coatlicue Co-orbital configuration Trojan moons Co-orbital moons Cosmic dust Debris disk Detached object Disk instability EXCEDE Exozodiacal dust Extraterrestrial materials Curation Sample-return mission Frost/Ice/Snow line Giant-impact hypothesis Grand tack hypothesis Gravitational collapse Hills cloud Hill sphere Interplanetary dust cloud Interplanetary medium/space Interstellar cloud Interstellar medium Interstellar space Kordylewski cloud Kuiper belt Kuiper cliff Late Heavy Bombardment Molecular cloud Nebular hypothesis Nice model Nice 2 model Five-planet Nice model Oort cloud Oort limit Outer space Planet Disrupted Migration System Planetesimal Formation Merging stars Protoplanetary disk Ring system Roche limit vs. Hill sphere Rubble pile Scattered disc Small Solar System bodies Asteroid belt Asteroids Ceres Vesta Pallas Hygiea active List families PHA exceptional Kirkwood gap Centaurs Comets Damocloids Meteoroids Minor planets names and meanings moons Planetesimal Planetary orbit-crossers Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Trojans Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Trojan camp Greek camp Saturn Uranus Neptune Near-Earth objects NEAs Trans-Neptunian objects Kuiper belt Cubewanos Plutinos Detached objects Sednoids Scattered disc Hills cloud Oort cloud Oort limit Related Double planet Lagrange point Moonlet Syzygy Tidal locking Outline of the Solar System Solar System portal Astronomy portal Earth sciences portal Solar System → Local Interstellar Cloud → Local Bubble → Gould Belt → Orion Arm → Milky Way → Milky Way subgroup → Local Group → Local Sheet → Virgo Supercluster → Laniakea Supercluster → Local Hole → Observable universe → Universe Each arrow ( → ) may be read as "within" or "part of".

Authority control databases National Germany United States Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐8r92m
Cached time: 20250818095716
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.540 seconds
Real time usage: 3.108 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 32609/1000000
Revision size: 114779/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 769806/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 35425/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 75/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 546983/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.205/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22250063/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2334.287      1 -total
 30.74%  717.493      3 Template:Reflist
 15.69%  366.151     58 Template:Cite_web
 15.45%  360.568     21 Template:Navbox
  6.24%  145.740      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.51%  128.509      1 Template:Public_sector_space_agencies
  4.74%  110.645      5 Template:In_lang
  4.67%  108.900     49 Template:Flagicon
  4.42%  103.245     54 Template:Flag
  4.36%  101.716     14 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18896:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818095716 and revision id 1306107213. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_spaceflight&oldid=1306107213 " Categories : Human spaceflight Spaceflight Space policy Life in outer space 1961 introductions Solar System Hidden categories: Pages using the Graph extension Pages with disabled graphs Pages using the EasyTimeline extension CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 Use American English from October 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2010 Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2025 Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with Ukrainian-language sources (uk) Articles with Kazakh-language sources (kk) Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles with Sanskrit-language sources (sa) All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2015 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 00:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Human spaceflight 40 languages Add topic

