Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Coinage 2 Usage Toggle Usage subsection 2.1 In other media 2.2 Criticism 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Rubber science 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Literary device in science fiction For the scientific properties of rubber in the real world, see Rubber .

Rubber science is a science fiction term describing a quasi-scientific explanation for an aspect of a science fiction setting. Rubber science explanations are fictional but convincing enough to avoid upsetting the suspension of disbelief . Rubber science is a feature of most genres of science fiction, with the exception of hard science fiction .

Coinage [ edit ] The term rubber science was coined by Norman Spinrad in his essay "Rubber Sciences", published in Reginald Bretnor 's anthology The Craft of Science Fiction (1976).

[ 1 ] Rubber science was Spinrad's term for " pseudo-science ... made up by the writer with literary care that it not be discontinuous with the reader's realm of the possible." [ 2 ] In "Rubber Sciences," Spinrad proposed eight rules of rubber science to write plausibly about future technology: Explanations must feel scientifically correct and have internal consistency.

[ 1 ] : 58 Principles used for plot purposes must be planted in the reader's mind long before they are used as plot elements.

[ 1 ] : 58 Concepts shouldn't be over-explained; a theoretical basis is sufficient.

[ 1 ] : 59 When creating a new science, authors should pay attention to how established sciences evolve.

[ 1 ] : 59 Interfacing two or more existing sciences will create a plausible new science.

[ 1 ] : 61 Plausibility can be lent by systematizing terminology and relating it to existing human knowledge by choosing words for metaphorical resonance.

[ 1 ] : 61 Rubber science can be solidified with believable hardware.

[ 1 ] : 62 Rubber science can "contribute to the dialectic of scientific evolution" [ 1 ] : 62 as a tool for intellectually exploring the unknown.

[ 1 ] : 64 Usage [ edit ] The term and concept have been adopted by science fiction writers to describe science based on "speculation, extrapolation, fabrication or invention." [ 3 ] Vonda N. McIntyre calls rubber science "a grand tradition" in science fiction and places it in "a hierarchy of rules for science in sf": "if you can make it right, you should; if you can't make it right, at least make it plausible; if you can't make it right or plausible, you had better make it fun." [ 4 ] In their writing guide On Writing Science Fiction , George H. Scithers , Darrell Schweitzer , and John M. Ford cite Spinrad's rules for rubber science as a way to "play fair with the reader," building a background logically from a minimum of assumptions, and focusing on the consequences of those assumptions rather than the assumptions themselves.

[ 5 ] Science fiction author Poul Anderson references Spinrad's concept of rubber science in his article "On Imaginary Science". Anderson prefers the term imaginary science to avoid plagiarizing Spinrad. He divides imaginary science into three types of usage: routine use, where the concepts are taken for granted; loose use, where concepts are treated for their own sake but without rigor; and brilliant use, where the implications of concepts are deeply explored. Anderson reiterates Spinrad's requirement that authors using rubber science know real science and avoid violating it unless they are conscious of what they're doing and what it means.

[ 6 ] In other media [ edit ] While rubber science was coined in reference to science fiction literature, the term has spread to discussion of science fiction in other media, including film, [ 7 ] television, [ 8 ] comic books , [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and gaming.

[ 11 ] Star Trek: Voyager script consultant Andre Bormanis used "the so-called rubber science or the very speculative, consistent with reality" when he was unable to find scientific explanations "based in fairly well-established real science".

[ 8 ] Game designer Steven S. Long included guidance for implementing rubber science in his Hero System tabletop role-playing game ruleset.

[ 11 ] Criticism [ edit ] Some science fiction authors have used the term disparagingly.

Bill Ransom associates rubber science with science fiction of the 1940s and 1950s, an era marked by "lots of cool gadgets," before "the genre became more character driven" under the influence of writers such as Frank Herbert and Samuel Delany , focusing on humans rather than technology solving dilemmas.

[ 12 ] Lucius Shepard , responding to a negative review by George Turner , decried the suggestion that he "haul a gob of rubber science out of the vat in order to justify and explain [his] physics".

[ 13 ] Ann C. Crispin considered Star Trek ' s rubber science to be a forgivable flaw.

[ 14 ] John G. Cramer included an afterword in his hard science fiction novel Twistor to note places where he departed from accurate real science into speculative rubber science. He expressed concern that as a literary device, rubber science added drama at the expense of potentially deceiving the reader into believing the rubber science was factual; he documented his use of rubber science for readers interested in "where the boundaries are between the real and the rubber science" in his novel.

[ 15 ] Reviewers have used the term to praise deft or plausible scientific explanations, [ 16 ] [ 17 ] and to criticise underdeveloped or distracting worldbuilding ; [ 18 ] for instance, a Washington Post review criticized Orson Scott Card 's novel Xenocide for its "chapter long dialogues about rubber science".

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Technobabble References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Spinrad, Norman (1976). "Rubber Sciences". In Reginald Bretnor (ed.).

The Craft of Science Fiction . New York: Harper & Row . pp.

54– 69.

ISBN 0060104619 .

^ Spinrad, Norman (September 9, 2010).

A Critic at Large in the Multiverse . Norman Spinrad. p. 22.

ASIN B0042JT3MQ .

^ Benford, Gregory (1989-01-29).

"Rubber Science, Real Science and Science Fiction" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 2011-05-26 .

^ McIntyre, Vonda N.

(1981). "The Straining Your Eyes Through the Viewscreen Blue". In Herbert, Frank (ed.).

Nebula Winners Fifteen . Harper & Row. p. 81.

ISBN 0-06-01-4830-6 .

^ Scithers, George H.; Schweitzer, Darrell; Ford, John M. (1981). "Science: The Art of Knowing".

On Writing Science Fiction . Owlswick Press. p. 141.

ISBN 0913896195 .

^ Anderson, Poul (April–June 1979).

Baen, James (ed.). "On Imaginary Science".

Destinies .

1 (3).

Ace Books : 310– 313.

^ Henderson, C. J.

(2001). "Buck Rogers in the 25th Century".

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction Movies . Checkmark Books. p. 52.

ISBN 0-8160-4043-5 .

^ a b Bischoff, David (February 1995). "Star trek: Voyager".

Omni .

17 (5): 82.

^ Peter Coogan; Randy Duncan & Kate McClancy (Winter 2009).

"The CAC Report" .

Comic-Con Magazine : 22 . Retrieved August 21, 2013 .

^ Bliss, Pam (April 12, 2010).

"Hopelessly Lost, But Making Good Time #108" .

Sequential Tart . Retrieved August 21, 2013 .

^ a b Long, Steven S.

(2006). "Chapter Two: The Skills".

The Ultimate Skill .

Hero Games . pp. 259, 267.

ISBN 1-58366-098-4 .

^ Friedrich, Brionna (May 12, 2013).

" "What if?" Sci-fi and poetry natural to Grayland writer" .

The Daily World . Retrieved August 11, 2013 .

^ Shepard, Lucius (2010). "A Letter from Lucius Shepard". In Damien Broderick (ed.).

Skiffy and Mimesis: More Best of Australian SF Review (Second Series) . Borgo Press. p. 212.

ISBN 978-1434457875 .

^ Crispin, A.C.

(May 5, 2011).

"The Wall Comes Down in Space: Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country" .

Tor.com . Retrieved August 11, 2013 .

^ Cramer, John G.

(1989). "Afterword".

Twistor .

Avon Books . pp.

332– 333.

ISBN 0-380-71027-7 .

^ "The Uprising" .

Kirkus Reviews .

LXXXI (12). June 15, 2013 . Retrieved August 21, 2013 .

^ Benford, Gregory (1996). "In the Wake of the Wave". In George Edgar Slusser; Gary Westfahl; Eric S. Rabkin (eds.).

Science Fiction and Market Realities .

University of Georgia Press .

^ "The Bar Code Prophecy".

Kirkus Reviews .

LXXX (20). October 15, 2012.

^ Suillivan, Tim (September 29, 1991). "Worlds Without End".

The Washington Post .

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rubber_science&oldid=1241155791 " Categories : 1976 neologisms Fiction about physics Science fiction themes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 August 2024, at 16:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rubber science 1 language Add topic

