Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Academic and professional history 3 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 3.1 Musical pursuits 4 Research and theories Toggle Research and theories subsection 4.1 Work on threat response, anxiety, and emotions 4.2 Difference between threat response and emotions 5 Awards and professional recognition 6 Books and other public outreach 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Joseph E. LeDoux 11 languages Deutsch Esperanto Français 한국어 Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Joseph LeDoux ) American neuroscientist Joseph E. LeDoux (born December 7, 1949) is an American neuroscientist whose research is primarily focused on survival circuits, including their impacts on emotions such as fear and anxiety .

[ 1 ] He is the Henry and Lucy Moses Professor of Science at New York University , and director of the Emotional Brain Institute, a collaboration between NYU and New York State with research sites at NYU and the Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research in Orangeburg, New York. He is also the lead singer and songwriter in the band The Amygdaloids .

Early life and education [ edit ] Joseph LeDoux was born on December 7, 1949, in the Cajun Prairie town of Eunice, Louisiana , to Joseph E. "Boo" LeDoux, a traveling rodeo performer (bull rider) and butcher, and Priscilla Buller LeDoux. He attended St. Edmund's Elementary School and Eunice High School, graduating in 1967.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] LeDoux attended Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge where he majored in Business Administration and minored in Psychology. In 1972 he began work on a Masters of Science in Marketing from LSU.

[ 3 ] During this time, his interest in psychology grew and he volunteered in the laboratory of Robert Thompson, who introduced him to brain research.

[ 4 ] With his Louisiana childhood, LeDoux was drawn to cajun/zydeco music, along with country, R&B, rock, and their fusion into " swamp pop ".

[ 5 ] In high school, he was a disc jockey at the local radio station, KEUN, and the rhythm guitarist of two bands: the Deadbeats and the Countdowns.

[ 6 ] Academic and professional history [ edit ] In the fall of 1974 LeDoux began a Ph.D. program at the State University of New York at Stony Brook (now known as Stony Brook University), and completed his doctorate in 1977.

[ 7 ] He was hired by the Department of Neurology at Cornell Medical School as a postdoctoral fellow and remained there through the rank of associate professor until 1989. During most of his time at Cornell, he worked in the Neurobiology Laboratory where he received technical training in state-of-the-art neuroscience techniques and began researching the brain mechanism of emotional memory that he has pursued ever since.

[ 2 ] In 1989 he joined NYU's newly formed Center for Neural Science as their first outside hire.

[ 7 ] In 1991 he was promoted to full professor, and in 1996 he became the Henry and Lucy Moses Professor of Science. In 2005, he was named "University Professor".

[ 8 ] Personal life [ edit ] In 1971 LeDoux married LSU classmate Diana Steen. They divorced amicably in 1978. Since 1982 he has been married to art critic Nancy Princenthal.

[ 9 ] They reside in the Williamsburg area of Brooklyn . They have two children, Jacob S. LeDoux (died 2005) and Milo E. LeDoux. Milo is a graduate of the University of Oxford , where he studied classics, and is pursuing a career in law.

[ 10 ] Musical pursuits [ edit ] In 2004, LeDoux and NYU Biology Professor Tyler Volk began performing as a cover band for small parties around NYU, and in 2006 they formed The Amygdaloids . The original band also included Daniela Schiller , (then an NYU postdoctoral fellow), and graduate student Nina Curley.

[ 11 ] The band's lyrics, mostly written by LeDoux, are based on neuroscientific, psychological, and philosophical themes, and offer scholarly insights into the role of mind and brain in daily life. Their inaugural CD, Heavy Mental , was released in 2007. On their second CD, Theory of My Mind , LeDoux and Grammy winner Rosanne Cash sing "Crime of Passion" and "Mind over Matter", both written by LeDoux.

[ 12 ] In 2012, the band released All in Our Minds , an EP in which all songs had "mind" in their title.

Anxious , a companion to LeDoux's book with the same title, was released in 2015 and explores some of the same scientific themes as the book, but through song. The band's unique focus on original songs about mind and brain has landed them considerable press. They play regularly in New York City, and have also performed in cities around the world.

[ 5 ] LeDoux and Amygdaloids' bassist Colin Dempsey perform as an acoustic duo called So We Are .

[ 7 ] Research and theories [ edit ] Work on threat response, anxiety, and emotions [ edit ] As explained in his 1996 book, The Emotional Brain , [ 13 ] LeDoux developed an interest in the topic of emotion through his doctoral work with Michael Gazzaniga on split-brain patients in the mid-1970s.

[ 14 ] Because techniques for studying the human brain were limited at the time, he turned to studies of rodents where the brain could be studied in detail. He chose to focus on a simple behavioral model, Pavlovian fear conditioning . This procedure allowed him to follow the flow of information about a stimulus through the brain as it comes to control behavioral responses by way of sensory pathways to the amygdala , and gave rise to the notion of two sensory roads to the amygdala, with the "low road" being a quick and dirty subcortical pathway for rapid activity behavioral responses to threats and the "high road" providing slower but highly processed cortical information.

[ 15 ] His work has shed light on how the brain detects and responds to threats, and how memories about such experiences are formed and stored through cellular, synaptic and molecular changes in the amygdala.

[ 16 ] A long-standing collaboration with NYU colleague Elizabeth Phelps has shown the validity of the rodent work for understanding threat processing in the human brain.

[ 17 ] LeDoux's work on amygdala processing of threats has helped understand exaggerated responses to threats in anxiety disorders in humans.

[ 16 ] [ 18 ] For example, studies with Maria Morgan in the 1990s implicated the medial prefrontal cortex in the extinction (psychology) of responses to threats [ 19 ] and paved the way for understanding how exposure therapy reduces threat reactions in people with anxiety by way of interactions between the medial prefrontal cortex and the amygdala.

[ 13 ] [ 20 ] Work conducted with Karim Nader and Glenn Schafe triggered a wave of interest in the topic of memory reconsolidation , [ 21 ] a process by which memories become labile and subject to change after being retrieved.

[ 22 ] This led to the idea that trauma-related cues might be weakened in humans by blocking reconsolidation. Studies with Marie Mofils, Daniela Schiller and Phelps showed that extinction conducted shortly after triggering reconsolidation is considerably more effective in reducing the threat value of stimuli than conventional extinction, [ 23 ] a finding that has proven useful in reducing drug relapse in humans.

[ 24 ] Difference between threat response and emotions [ edit ] In 2012 LeDoux emphasized the value, when discussing brain functions in animals, of using terms that are not derived from human subjective experience.

[ 25 ] The common practice of calling brain circuits that detect and respond to threats "fear circuits" implies that these circuits are responsible for feelings of fear. LeDoux has argued that so-called Pavlovian fear conditioning should be renamed Pavlovian threat conditioning to avoid the implication that "fear" is being acquired in rats or humans.

[ 26 ] In 2015 he emphasised the notion of survival functions mediated by survival circuits, the purpose of which is to keep organisms alive (rather than to make emotions). For example, defensive survival circuits exist to detect and respond to threats, and can be present in all organisms. However, only organisms that can be conscious of their own brain's activities can feel fear. Fear is a conscious experience and occurs the same way as any other kind of conscious experience: via cortical circuits that allow attention to certain forms of brain activity. He argues the only differences between an emotional and non-emotion state of consciousness are the underlying neural ingredients that contribute to the state.

[ 27 ] These ideas and their implications for understanding the neural foundations of pathological fear and anxiety are explained in his 2015 book, Anxious , where he writes: "Fear and anxiety are not biologically wired... They are the consequence of the cognitive processing of nonemotional ingredients." [ 28 ] [ 29 ] In 2018 he wrote that the amygdala may release hormones due to a trigger (such as an innate reaction to seeing a snake), but "then we elaborate it through cognitive and conscious processes". He differentiated between the defence system, which has evolved over time, and emotions such as fear and anxiety . He points out that even simple organisms such as bacteria move in response to threats; "It's in the brain to allow an organism, whether it be a bacterium or a human, to detect and respond to danger. ... It's not in the brain to create feelings like fear and anxiety ." [ 30 ] Lisa Feldman Barrett takes a similar view.

[ 31 ] Awards and professional recognition [ edit ] LeDoux has received a number of awards, including the Karl Spencer Lashley Award from the American Philosophical Society , the Fyssen International Prize in Cognitive Science, Jean Louis Signoret Prize of the IPSEN Foundation, the Santiago Grisolia Prize, the American Psychological Association Distinguished Scientific Contributions Award, and the American Psychological Association Donald O. Hebb Award.

[ citation needed ] He is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , the New York Academy of Sciences , and the American Association for the Advancement of Science , a William James Fellow of the Association for Psychological Science , and a member of the National Academy of Sciences .

[ citation needed ] Books and other public outreach [ edit ] In addition to numerous publications in scholarly journals, LeDoux has written: The Integrated Mind (with Michael Gazzaniga, Plenum, 1978) The Emotional Brain (Simon and Schuster, 1998) Synaptic Self: How Our Brains Become Who We Are (Viking, 2002) Anxious: Using the Brain to Understand and Treat Fear and Anxiety (Viking, 2015) The Deep History of Ourselves: The Four-Billion-Year Story of How We Got Conscious Brains (Viking, 2019) The Four Realms of Existence: A New Theory of Being Human (Belknap 2023) [ 32 ] He has edited several volumes, including Mind and Brain: Dialogues in Cognitive Neuroscience (with William Hirst, Cambridge University Press, 1986), The Self: From Soul to Brain (with Jacek Debiec and Henry Moss, Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 2003), and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder: Basic Science and Clinical Practice (with Peter Shiromani and Terrence Keane, Humana Press, 2009).

He has contributed to The New York Times Opinionator column on anxiety and to the Huffington Post , and has conducted numerous television, radio, online, and print interviews.

[ 33 ] LeDoux has also collaborated with filmmaker Alexis Gambis on a project called "My Mind's Eye" on the Scientific American website in which interviews with esteemed scientists and philosophers (including Eric Kandel , Michael Gazzaniga , Ned Block ) are framed within the context of his music (see § Music below).

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ "I'm not studying emotion. I'm studying the function of survival circuits. Survival circuits contribute to emotions but are not emotion circuits." LeDoux as quoted in: Emory, Margaret (June 6, 2018).

"On Fear, Emotions, and Memory: An Interview with Dr. Joseph LeDoux" .

brainworldmagazine.com . Retrieved 2020-04-05 .

^ a b Huggett, Brady (January 1, 2024).

"Joseph LeDoux, the split brain and a traveling magic show" (PDF) .

The Transmitter .

^ a b Behar, Michael (December 26, 2007).

"Can Fear Be Forgotten?" .

Popular Science .

^ LeDoux, Joseph E. (March 2024).

"Joseph E. LeDoux" .

Neuron .

112 (6): 870– 874.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2024.02.003 .

PMID 38513617 .

[ non-primary source needed ] ^ a b LeDoux, Joseph E. (September 13, 2023).

"Heavy Mental" .

Psychology Today .

[ non-primary source needed ] ^ De Geest, Lawrence (October 25, 2012).

"An Interview with Joe LeDoux, NYU Neuroscience Professor and Frontman of The Amygdaloids" .

Vice .

^ a b c "Joseph LeDoux" . Growing up in Science. March 27, 2024.

^ "Dr. Joseph E. LeDoux" .

Scholarpedia . April 23, 2008.

^ Scarantino, Andrea (21 November 2013).

"Joe LeDoux: The Emotional Brain, Gumbo and the Amygdaloids" . Emotion Researcher. Archived from the original on January 14, 2014.

^ LeDoux, Joseph.

"Excerpt from Anxious " . Penguin Random House Canada . Retrieved June 10, 2025 .

[ non-primary source needed ] ^ Reydarpour, Roja (March 6, 2007).

"A Band of Scientists Who Really Are a Band" .

The New York Times .

^ "Theory of My Mind (June, 2010)" . The Amygdaloids – Neuroscience meets Rock & Roll . Retrieved June 10, 2025 .

^ a b LeDoux JE (1996) The Emotional Brain . New York: Simon and Schuster.

^ Gazzaniga MS, LeDoux JE (1978) The Integrated Mind . New York: Plenum.

^ LeDoux JE (1994) "Emotion, memory and the brain".

Scientific American 270:50-57.

^ a b LeDoux JE (2002) Synaptic Self: How Our Brains Become Who We Are . New York: Viking; LeDoux JE (2000) Emotion circuits in the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 23:155-184; Rodrigues SM, Schafe GE, LeDoux JE (2004) Molecular mechanisms underlying emotional learning and memory in the lateral amygdala. Neuron 44:75-91; Johansen JP, Cain CK, Ostroff LE, LeDoux JE (2011) Molecular mechanisms of fear learning and memory. Cell 147:509-524.

^ Phelps, Elizabeth A.; Ledoux, Joseph E. (2005).

"Contributions of the Amygdala to Emotion Processing: From Animal Models to Human Behavior" .

Neuron .

48 (2): 175– 187.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.09.025 .

PMID 16242399 .

S2CID 4821044 .

[ non-primary source needed ] ^ New York: Viking; LeDoux JE (2015) Anxious: Using the Brain to Understand and Treat Fear and Anxiety . New York: Viking.

^ Morgan MA, Romanski LM, LeDoux JE (1993) Extinction of emotional learning: contribution of medial prefrontal cortex. Neurosci Lett 163:109-113; Morgan MA, LeDoux JE (1995) Differential contribution of dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex to the acquisition and extinction of conditioned fear in rats. Behav Neurosci 109:681-688; Sotres-Bayon F, Bush DE, LeDoux JE (2004) Emotional perseveration: an update on prefrontal-amygdala interactions in fear extinction . Learn Mem 11:525-535.

^ LeDoux JE (2002) Synaptic Self: How Our Brains Become Who We Are . New York: Viking; LeDoux JE (2015) Anxious: Using the Brain to Understand and Treat Fear and Anxiety . New York: Viking; Shin, L.M., S.L. Rauch, R.K. Pitman. "Amygdala, Medial Prefrontal Cortex, and Hippocampal Function in PTSD." Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences (2006) 1071:67–79; Mathew, S.J., R.B. Price, and D.S. Charney. "Recent Advances in the Neurobiology of Anxiety Disorders: Implications for Novel Therapeutics." American Journal of Medical Genetics Part C, Seminars in Medical Genetics (2008) 148C:89–98.

^ Nader K, Schafe GE, LeDoux JE (2000) Fear memories require protein synthesis in the amygdala for reconsolidation after retrieval. Nature 406:722-726 ^ Dudai, Yadin; Eisenberg, Mark (2004).

"Rites of Passage of the Engram" .

Neuron .

44 (1): 93– 100.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.003 .

PMID 15450162 .

S2CID 18182429 .

^ Monfils MH, Cowansage KK, Klann E, LeDoux JE (2009) Extinction-reconsolidation boundaries: key to persistent attenuation of fear memories. Science 324:951-955; Schiller D, Monfils MH, Raio CM, Johnson DC, LeDoux JE, Phelps EA (2010) Preventing the return of fear in humans using reconsolidation update mechanisms. Nature 463:49-53; Schiller D, Kanen JW, LeDoux JE, Monfils MM, and Phelps EA (2013) Extinction during reconsolidation of threat memory diminishes prefrontal cortex involvement . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:20040-20045.

^ Xue YX, Luo YX, Wu P, Shi HS, Xue LF, Chen C, Zhu WL, Ding ZB, Bao YP, Shi J, Epstein DH, Shaham Y, Lu L (2012) A memory retrieval-extinction procedure to prevent drug craving and relapse . Science 336:241-245.

^ LeDoux J (2012) Rethinking the emotional brain . Neuron 73:653-676.

^ LeDoux JE (2014) Coming to terms with fear . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:2871-2878.

^ LeDoux JE (2015) Feelings: What are they and how does the brain make them?

Archived 2015-05-01 at the Wayback Machine Daedalus 144.

^ LeDoux, Joseph (2015).

Anxious: Using the Brain to Understand and Treat Fear and Anxiety . New York: Viking. p. 232.

[ non-primary source needed ] ^ Ossola, Alexandra (November 1, 2015).

" Scientific American MIND Reviews Anxious " .

Scientific American MIND .

^ "On Fear, Emotions, and Memory: An Interview with Dr. Joseph LeDoux » Page 2 of 2 » Brain World" . 2018-06-07.

^ Mobbs, Dean; Adolphs, Ralph; Fanselow, Michael S.; Barrett, Lisa Feldman; LeDoux, Joseph E.; Ressler, Kerry; Tye, Kay M.; Nature Neuroscience (October 10, 2019).

"On the Nature of Fear" .

Scientific American . Retrieved June 9, 2022 .

[ non-primary source needed ] ^ Harvard University Press.

"The Four Realms of Existence: A New Theory of Being Human" .

^ "LeDoux Lab: News/Events/Press" .

www.cns.nyu.edu . Retrieved 2020-04-05 .

External links [ edit ] LeDouxlab — LeDoux Biography LeDoux Lab Website NYU/NCS : Core Faculty : Joseph LeDoux Archived May 27, 2019, at the Wayback Machine LeDoux Lecture "What fearful rats can tell us about psychiatric treatment" Joseph LeDoux interviewed on NOUS, in a podcast titled "On the 4 billion year journey to our conscious selves" Archived November 11, 2020, at the Wayback Machine v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Joseph_E._LeDoux&oldid=1304159850 " Categories : Living people 1949 births American cognitive scientists American neuroscientists Emotion psychologists 20th-century American psychologists 21st-century American psychologists Stony Brook University alumni New York University faculty Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences Weill Medical College of Cornell University faculty APA Distinguished Scientific Award for an Early Career Contribution to Psychology recipients Hidden categories: All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2025 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 10:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Joseph E. LeDoux 11 languages Add topic

