Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development Toggle Development subsection 1.1 Twelve Tables 1.2 Early republican law 2 Jurisprudence Toggle Jurisprudence subsection 2.1 Pre-classical period 2.2 Classical Roman law 2.3 Post-classical law 2.4 Byzantine law 3 Substance Toggle Substance subsection 3.1 Concept of laws 3.2 Public law 3.3 Private law 3.4 Status 3.5 Litigation 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 In the West 4.2 Today 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Roman law 70 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски مصرى Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Law in Ancient Rome (c. 449 BC – AD 529) For Roman Catholic canon law, see Canon law .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Roman law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Politics of ancient Rome Periods Roman Kingdom 753–509 BC Roman Republic 509–27 BC Roman Empire 27 BC – AD 395 Western AD 395–476 Eastern AD 330–1453 Timeline Constitution Kingdom Republic Sullan republic Empire Augustan reforms Late Empire Political institutions Imperium Collegiality Auctoritas Roman citizenship Cursus honorum Assemblies Centuriate Curiate Plebeian Tribal Ordinary magistrates Consul Praetor Quaestor Promagistrate Aedile Tribune Censor Governor Extraordinary magistrates Corrector Dictator Magister equitum Consular tribune Rex Triumviri Decemviri Interrex Public law Mos maiorum Ius Senatus consultum Quaestio perpetua Senatus consultum ultimum Titles and honours Emperor Legatus Dux Officium Praeses Praefectus Vicarius Vigintisexviri Triumvir monetalis Lictor Magister militum Imperator Princeps senatus Pontifex maximus Augustus Caesar Tetrarch Other countries v t e Roman law is the legal system of ancient Rome , including the legal developments spanning over a thousand years of jurisprudence , from the Twelve Tables ( c.

449 BC ), to the Corpus Juris Civilis (AD 529) ordered by Eastern Roman emperor Justinian I .

Roman law also denoted the legal system applied in most of Western Europe until the end of the 18th century. In Germany , Roman law practice remained in place longer under the Holy Roman Empire (963–1806). Roman law thus served as a basis for legal practice throughout Western continental Europe, as well as in most former colonies of these European nations, including Latin America, and also in Ethiopia.

English and Anglo-American common law were influenced also by Roman law, notably in their Latinate legal glossary.

[ 1 ] Eastern Europe was also influenced by the jurisprudence of the Corpus Juris Civilis , especially in countries such as medieval Romania, which created a new legal system comprising a mixture of Roman and local law.

After the dissolution of the Western Roman Empire , the Roman law remained in effect in the Byzantine Empire . From the 7th century onward, the legal language in the East was Greek, with Eastern European law continuing to be influenced by Byzantine law .

Development The jurist Sextus Pomponius said, "At the beginning of our city, the people began their first activities without any fixed law, and without any fixed rights: all things were ruled despotically, by kings".

[ 2 ] Before the Twelve Tables (i.e between 754 and 449 BC), private law comprised the Roman civil law ( ius civile Quiritium ) that applied only to Roman citizens and was bonded to religion. The ius civile of the time was undeveloped, with attributes of strict formalism, symbolism, and conservatism, for example, as embodied in the ritual practice of mancipatio . It is believed that Roman law is rooted in the Etruscan religion , emphasizing ritual.

[ 3 ] Twelve Tables Main article: Twelve Tables The first legal text of the Roman law is the Law of the Twelve Tables , dating from the mid-fifth century BC. The plebeian tribune , C. Terentilius Arsa, proposed that the law should be written in order to prevent magistrates from applying the law arbitrarily.

[ 4 ] After eight years of political struggle, the plebeian social class convinced the patricians to send a delegation to Athens to copy the Laws of Solon ; they also dispatched delegations to other Greek cities for a like reason.

[ 4 ] In 451 BC, according to the traditional story, according to Livy , ten Roman citizens were chosen to record the laws, known as the decemviri legibus scribundis . While they were performing this task, they were given supreme political power ( imperium ), whereas the power of the magistrates was restricted.

[ 4 ] In 450 BC, the decemviri produced a set of laws inscribed on ten tablets ( tabulae ), which were considered unsatisfactory by the plebeians. A second decemvirate is said to have added two additional tablets in 449 BC. The resulting Law of the Twelve Tables was subsequently approved by the people’s assembly.

[ 4 ] Modern scholars tend to challenge the accuracy of Latin historians . They generally do not believe that a second decemvirate ever took place. The decemvirate of 451 BC is believed to have assumed the leading functions in Rome and included the most controversial points of customary law.

[ 4 ] Questions concerning Greek influence on early Roman Law are still much discussed. Many scholars consider it unlikely that the patricians sent an official delegation to Greece, as the Latin historians believed. Rather, the Romans acquired Greek legislations from the Greek cities of Magna Graecia , the main portal between the Roman and Greek worlds.

[ 4 ] The original text of the Twelve Tables has not been preserved. The tablets were probably destroyed when Rome was conquered and burned by the Gauls in 387 BC.

[ 4 ] The fragments which did survive show that it was not a law code in the modern sense. It did not provide a complete and coherent system of all applicable rules or give legal solutions for all possible cases. Rather, the tables contained specific provisions designed to change the then-existing customary law . Although the provisions pertain to all areas of law, the largest part is dedicated to private law and civil procedure .

[ citation needed ] Early republican law Main articles: Lex Canuleia , Lex Hortensia , and Lex Aquilia Among the most consequential laws passed during the early Republic were the Lex Canuleia (445 BC), which allowed marriage ( conubium ) between patricians and plebeians ; the Leges Liciinae Sextiae (367 BC), which restricted the amount of public land ( ager publicus ) that any citizen could occupy, and stipulated that one of the two annual consuls must be plebeian; [ 5 ] the Lex Ogulnia (300 BC), which permitted plebeians to hold certain priestly offices as pontiffs or augurs ; and the Lex Hortensia (287 BC), which stated that the determinations of plebeian assemblies (plebiscita) would henceforth be binding on the entire populus Romanus , both patricians and plebeians.

[ 6 ] Another important statute from the Republican era is the Lex Aquilia of 286 BC, which may be regarded as the root of modern tort law .

[ citation needed ] Jurisprudence Rome's most important contribution to European legal culture was not the enactment of well-drafted statutes, but the emergence of a class of professional jurists ( prudentes or jurisprudentes , sing.

prudens ) and of a legal science . This was achieved in a gradual process of applying the scientific methods of Greek philosophy to the subject of law, a subject which the Greeks themselves never treated as a science.

[ citation needed ] Traditionally, the origins of Roman legal science are connected to Gnaeus Flavius . Around the year 300 BC, Flavius is said to have published the formularies containing the words which had to be spoken in court to begin a legal action. Before the time of Flavius, these formularies are said to have been secret and known only to the priests. Their publication made it possible for non-priests to explore the meaning of these legal texts. Whether or not this story is credible, jurists were active, and legal treatises were written in larger numbers before the 2nd century BC. Among the famous jurists of the republican period are Quintus Mucius Scaevola , who wrote an influential and voluminous treatise on all aspects of the law, and Servius Sulpicius Rufus , a friend of Marcus Tullius Cicero . Thus, Rome had developed a very sophisticated legal system and a refined legal culture when the Roman republic was replaced by the monarchical system of the Principate in 27 BC.

[ citation needed ] Pre-classical period In the period between about 201 to 27 BC, more flexible laws developed to match the needs of the time. In addition to the old and formal ius civile , a new juridical class was created: the ius honorarium : "The law introduced by the magistrates who had the right to promulgate edicts in order to support, supplement or correct the existing law." [ 7 ] With this new law the old formalism was abandoned, and more flexible principles of ius gentium ("law of the nations") were used.

[ citation needed ] The adaptation of law to new needs was given over to juridical practice, to magistrates , and especially to the praetors . Though the praetors were not legislators and did not technically create new law when he issued his edicts ( magistratuum edicta ), the results of his rulings enjoyed legal protection ( actionem dare ) and were in effect often the source of new legal rules. A praetor's successor was not bound by the edicts of his predecessor. However, he did take rules from edicts of his predecessor that had proved to be useful. In this way a constant content was created that proceeded from edict to edict ( edictum traslatitium ).

[ citation needed ] Thus, over the course of time, parallel to the civil law and supplementing and correcting it, a new body of praetoric law emerged. In fact, praetoric law was so defined by the famous Roman jurist Papinian (142–212 AD): " Ius praetorium est quod praetores introduxerunt adiuvandi vel supplendi vel corrigendi iuris civilis gratia propter utilitatem publicam " ("praetoric law is that law introduced by praetors to supplement or correct civil law for public benefit"). Ultimately, civil law and praetoric law were fused in the Corpus Juris Civilis .

[ citation needed ] Classical Roman law Main articles: Gaius (jurist) , Ulpian , Papinian , Julius Paulus , and Herennius Modestinus The first 250 years of the current era are the period during which Roman law and Roman legal science reached its greatest degree of sophistication and influence. The law of this period is often referred to as the "classical period of Roman law".

[ by whom?

] The Roman Republic had three different branches: the Assemblies , the Senate , and the Consuls . The assemblies passed laws and made declarations of war; the Senate controlled the treasury; and the consuls had the highest juridical power.

[ 8 ] The jurists worked in different functions, including giving legal opinions at the request of private parties; advising magistrates, especially the praetors; and helping the praetors draft their edicts , in which they publicly announced, at the beginning of their tenure, how they would handle their duties, and the formularies, according to which specific proceedings were conducted. Some jurists also held high judicial and administrative offices themselves.

[ citation needed ] The jurists also produced various legal punishments. Around 130 AD, the jurist Salvius Iulianus drafted a standard form of the praetor's edict, which was used by all praetors from that time onwards. This edict contained detailed descriptions of all cases, in which the praetor would allow a legal action and in which he would grant a defense. The standard edict thus functioned like a comprehensive law code, even though it did not formally have the force of law. It indicated the requirements for a successful legal claim. The edict therefore became the basis for extensive legal commentaries by later classical jurists like Paulus and Ulpian .

[ citation needed ] During the pre-classical and classical period, such laws emerged as the separation of ownership and possession; contract and tort as distinct sources of obligations; standard types of contracts (sale, contract for work, hire, contract for services) regulated in most continental codes; the Institutes of Gaius , which invented a system of private law based on the division of all material into personae (persons), res (things) and actiones (legal actions).

Gaius's system was used for many centuries, and has been recognized in legal treatises like William Blackstone 's Commentaries on the Laws of England and enactments like the French Code civil and the German BGB .

[ citation needed ] Post-classical law By the middle of the 3rd century, the conditions for the flourishing of a refined legal culture had become less favourable. The general political and economic situation deteriorated as the emperors assumed more direct control of all aspects of political life. The political system of the Principate , which had retained some features of the republican constitution, began to transform itself into the absolute monarchy of the Dominate . The existence of legal science and of jurists who regarded law as a science, not as an instrument to achieve the political goals set by the absolute monarch, did not fit well into the new order of things. Jurisprudential literary production all but ended. Few jurists after the mid-3rd century are known by name. While legal science and legal education persisted to some extent in the eastern part of the Empire, most of the subtleties of classical law came to be disregarded and finally forgotten in the west. Classical law was replaced by the so-called vulgar law of the late Roman Empire .

[ citation needed ] Byzantine law Main articles: Corpus Juris Civilis and Byzantine law Title page of a late 16th-century edition of the Digesta , part of Emperor Justinian 's Corpus Juris Civilis When the centre of the Empire was moved to the Greek East in the 4th century, many legal concepts of Greek origin appeared in the official Roman legislation.

[ 9 ] The influence is visible even in the law of persons or of the family, traditionally the part of the law that changes least. For example, Constantine started putting restrictions on the ancient Roman concept of patria potestas , the power held by the male head of a family over his descendants, by acknowledging that persons in potestate , the descendants, could have proprietary rights. He was apparently making concessions to the much stricter concept of paternal authority under Greek-Hellenistic law.

[ 9 ] The Codex Theodosianus (438 AD) was a codification of Constantian laws. Later emperors went even further, until Justinian finally decreed that a child in potestate became owner of everything it acquired, except when it acquired something from its father.

[ 9 ] The codes of Justinian, particularly the Corpus Juris Civilis (529–534) continued to be the basis of legal practice in the Empire throughout its so-called Byzantine history.

Leo III the Isaurian issued a new code, the Ecloga , [ 10 ] in the early 8th century. In the 9th century, the emperors Basil I and Leo VI the Wise commissioned a combined translation of the Code and the Digest, parts of Justinian's codes, into Greek, which became known as the Basilica . Roman law as preserved in the codes of Justinian and in the Basilica remained the basis of legal practice in Greece and in the courts of the Eastern Orthodox Church even after the fall of the Byzantine Empire and the conquest by the Turks, and, along with the Syro-Roman law book , also formed the basis for much of the Fetha Negest , which remained in force in Ethiopia until 1931.

[ citation needed ] Substance The basics of Roman law (in German with English captioning) Concept of laws The 2nd-century Roman jurist Ulpian , however, divided law into three branches: natural law, which existed in nature and governed animals as well as humans; the law of nations, which was distinctively human; and, civil law, which was the body of laws specific to a people.

[ 11 ] Ius civile ("citizen law", originally ius civile Quiritium) was the body of common laws that applied to Roman citizens and the Praetores Urbani , the individuals who had jurisdiction over cases involving citizens.

Ius gentium ("law of peoples") was the body of common laws that applied to foreigners, and their dealings with Roman citizens. The Praetores Peregrini were the individuals who had jurisdiction over cases involving citizens and foreigners.

Ius naturale ("natural law") was the concept that all persons had a kind of common sense, which the jurists developed to explain why all people seemed to obey some laws.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Ius scriptum ("written law") was the body of statute laws made by the legislature, known as leges ( lit.

' laws ' ) and plebiscita ( lit.

' plebiscites ' , originating in the Plebeian Council ). Roman lawyers would also include in the ius scriptum the edicts of magistrates ( magistratuum edicta ), the advice of the Senate ( Senatus consulta ), the responses and thoughts of jurists ( responsa prudentium ), and the proclamations and beliefs of the emperor ( principum placita ).

Ius non scriptum ("unwritten law") was the body of common laws that arose from customary practice and had become binding over time.

[ citation needed ] Ius singulare ("singular law") was the special law for certain groups of people, things, or legal relations, as exceptional from the general rules of the legal system. For example, the ius singulare about wills written by people in the military during a campaign exempted them from the solemnities generally required for citizens when writing wills in normal circumstances.

Ius commune ("common law") was the general, ordinary, law, as distinct from ius singulare .

[ citation needed ] Ius publicum ("public law") was the law that protected the interests of the Roman state. Roman criminal law was mostly private, with only the most severe crimes prosecuted by the state.

Ius publicum was also used to describe obligatory legal regulations (today called ius cogens ).

Ius privatum ("private law") was the law that protected individuals, which included personal, property, civil and criminal law as well as the procedural law of judicial proceedings ( iudicium privatum ).

[ citation needed ] Public law See also: Res publica Cicero , author of the classic book The Laws, attacks Catiline for attempting a coup in the Roman Senate .

The Roman Republic's constitution or mos maiorum ("custom of the ancestors") was an unwritten, informal, and unofficial set of guidelines and principles passed down mainly through precedent,  constantly evolving throughout the life of the Republic.

[ citation needed ] Throughout the 1st century BC, the power and legitimacy of the Roman constitution progressively eroded. Even Roman constitutionalists, such as the senator Cicero , lost a willingness to remain faithful to it towards the end of the Republic. When the Roman Republic ultimately fell in the years following the Battle of Actium and Mark Antony 's suicide, what was left of the Roman constitution died along with the Republic. The first Roman emperor , Augustus , attempted to manufacture the appearance of a constitution that still governed the Empire, by utilising that constitution's institutions to lend legitimacy to the Principate , e.g., reusing prior grants of greater imperium to substantiate Augustus' greater imperium over the imperial provinces and the prorogation of different magistracies to justify Augustus' receipt of tribunician power. The belief in a surviving constitution lasted well into the life of the Roman Empire .

[ citation needed ] Concepts that originated in the Roman constitution live on in constitutions to this day. Examples include checks and balances , the separation of powers , vetoes , filibusters , quorum requirements, term limits , impeachments , the powers of the purse , and regularly scheduled elections . Even some lesser used modern constitutional concepts, such as the block voting found in the electoral college of the United States , originate from ideas found in the Roman constitution.

[ citation needed ] Private law Stipulatio was the basic form of contract in Roman law. It was made in the format of question and answer. The precise nature of the contract is disputed.

[ citation needed ] Rei vindicatio is a legal action by which the plaintiff demands that the defendant return a thing that belongs to the plaintiff. It was only used when the plaintiff owns the thing, and the defendant somehow impeded the plaintiff's possession of the thing. The plaintiff could also institute an actio furti , a personal action , to punish the defendant. If the thing could not be recovered, the plaintiff could also claim damages from the defendant with the aid of the condictio furtiva , another personal action. With the aid of the actio legis Aquiliae , another personal action, the plaintiff could claim damages from the defendant.

Rei vindicatio was derived from the ius civile , and was only available to Roman citizens.

[ citation needed ] Status Main article: Status in Roman legal system A person's abilities and duties within the Roman legal system depended on their legal status . The individual could have been a Roman citizen ( status civitatis ), unlike a foreigner; been free ( status libertatis ), unlike slaves; or had a certain position in a Roman family ( status familiae ) either as the head of the family ( pater familias ) or some lower member ( alieni iuris "one who lives under someone else's law").

[ citation needed ] Litigation Main article: Roman litigation The history of Roman Law can be divided into three systems of procedure: legis actiones , the formulary system , and cognitio extra ordinem . The periods in which these systems were in use overlapped and did not have definitive breaks. Roughly, legis actio system prevailed from the time of the XII Tables ( c.

450 BC ) until about the end of the 2nd century BC; the formulary procedure was primarily used from the last century of the Republic until the end of the classical period ( c.

AD 200 ); and cognitio extra ordinem was used in post-classical times.

[ 15 ] During the republic and until the bureaucratization of Roman judicial procedure, the judge was usually a private person ( iudex privatus ). He had to be a Roman male citizen. The parties could agree on a judge, or they could appoint one from a list of judges known as the album iudicum . They went down the list until they found a judge agreeable to both parties, or if none could be found they had to take the last one on the list.

No one had a legal obligation to judge a case. Judges had great latitude in the way they conducted litigation. He considered all the evidence and ruled in the way that seemed just. Because the judge was not a jurist or a legal technician, he often consulted a jurist about the technical aspects of the case, but he was not bound by the jurist's reply. At the end of the litigation, if things were not clear to him, he could refuse to give a judgment, by swearing that it wasn't clear. Also, there was a maximum time to issue a judgment, which depended on some technical issues of law.

Later on, with the bureaucratization, this procedure disappeared, and was substituted by the so-called extra ordinem procedure, also known as the cognitory system. The whole case was reviewed before a magistrate in a single phase. The magistrate had obligation to judge and to issue a decision, and the decision could be appealed to a higher magistrate.

Legacy German legal theorist Rudolf von Jhering famously remarked that ancient Rome had conquered the world three times: the first through its armies, the second through its religion, the third through its laws. He might have added: each time more thoroughly.

— David Graeber , Debt: The First 5,000 Years In the West Main articles: Early Germanic law , Anglo-Saxon law , and Medieval Roman law In the west, Justinian's political authority never went any farther than certain portions of the Italian and Hispanic peninsulas. In Law codes issued by the Germanic kings, however, the influence of early Eastern Roman codes on some of these is discernible. In many early Germanic states, Roman citizens continued to be governed by Roman laws for quite some time, even while members of the various Germanic tribes were governed by their own respective codes.

[ citation needed ] The Codex Justinianus , Institutes of Justinian , and the earlier code of Theodosius II were well-known in Western Europe and served as models for a few of the Germanic law codes. However, the Digest portion was largely ignored for several centuries until around 1070, when a manuscript of the Digest was rediscovered in Italy. This was done mainly through the works of glossars who wrote their comments between lines ( glossa interlinearis ), or in the form of marginal notes ( glossa marginalis ). From that time, scholars began to study the ancient Roman legal texts, and to teach others what they learned from their studies. The center of these studies was Bologna . The law school there gradually developed into Europe's first university.

[ citation needed ] There are several reasons that Roman law was favored in the Middle Ages . Roman law regulated the legal protection of property and the equality of legal subjects and their wills, and it prescribed the possibility that the legal subjects could dispose their property through testament. The students who were taught Roman law in Bologna (and later in many other places) found that many rules of Roman law were better suited to regulate complex economic transactions than the customary rules applicable throughout Europe. For this reason, Roman law, or at least some provisions borrowed from it, began to be re-introduced into legal practice, centuries after the end of the Roman empire. This process was actively supported by many kings and princes who employed university-trained jurists as counselors and court officials and sought to benefit from rules like princeps legibus solutus est ("The sovereign is not bound by the laws", a phrase initially coined by Ulpian , a Roman jurist).

[ citation needed ] By the middle of the 16th century, the rediscovered Roman law dominated the legal practice of many European countries. A legal system, in which Roman law was mixed with elements of canon law and of Germanic custom, especially feudal law , had emerged. This legal system, which was common to all of continental Europe (and Scotland ) was known as Ius Commune . This Ius Commune and the legal systems based on it are usually referred to as civil law in English-speaking countries.

[ citation needed ] Only England and the Nordic countries did not take part in the wholesale reception of Roman law. One reason for this is that the English legal system was more developed than its continental counterparts by the time Roman law was rediscovered. Therefore, the practical advantages of Roman law were less obvious to English practitioners than to continental lawyers. As a result, the English system of common law developed in parallel to Roman-based civil law, with its practitioners being trained at the Inns of Court in London rather than receiving degrees in Canon or Civil Law at the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge . Elements of Romano-canon law were present in England in the ecclesiastical courts and, less directly, through the development of the equity system. In addition, some concepts from Roman law made their way into the common law. Especially in the early 19th century, English lawyers and judges were willing to borrow rules and ideas from continental jurists and directly from Roman law.

The practical application of Roman law, and the era of the European Ius Commune , came to an end when national codifications were made. In 1804, the French civil code came into force. In the course of the 19th century, many European states either adopted the French model or drafted their own codes. In Germany, the political situation made the creation of a national code of laws impossible. From the 17th century, Roman law in Germany had been heavily influenced by domestic (customary) law, and it was called usus modernus Pandectarum . In some parts of Germany, Roman law continued to be applied until the German civil code ( Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch , BGB) went into effect in 1900.

[ 16 ] Colonial expansion spread the civil law system.

[ 17 ] Today Legal systems of the world. Blue is based on Roman law.

Today, Roman law is no longer applied in legal practice, even though the legal systems of some countries like South Africa and San Marino are still based on the old jus commune . However, even where the legal practice is based on a code, many rules deriving from Roman law apply: no code completely broke with the Roman tradition. Rather, the provisions of the Roman law were fitted into a more coherent system and expressed in the national language. For this reason, knowledge of the Roman law is indispensable to understand the legal systems of today. Thus, Roman law is often still a mandatory subject for law students in civil law jurisdictions . In this context, the annual International Roman Law Moot Court was developed in order to better educate the students and to network with one another internationally.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] As steps towards a unification of the private law in the member states of the European Union are being taken, the old jus commune , which was the common basis of legal practice everywhere in Europe, but allowed for many local variants, is seen by many as a model.

[ 21 ] See also Ancient Rome portal Abalienatio (legal transfer of property) Auctoritas (power of the sovereign) Capitis deminutio Cessio bonorum (surrender of goods to a creditor) Compascuus (common pasture) Constitution (Roman law) Homo sacer Inheritance law in ancient Rome Justitium (akin to modern state of exception ) List of Roman laws Res extra commercium Ancient Greek law Roman-Dutch law References ^ In Germany, Art. 311 BGB ^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Roman Law" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Jenő Szmodis: The Reality of the Law – From the Etruscan Religion to the Postmodern Theories of Law ; Ed. Kairosz, Budapest, 2005.

^ a b c d e f g "A Short History of Roman Law", Olga Tellegen-Couperus pp. 19–20.

^ The Oxford Classical Dictionary , Third Edition. Edited by Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth, Oxford University Press, 1996. Entry: Licinius Stolo, Gaius ^ The Oxford Classical Dictionary , Third Edition. Edited by Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth, Oxford University Press, 1996. Entry: Lex ^ Berger, Adolf (1953).

Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law . Vol. 76. pp.

90– 93.

doi : 10.2307/297597 .

ISBN 9780871694324 .

JSTOR 291711 .

S2CID 162540731 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ; |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ "Consul" .

Livius.org . 2002 . Retrieved 19 June 2017 .

^ a b c Tellegen-Couperus, Olga Eveline (1993).

A Short History of Roman Law .

Psychology Press . p. 174.

ISBN 9780415072502 .

^ "Ecloga" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc.

20 July 1998 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Digest 1.1.1.4; Tierney, The Idea of Natural Rights , p. 136.

^ Department, Reference.

"GW Law Library: Library Guides: Roman Law Research: Introduction to Roman Law through Emperor Justinian" .

law.gwu.libguides.com . Retrieved 2025-06-14 .

^ "natural law" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 2025-06-14 .

^ "Roman law | Influence, Importance, Principles, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2025-06-14 .

^ Jolowicz, Herbert Felix; Nicholas, Barry (1967).

Historical Introduction to the Study of Roman Law .

Cambridge University Press . p. 528.

ISBN 9780521082532 .

^ Wolff, Hans Julius, 1902-1983. (1951).

Roman law : an historical introduction . Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. p. 208.

ISBN 0585116784 .

OCLC 44953814 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Rheinstein, Max ; Glendon, Mary Ann; Carozza, Paolo.

"Civil law (Romano-Germanic)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "International Roman Law Moot" .

^ Paolo De Luca "Quattro studenti della Federico II in gara a Oxford inscenano un antico processo romano" In: La Repubblica, 05.04.2013.

^ Areti Kotseli "Greek Law Students Finish Second in the 2012 International Roman Law Moot Court Competition" In: Greek Reporter 13.04.2012.

^ "European legal pluralism as a rebirth of Ius commune. Retfaerd 94(2001)" .

Jarkko Tontti (in Finnish). 2025-05-15 . Retrieved 2025-05-15 .

Sources Berger, Adolf, "Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law" , Transactions of the American Philosophical Society , Vol. 43, Part 2., pp. 476. Philadelphia : American Philosophical Society , 1953. (reprinted 1980, 1991, 2002).

ISBN 1-58477-142-9 Further reading Bablitz, Leanne E. (2007).

Actors and Audience in the Roman Courtroom . London: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780203946770 .

ISBN 978-0-203-94677-0 .

Bauman, Richard A. (1989).

Lawyers and Politics in the Early Roman Empire . Munich: C. H. Beck.

ISBN 9783406337734 .

Borkowski, Andrew; Du Plessis, Paul (2020).

Borkowski's Textbook on Roman Law (6 ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/he/9780198848011.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-884801-1 .

Buckland, William Warwick (1963).

A Textbook of Roman Law from Augustus to Justinian . Revised by P. G. Stein (3rd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Daube, David (1969).

Roman Law: Linguistic, Social and Philosophical Aspects . Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univ. Press.

ISBN 9780852240519 .

De Ligt, Luuk (2007). "Roman Law and the Roman Economy: Three Case Studies".

Latomus .

66 (1): 10– 25.

JSTOR 41545348 .

Du Plessis, Paul (2006). "Janus in the Roman Law of Urban Lease".

Historia: Zeitschrift für Alte Geschichte .

55 (1): 48– 63.

doi : 10.25162/historia-2006-0004 .

JSTOR 4436798 .

Gardner, Jane F.

(1986).

Women in Roman Law and Society . London: Croom Helm.

doi : 10.4324/9780203134603 .

ISBN 978-0-203-13460-3 .

Gardner, Jane F.

(1998).

Family and Familia in Roman Law and Life . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780198152170.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-815217-0 .

Harries, Jill (1999).

Law and Empire in Late Antiquity . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511482809 .

ISBN 978-0-521-41087-8 .

Nicholas, Barry (1962).

An Introduction to Roman Law . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Nicholas, Barry; Birks, Peter (1989).

New Perspectives in the Roman Law of Property . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198256144 .

Powell, Jonathan; Paterson, Jeremy, eds. (2004).

Cicero the Advocate . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198152804.001.0001 .

ISBN 0-19-815280-9 .

Rives, James B. (2003). "Magic in Roman Law: The Reconstruction of a Crime".

Classical Antiquity .

22 (2): 313– 39.

doi : 10.1525/ca.2003.22.2.313 .

Schulz, Fritz (1946).

History of Roman Legal Science . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Stein, Peter (1999).

Roman Law in European History . New York: Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511814723 .

ISBN 978-0-521-64372-6 .

Tellegen-Couperus, Olga E. (1993).

A Short History of Roman Law . London: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780203416464 .

ISBN 978-0-203-41646-4 .

Wenger, Leopold (1953).

Die Quellen des römischen Rechts (in German). Vienna: Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften.

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Roman law .

Library resources about Roman law Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries A collection of resources maintained by professor Ernest Metzger The Roman Law Library by Professor Yves Lassard and Alexandr Koptev The Roman Law Articles of Smith's Dictionary Roman Legal Tradition : open access journal devoted to Roman law "Roman Law" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

v t e Roman Constitution Institutions Assemblies Comitia curiata Comitia centuriata Comitia tributa Concilium plebis Contio Magistrates Consul Consular tribune Dictator Magister equitum Praetor Aedile Plebeian tribune Quaestor Promagistrate Junior magistrates Decemviri stlitibus judicandis Tresviri capitales Triumvir monetalis Senate Senatus consultum ( ultimum ) Senate of the Roman Republic Senate of the Roman Empire Byzantine senate Periods Roman Republic Overthrow of the Roman monarchy Conflict of the Orders Constitutional reforms of Sulla Constitutional reforms of Augustus Principate Tetrarchy Dominate Concepts Conflict of the Orders Roman law Obligation v t e Ancient Rome topics Outline Timeline Index History Foundation Kingdom overthrow Republic Empire History Pax Romana Principate Dominate Western Empire fall historiography of the fall Byzantine Empire decline fall Later Roman Empire History Constitution History Kingdom Republic Empire Late Empire Senate Legislative assemblies Curiate Centuriate Tribal Plebeian Executive magistrates SPQR Law Twelve Tables Mos maiorum Citizenship Auctoritas Imperium Status Litigation Government Curia Forum Cursus honorum Collegiality Emperor Legatus Dux Officium Praefectus Vicarius Vigintisexviri Lictor Magister militum Imperator Princeps senatus Pontifex maximus Augustus Caesar Tetrarch Optimates and populares Province Magistrates Ordinary Consul Censor Praetor Tribune Tribune of the plebs Military tribune Quaestor Aedile Promagistrate Governor Extraordinary Rex Interrex Dictator Magister equitum Decemviri Consular tribune Triumvir Military History Borders Establishment Structure Campaigns Political control Strategy Engineering Frontiers and fortifications castra Technology Army Legion Infantry tactics Personal equipment Siege engines Siege in Ancient Rome Navy Auxiliaries Decorations and punishments Hippika gymnasia Economy Agriculture Deforestation Commerce Finance Currency Republican currency Imperial currency Culture Architecture Art Bathing Calendar Clothing Cosmetics Cuisine Education Family Pater familias Folklore Hairstyles Literature Music Mythology Religion Deities Romanization Romans Sexuality Spectacles Theatre Toys and games Wine Society Patricians Plebs Conflict of the Orders Secessio plebis Equites Gens Tribes Assembly Patronage Naming conventions Demography Women Marriage Adoption Slavery Bagaudae Technology Amphitheatres Aqueducts Bridges Circuses Civil engineering Concrete Domes Metallurgy Numerals Roads Sanitation Ships Temples Theatres Thermae Latin History Alphabet Versions Old Classical Vulgar Late Medieval Renaissance Neo-Latin Contemporary Ecclesiastical Romance languages Writers Latin Aelius Donatus Ammianus Marcellinus Appuleius Asconius Pedianus Augustine Aurelius Victor Ausonius Boëthius Caesar Catullus Cassiodorus Censorinus Cicero Claudian Columella Cornelius Nepos Ennius Eutropius Fabius Pictor Sextus Pompeius Festus Rufus Festus Florus Frontinus Fronto Fulgentius Gellius Horace Hydatius Hyginus Jerome Jordanes Julius Paulus Justin Juvenal Lactantius Livy Lucan Lucretius Macrobius Marcellus Empiricus Marcus Aurelius Manilius Martial Nicolaus Damascenus Nonius Marcellus Obsequens Orosius Ovid Petronius Phaedrus Plautus Pliny the Elder Pliny the Younger Pomponius Mela Priscian Propertius Quadrigarius Quintilian Quintus Curtius Rufus Sallust Seneca the Elder Seneca the Younger Servius Sidonius Apollinaris Silius Italicus Statius Suetonius Symmachus Tacitus Terence Tertullian Tibullus Valerius Antias Valerius Maximus Varro Velleius Paterculus Verrius Flaccus Vergil Vitruvius Greek Aelian Aëtius of Amida Appian Arrian Cassius Dio Diodorus Siculus Diogenes Laërtius Dionysius of Halicarnassus Dioscorides Eusebius of Caesaria Galen Herodian Josephus Julian Libanius Lucian Pausanias Philostratus Phlegon of Tralles Photius Plutarch Polyaenus Polybius Porphyrius Priscus Procopius Simplicius of Cilicia Sozomen Stephanus Byzantinus Strabo Themistius Theodoret Zonaras Zosimus Major cities Alexandria Antioch Aquileia Berytus Bononia Carthage Constantinopolis Eboracum Leptis Magna Londinium Lugdunum Lutetia Mediolanum Pompeii Ravenna Roma Smyrna Vindobona Volubilis Lists and other topics Cities and towns Climate Consuls Dictators Distinguished women Dynasties Emperors Empresses Fiction Film Generals Gentes Geographers Institutions Laws Legacy Legions Magistri equitum Nomina Pontifices maximi Praetors Quaestors Tribunes Roman–Iranian relations External wars and battles Civil wars and revolts v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wpmnt
Cached time: 20250817043916
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.103 seconds
Real time usage: 1.345 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9927/1000000
Revision size: 40703/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 265290/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20025/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 153109/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.659/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20750228/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1119.731      1 -total
 15.32%  171.597     25 Template:Citation_needed
 14.30%  160.078      1 Template:Reflist
 13.50%  151.139      8 Template:Lang
 12.85%  143.912     26 Template:Fix
 10.95%  122.604      1 Template:Roman_government
 10.64%  119.167      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.87%   99.267     19 Template:Cite_book
  6.82%   76.377      1 Template:CathEncy
  6.70%   75.027      8 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26364:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043916 and revision id 1300660434. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roman_law&oldid=1300660434 " Categories : Roman law Italian inventions Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles needing additional references from September 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 17:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Roman law 70 languages Add topic

