Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Expulsion of Jews Toggle Expulsion of Jews subsection 2.1 Crypto-Jews 3 Expulsion of Muslims 4 Return of some Jews to Portugal 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources Toggle the table of contents Persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal 8 languages Български Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Expulsion of Muslims and Jews from Portugal Epistola de victoria contra infideles habita , 1507 On 5 December 1496, King Manuel I of Portugal signed the decree of expulsion of Jews and Muslims to take effect by the end of October of the next year.

[ 1 ] Background [ edit ] Until the 15th century, some Jews occupied prominent places in Portuguese political and economic life. For example, Isaac Abrabanel was  the treasurer of King Afonso V of Portugal . Many also had an active role in Portuguese culture , and they kept their reputation of diplomats and merchants. By this time, Lisbon and Évora were home to important Jewish communities. The Jewish community, along with the Moors, had control in Spain as well, until around 1478 when Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand had started buying the land that anyone who was not Catholic had controlled.

[ 2 ] Expulsion of Jews [ edit ] See also: History of the Jews in Portugal Expulsion of the Jews in 1497, in a 1917 watercolour by Alfredo Roque Gameiro On 5 December 1496, King Manuel I of Portugal decreed that all Jews must convert to Catholicism or leave the country, in order to satisfy a request by the Catholic Monarchs of Spain during the negotiations of the contract of marriage between himself and their eldest daughter Isabella, Princess of Asturias , as an unstated condition to win her hand.

[ 3 ] The King demonstrated his wish to completely and forever eradicate Judaism from Portugal by issuing two decrees.

[ 1 ] The initial edict of expulsion of 1496 was turned into an edict of forced conversion in 1497, whereby Portuguese Jews were prevented from leaving the country and were forcibly baptized and converted to Christianity.

[ 4 ] Those Jews who refused to pay taxes in protest were deported from Portugal and abandoned to their fate in the islands of São Tomé and Príncipe , off the western coast of Africa.

[ 5 ] Hard times followed for the Portuguese conversos , with the massacre of 2,000 people in Lisbon in 1506 , and later the establishment of the Portuguese Inquisition in 1536.

[ citation needed ] Burning of Crypto-Jews in Lisbon, Portugal When the King allowed conversos to leave after the Lisbon massacre of 1506, many went to the Ottoman Empire, notably Salonica and Constantinople , and to the Wattasid Sultanate of Morocco . Smaller numbers went to Amsterdam , France , Brazil , Curaçao and the Antilles , Surinam and New Amsterdam . In some of these places their presence can still be perceived in the use of the Ladino language by some Jewish communities in Greece and Turkey , the Portuguese-based dialects of the Antilles, or the multiple synagogues built by those who became known as the Spanish and Portuguese Jews , such as the Amsterdam Esnoga or the Willemstad Snoa . Some of the most famous descendants of Portuguese Jews who lived outside Portugal are the philosopher Baruch Spinoza ( Bento de Espinosa in Portuguese), and the classical economist David Ricardo .

[ citation needed ] Crypto-Jews [ edit ] Jews who converted to Christianity were known as New Christians , and were always under the constant surveillance of the Inquisition. The Holy Office in Portugal lasted for almost three hundred years, until the Portuguese Inquisition was abolished in 1821 by the "General Extraordinary and Constituent Courts of the Portuguese Nation ". Many of those New Christians were crypto-Jews who continued to secretly practice their religion; they eventually left the country in the centuries to come, and openly embraced their Jewish faith again in foreign lands. Such was the case, for example, of the ancestors of Baruch Spinoza in the Netherlands. Some other Portuguese Jews, very few in number like the Belmonte Jews , opted for a different and radical solution, practicing their faith in a strictly secret manner among a rural and isolated community. Known as the "Last of the Marranos ", some have survived until today (especially the Jewish community from Belmonte in Castelo Branco, plus some scattered families) by their practice of intermarriage and their very limited cultural contacts with the outside world. Only recently, in the late 20th century, have they re-established contact with the international Jewish community and openly practice their religion in a public synagogue with a formal rabbi .

[ 6 ] Expulsion of Muslims [ edit ] According to contemporary historian François Soyer, the expulsion of Muslims from Portugal has been overshadowed by the forced conversion of Jews in the country.

[ 7 ] While tolerance of Muslim minorities in Portugal was higher than in any other part of Europe, [ 8 ] Muslims were still perceived as "alien." [ 9 ] Anti-Muslim riots were regular in neighboring Valencia during the 1460s; however, no similar acts of violence occurred in Portugal.

[ 8 ] In December 1496, Manuel I ordered all Muslim subjects to leave without any apparent provocation.

[ 10 ] According to 16th-century Portuguese historians Damião de Góis and Jerónimo Osório , the Portuguese government originally planned to forcibly convert or execute Muslims as they had done to Jews, but fear of retaliation from Muslim kingdoms in North Africa led the king to settle on deportations instead.

[ 11 ] Manuel I's motivation behind the order is unclear, but some contemporary historians say it was part of a greater goal of Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand (known as the " Catholic Monarchs ") to rid the peninsula of Muslims and create "religious uniformity" and "monolithic Catholic Christian unity".

[ 12 ] Other historians say it was influenced by ambitions of conquering Morocco, [ 13 ] or by the suggestion of the Dominican confessor to the king, Friar Jorge Vogado.

[ 14 ] Some Muslims found refuge in Castile , [ 15 ] but most fled to North Africa.

[ 16 ] Return of some Jews to Portugal [ edit ] In 1525, David Reubeni , a Jewish man who claimed to be the commander of a Jewish army in the Ottoman Empire , arrived in Portugal. With the approval of the Pope , he sought the Portuguese king’s assistance in providing him with ammunition to fight against the Muslims. Reubeni stayed in Portugal for several months, during which he sparked messianic expectations among the New Christians . His actions also led to the conversion of Solomon Molcho , which ultimately resulted to the King of Portugal expelling Reubeni from the country.

[ 17 ] In the 19th century, some affluent families of Sephardi Jewish Portuguese origin such as the Ruah and Bensaude, resettled in Portugal from Morocco. The first synagogue to be built in Portugal since the 15th century was the Lisbon Synagogue , inaugurated in 1904.

[ 18 ] In 2014 the Portuguese parliament changed the Portuguese nationality law in order to grant Portuguese nationality to descendants of Sephardi Jews expelled from Portugal. The law is a reaction to historical events that led to their expulsion from Portugal, but also due to increased concerns over Jewish communities throughout Europe. In order to obtain Portuguese nationality, the person must attest being a direct descendant of a Sephardi of Portuguese origin or family connections in a collateral line from a former Portuguese Sephardi community. Use of expressions in Portuguese in Jewish rites or Judaeo-Portuguese or Ladino can also be considered proof.

[ 19 ] From 2015 several hundred Turkish Jews who were able to prove descent from Portuguese Jews expelled in 1497 emigrated to Portugal and acquired Portuguese citizenship .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Pallache family References [ edit ] ^ a b António José Saraiva: The Marrano Factory: The Portuguese Inquisition and Its New Christians 1536-1765, BRILL, 2001, ISBN 9789004120808 , p. 10-12.

^ Altabé, David Fintz; Altabe, David Fintz (September 1992).

"The Significance of 1492 to the Jews and Muslims of Spain" .

Hispania .

75 (3): 728.

doi : 10.2307/344154 .

JSTOR 344154 .

^ François Soyer (2008).

"King Manuel I and the expulsion of the Castilian Conversos and Muslims from Portugal in 1497: new perspectives" (PDF) .

Cadernos de Estudos Sefarditas, n.º 8, 2008, pp. 33-62 .

^ Reuven Faingold (2013).

"Judeus ibéricos deportados a São Tomé entre 1492-1497" .

Morashá: História Judaica Moderna (79) .

^ "Sao Tome & Principe" .

Jewish Virtual Library .

^ Frédéric Brenner and Stan Neumann, Les Derniers Marranes (Motion Picture), La Sept-Les Film d'Ici, 1990.

^ Soyer 2007 , p. 241.

^ a b Soyer 2007 , p. 258.

^ Soyer 2007 , p. 254, 259.

^ Soyer 2007 , p. 242.

^ Soyer 2007 , pp. 260–261.

^ Soyer 2007 , p. 269.

^ Soyer 2007 , p. 280.

^ Soyer 2007 , p. 273.

^ Soyer 2007 , p. 262.

^ Soyer 2007 , p. 268.

^ Benmelech, Moti (2011).

"History, Politics, and Messianism: David Ha-Reuveni's Origin and Mission" .

AJS Review .

35 (1): 35– 36.

ISSN 0364-0094 .

^ "Shaaré Tikvah Synagogue - Lisbon" . Path of Faith.

^ Lusa (29 January 2015).

"Descendentes de judeus sefarditas já vão poder pedir a nacionalidade" .

PÚBLICO .

^ Devos, Olivier.

"Amid rising European anti-Semitism, Portugal sees Jewish renaissance" .

www.timesofisrael.com . Retrieved Apr 4, 2019 .

^ Liphshiz, Cnaan.

"New citizenship law has Jews flocking to tiny Portugal city" .

www.timesofisrael.com . Retrieved Apr 4, 2019 .

^ "Portugal open to citizenship applications by descendants of Sephardic Jews" . Mar 3, 2015 . Retrieved Apr 4, 2019 .

Sources [ edit ] Soyer, François (2007).

The Persecution of the Jews and Muslims of Portugal: King Manuel I and the End of Religious Tolerance (1496–7) . Leiden, The Netherlands: Koninklijke Brill NV.

ISBN 9789004162624 . Retrieved 15 May 2017 .

v t e Sephardi Jewish topics Origins Sepharad Roman Empire Golden Age Expulsion from Spain Alhambra Decree Expulsion from Portugal Conversos Degredados Lançados Marranos Megorashim Maghrebi Jews New Christian Dispersion Eastern Mediterranean Albanian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Ragusan Splicani Egyptian Alexandrian Greek Rhodian Thessalonian Hungarian Macedonian Monastir Ottoman Palestinian Romanian Serbian Syrian Turkish Istanbulite Symirniote North Africa Algerian Gibraltarian Libyan Moroccan Tetuani Tunisian Western Europe and overseas American Dutch Aruba Curaçao Suriname New Amsterdam English French Hamburger Indian Paradesi Jews Italian Livornese Crypto-Sephardim Amazonian Belmonte Jews Xuetas Modern history History of the Jews under Muslim rule Antisemitism in the Arab world Antisemitism in Islam Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries Languages Judeo-Berber Sephardi Hebrew Judeo-Arabic Judaeo-Portuguese Judaeo-Spanish Haketia Tetuani Ladino Judeo-Gascon Bagitto Religion and culture Cuisine Music Rite and customs Sephardi chief rabbi Haredim Politics Black Panthers Shas Sephardim and Oriental Communities Major communal organizations American Sephardi Federation Sephardi Community Council Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Persecution_of_Jews_and_Muslims_by_Manuel_I_of_Portugal&oldid=1303488935 " Categories : 1496 in Portugal Anti-Islam sentiment in Portugal Antisemitism in Portugal Ethnic cleansing in Europe Expulsions of Jews Islam-related controversies Jewish Portuguese history Portuguese-Jewish diaspora Religious expulsion orders Persecution of Muslims by Christians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 08:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal 8 languages Add topic

