Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Belgium 3 Spain 4 United Kingdom 5 Analogous non-Western titles 6 In fiction 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Marquess 51 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Italiano עברית Lietuvių مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hereditary rank in various European peerages Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see Marchesa (disambiguation) , Marchese (disambiguation) , Marchioness (disambiguation) , Marquis (disambiguation) , Marquise (disambiguation) , Marquesa (disambiguation) , and Marquess (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Imperial, royal, noble, gentry and chivalric ranks in Europe Emperor, Empress dowager High king, High queen Great king, Great queen King consort dowager Queen regnant consort dowager mother Archduke, Archduchess Grand duke, Grand duchess Grand prince, Grand princess Prince consort Princess consort Duke, Duchess Knyaz, Knyaginya Fürst, Fürstin Herzog Jarl Prince-elector, Princess-elector Heir apparent presumptive Count palatine Marquess, Marchioness Margrave, Margravine Marcher lord Landgrave Boyar Voivode Count, Countess Earl Mormaer Ealdorman Viscount, Viscountess Castellan Burgrave, Burgravine Captal Vidame Starosta Baron, Baroness Lord of Parliament Lord paramount Overlord Tenant in chief Territorial lord Liege lord Mesne lord Lendmann Nobile Edler Primor Fidalgo Baronet, Baronetess Vavasour Imperial knight Knight/Chevalier Ritter Seigneur Knight bachelor Thane Druzhinnik Lord of the manor Vogt Esquire Gentleman, Gentlewoman Franklin Yeoman Man at arms Edelfrei Ministerialis v t e A marquess ( UK : / ˈ m ɑːr k w ɪ s / ; [ 1 ] French : marquis [maʁki] ) [ 2 ] [ a ] is a nobleman of high hereditary rank in various European peerages and in those of some of their former colonies. The German-language equivalent is Markgraf (margrave). A woman with the rank of a marquess or the wife (or widow) of a marquess is a marchioness ( / m ɑːr ˈ ʃ ə n ɛ s / [ 3 ] ) or marquise ( French: [maʁkiz] ⓘ ). These titles are also used to translate equivalent Asian styles, as in Imperial China and Imperial Japan .

A portrait of William Kerr, 4th Marquess of Lothian , wearing his British Army uniform.

Etymology [ edit ] The word marquess entered the English language from the Old French marchis ("ruler of a border area") in the late 13th or early 14th century. The French word was derived from marche ("frontier"), itself descended from the Middle Latin marca ("frontier"), from which the modern English word march also descends. The distinction between governors of frontier territories and interior territories was made as early as the founding of the Roman Empire when some provinces were set aside for administration by the senate and more unpacified or vulnerable provinces were administered by the emperor. The titles " duke " and " count " were similarly distinguished as ranks in the Byzantine Empire , with dux (literally, "leader") being used for a provincial military governor and the rank of comes (literally "companion", that is, of the Emperor) given to the leader of an active army along the frontier.

Belgium [ edit ] The title of marquess in Belgium predates the French Revolution and still exists today. See Belgian nobility § Marquesses in the Belgian nobility and List of noble families in Belgium § Marquesses .

Spain [ edit ] In Spain, the rank of Marquess/Marchioness ( Marqués / Marquesa ) still exists. One hundred forty-two of them are Spanish grandees . Normally a marqués is addressed as " The Most Illustrious Lord" ( Ilustrísimo Señor ), or if he/she is a grandee as " The Most Excellent Lord" ( Excelentísimo Señor ). Examples include the Marquess of Carpio , Grandee of Spain .

United Kingdom [ edit ] Part of a series on Peerages in the United Kingdom Ranks Duke / Duchess Marquess / Marchioness Earl / Countess Viscount / Viscountess Baron / Baroness (in Scotland , replaced by Lord / Lady of Parliament ) Types Hereditary Life Representative Divisions England Scotland Great Britain Ireland United Kingdom Topics Nobility History Privileges Robes Courtesy titles ( list ) Forms of address Family seat Territorial designation Related Peerages Welsh Jacobite Australia Canada India House of Lords Politics portal United Kingdom portal v t e Main article: Marquesses in the United Kingdom In Great Britain and historically in Ireland, a marquess ranks below a duke and above an earl . A woman with the rank of a marquess, or the wife of a marquess, is a marchioness / ˌ m ɑː r ʃ ə ˈ n ɛ s / .

[ 4 ] The dignity, rank, or position of the title is a marquisate or marquessate.

The honorific prefix " The Most Honourable " precedes the name of a marquess or marchioness of the United Kingdom .

[ 5 ] In Great Britain , and historically in Ireland , the spelling of this title is marquess . In Scotland, the French spelling marquis is sometimes used.

The coronet for a marquess in the British realms The theoretical distinction between a marquess and other titles has, since the Middle Ages , faded into obscurity. In times past, the distinction between a count and a marquess was that the land of a marquess, called a march , was on the border of the country, while a count's land, called a county , often was not. As a result of this, a marquess was trusted to defend and fortify against potentially hostile neighbours and was thus more important and ranked higher than a count. The title is ranked below that of a duke , which was often largely restricted to the royal family.

The rank of marquess was a relatively late introduction to the British peerage: no marcher lords had the rank of marquess, though some were earls . On the evening of the Coronation of Queen Victoria in 1838, the Prime Minister Lord Melbourne explained to her why (from her journals): I spoke to [Lord Melbourne] about the numbers of Peers present at the Coronation, & he said it was quite unprecedented. I observed that there were very few Viscounts, to which he replied "There are very few Viscounts ," that they were an old sort of title & not really English; that they came from Vice-Comites; that Dukes & Barons were the only real English titles; – that Marquises were likewise not English, & that people were mere made Marquises, when it was not wished that they should be made Dukes.

[ 6 ] Analogous non-Western titles [ edit ] The Marquess of Trazegnies Like other major Western noble titles, marquess (or marquis) is sometimes used to translate certain titles from non-Western languages with their own traditions, even though they are, as a rule, historically unrelated and thus hard to compare. However, they are considered "equivalent" in relative rank.

This is the case with: In ancient China , 侯 ( hóu ) a noble rank created by King Wu of Zhou for rulers of newly conquered regions, and is generally translated as marquess or marquis.

[ 7 ] In imperial China , 侯 ( hóu ) is generally, but not always, a middle-to-high ranking hereditary nobility title. Its exact rank varies greatly from dynasty to dynasty, and even within a dynasty. It is often created with different sub-ranks, with 列侯 ( liè hóu , Ranged Marquis ) generally the highest.

[ 8 ] In Meiji Japan , 侯爵 ( kōshaku ), a hereditary peerage ( kazoku ) rank, was introduced in 1884, granting a hereditary seat in the upper house of the imperial diet just as a British peerage did (until the House of Lords Act 1999 ), with the ranks usually rendered as baron, viscount, count, marquis and duke/prince.

[ 9 ] In Korea , the title of 현후 (縣侯; hyeonhu ), the meaning of which is "marquess of district", existed for the hereditary nobility in the Goryeo dynasty . It was equivalent to the upper fifth rank of nine bureaucratic orders, and was in the third rank of six nobility orders. The title of Buwongun, could be received only Father in law of King or The Vassals who dedicate Notably to create New kingdom is also same as Marquess. In the Joseon dynasty , there was no title equivalent to marquess.

In Maritime Southeast Asia , temenggong (or tumenggung ) is a title used by Islamic dynasties such as Mataram Sultanate and Johor to designate a noble ruled over a frontier area or district, or to a chief of public security. Tumenggung ranks below Bendahara or vizier.

In Vietnam , hầu ( 侯 ) was a senior title of hereditary nobility, equivalent to marquis, for male members of the imperial clan, ranking under hoàng đế (皇帝; emperor), vương (王; king/prince), quốc công (國公; grand duke/duke of the nation), quận công (郡公; provincial duke) and công (公; duke, rather like a German Fürst ), and above bá (伯; count), tử (子; viscount) and nam (男; baron).

In fiction [ edit ] See also: List of fictional nobility § Marquesses and marchionesses Marquesses and marchionesses have occasionally appeared in works of fiction.

See also [ edit ] Mark (county) Marquesses in the United Kingdom List of marquesses in the peerages of Britain and Ireland List of marquessates in the peerages of Britain and Ireland List of marquesses in Italy List of marquises in Norway List of marquises in Portugal Exarch Notes [ edit ] ^ Italian : marchese , Spanish : marqués , Portuguese : marquês .

References [ edit ] ^ "English: Marquis" .

Collins Dictionary . n.d . Retrieved 22 September 2014 .

^ "French: Marquis" .

Collins Dictionary . n.d . Retrieved 22 September 2014 .

^ "Marchioness definition and meaning | Collins English Dictionary" .

www.collinsdictionary.com . Archived from the original on 30 April 2021 . Retrieved 11 December 2024 .

^ "Marchioness" .

Collins Dictionary . n.d . Retrieved 22 September 2014 .

^ "Marquess and Marchioness" . Debrett's. n.d. Archived from the original on 10 November 2014 . Retrieved 22 September 2014 .

^ Queen Victoria's Journals , Thursday 28th June 1838, Buckingham Palace, Princess Beatrice's copies, Volume:4 (1st June 1838–1st October 1838) p. 84, online , accessed May 25, 2013 ^ Pines, Yuri (2020). "Names and Titles in Eastern Zhou Texts".

T'oung Pao .

106 . Leiden: Brill: 715.

Li Feng (2008). "Transmitting Antiquity: The Origin and Paradigmization of the "Five Ranks" ". In Kuhn, Dieter; Stahl, Helga (eds.).

Perceptions of Antiquity in Chinese Civilization . Würzberg: Würzburger Sinologische Schriften. p. 112.

^ You Jia (尤佳) (2015).

Dong Han Liehou juewei zhidu 东汉列侯爵位制度 . Kunming: 云南大学出版社. pp.

47– 48, 52, 73.

^ Lebra, Takie Sugiyama (1993).

Above the Clouds: Status Culture of the Modern Japanese Nobility . CA, US: University of California Press. p. 51.

ISBN 9780520911796 .

The Chronological Peerage of England, hereditarytitles.com as of 2 March 2003 ; omits Normanby, misspells Hartington as Martington, places Marquess of Lorn and Kintyre in the peerage of England (Scotland is more probable).

EtymologyOnLine Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Buckingham and Normanby, John Sheffield, 1st Duke of" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 4 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

727– 728.

— "and in 1694 was made marquess of Normanby" External links [ edit ] Media related to Marquesses at Wikimedia Commons "Marquess" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 17 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 751.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐6wk49
Cached time: 20250818100734
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.468 seconds
Real time usage: 0.585 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2182/1000000
Revision size: 12095/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 67453/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2532/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 81695/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.304/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17307934/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  517.292      1 -total
 24.16%  124.997      2 Template:Reflist
 16.21%   83.851      5 Template:Cite_web
 15.75%   81.479      4 Template:Langx
 12.91%   66.804      1 Template:Royal_and_noble_ranks
 12.44%   64.335      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.29%   48.037      1 Template:Short_description
  8.27%   42.785      1 Template:Peerage
  7.83%   40.517      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.55%   28.707      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:58253:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818100734 and revision id 1301557379. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marquess&oldid=1301557379 " Categories : Marquessates Marquesses Counts Noble titles Peerage Men's social titles Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2015 Articles containing French-language text Pages with French IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 13:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marquess 51 languages Add topic

