Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design 2 Construction history 3 Experimental goals 4 Results 5 Additional instrumentation 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents ANTARES (telescope) 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français 日本語 Polski Русский Simple English Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°48′N 6°10′E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.800°N 6.167°E ﻿ / 42.800; 6.167 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Neutrino Detector 42°48′N 6°10′E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.800°N 6.167°E ﻿ / 42.800; 6.167 An artist illustration of the Antares neutrino detector and the Nautile .

For the star, see Antares .

ANTARES ( A stronomy with a N eutrino T elescope and A byss environmental RES earch project) is a neutrino detector residing 2.5 km under the Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Toulon , France . It is designed to be used as a directional neutrino telescope to locate and observe neutrino flux from cosmic origins in the direction of the Southern Hemisphere of the Earth , a complement to the South Pole neutrino detector IceCube that detects neutrinos from both hemispheres. The experiment is a recognized CERN experiment (RE6).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Other neutrino telescopes designed for use in the nearby area include the Greek NESTOR telescope and the Italian NEMO telescope, which are both in early design stages. The data taking of ANTARES was finished in February 2022, after 16 years of continuous operation.

[ 3 ] Design [ edit ] The array contains a set of twelve separate vertical strings of photomultiplier tubes.  Each one has 75 optical modules and is about 350 meters long. They are anchored at the bottom of the sea at a depth of about 2.5 km, roughly 70 meters apart from each other.  When neutrinos enter the southern hemisphere of the earth, they usually continue traveling directly through it. On rare occasions, a few muon neutrinos interact with the water in the Mediterranean Sea.  When this happens, they produce a high energy muon.  ANTARES works by its photomultiplier tubes detecting the Cherenkov radiation emitted as the muon passes through the water. The detection techniques used discriminate between the signature of "upward-going muons", a muon neutrino that has had interactions with matter below the detector (the Earth ), and much higher flux of "downward atmospheric muons".

In contrast to the South Pole neutrino telescopes AMANDA and IceCube , ANTARES uses water instead of ice as its Cherenkov medium.  As light in water is less scattered than in ice this results in a better resolving power . On the other hand, water contains more sources of background light than ice ( radioactive isotopes potassium -40 in the sea salt and bioluminescent organisms ), leading to a higher energy thresholds for ANTARES with respect to IceCube and making more sophisticated background-suppression methods necessary.

Construction history [ edit ] The construction of ANTARES was completed on May 30, 2008, two years after the first string was deployed.
Initial testing began in 2000. Equipment indirectly related to the detector such as a seismometer were deployed in 2005. The first string of photomultiplier tubes was moved into place in February 2006. In September 2006 the second line was successfully connected. Lines 3, 4 and 5 were deployed at the end of 2006 and connected in January 2007. This was an important step that made Antares the biggest neutrino telescope in the Northern hemisphere (surpassing the Baikal neutrino telescope ). Lines 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 were deployed between March and early November 2007 and connected in December 2007 and January 2008. From May 2008 the detector has been running in its complete 12-line configuration.

Deployment and connection of the detector were performed in cooperation with the French oceanographic institute, IFREMER using the ROV Victor, and for some earlier operations the submarine Nautile .

The detector has finished collecting data and has been dismantled in a series of sea campaigns in 2022 [1] .

Experimental goals [ edit ] The ANTARES project complements the IceCube Neutrino Observatory in Antarctica .  The detection principles of the two projects are very similar, although ANTARES only points toward the Southern Hemisphere. Thanks to its location in the Mediterranean Sea, ANTARES is more sensitive to neutrinos with energies below 100 TeV in the southern sky, a region that includes many galactic sources. ANTARES will detect neutrinos from high energy origin, particularly in the range from 10 10 to 10 14 electronvolts (10 GeV - 100 TeV ). Over many years of operation, it may be able to produce a map of the neutrino flux from cosmic origins in the Southern Hemisphere. Of particular interest would be the detection of astrophysical point sources of neutrinos, possibly in correlation with observations in other bands (such as gamma rays sources observed by the HESS telescope in Namibia , which has a common field of view with ANTARES).

Apart from this astro-particle physics aspect, the ANTARES telescope may also tackle some fundamental problems in particle physics, such as the search for dark matter in the form of neutralino annihilation in the Sun (normal solar neutrinos being outside the energy range of ANTARES) or the Galactic Center . Due to the very different methods employed, its expected sensitivity is complementary to both the direct dark matter searches performed by experiments such as DAMA and CDMS , and to the indirect searches at the LHC . Detection of neutralino signals would also confirm supersymmetry , but is not generally considered very likely at the ANTARES sensitivity level. Other possible "exotic" phenomena that could conceivably be measured by ANTARES include nuclearites or magnetic monopoles .

Results [ edit ] The first neutrino detections were reported in Feb 2007.

Using 6 years of data, a search of the galactic center for point sources of neutrinos found none.

[ 4 ] Atmospheric neutrino oscillations were also measured.

[ 5 ] Additional instrumentation [ edit ] In addition to the main optical detector for cosmic neutrinos, the ANTARES experiment also houses a number of instruments for the study of the deep sea environment, such as salinity and oxygen probes, sea current profilers and instrumentation for the measurement of light transmission and sound velocity. Also, a camera system has been installed for automatic tracking of bioluminescent organisms. Results from these instruments, while also important for the calibration of the detector, will be shared with ocean science institutes involved in the ANTARES collaboration. While the ANTARES detector contains an acoustic positioning system for the alignment of the free-floating detector lines, it also houses a separate dedicated acoustic detection system AMADEUS , which will comprise 6 converted ANTARES storeys with hydrophones to evaluate the possibility for acoustic detection of neutrinos in the deep sea. The first 3 of these acoustic storeys have been included in the instrumentation line , the other 3 on the 12th line.

See also [ edit ] P-ONE References [ edit ] ^ "Recognized Experiments at CERN" .

The CERN Scientific Committees . CERN. Archived from the original on 13 June 2019 . Retrieved 21 January 2020 .

^ "RE6/ANTARES : Astronomy with a Neutrino Telescope and Abyss environmental Research" .

The CERN Experimental Programme . CERN . Retrieved 21 January 2020 .

^ The ANTARES adventure Archived 2022-05-17 at the Wayback Machine . — The ANTARES Collaboration official web-site.

^ Adrián-Martínez, S.; et al. (2014). "Searches for point-like and extended neutrino sources close to the galactic center using the ANTARES neutrino telescope".

The Astrophysical Journal Letters .

786 (1): L5.

arXiv : 1402.6182 .

Bibcode : 2014ApJ...786L...5A .

doi : 10.1088/2041-8205/786/1/l5 .

S2CID 31685649 .

^ Adrián-Martínez, S.; et al. (2012). "Measurement of atmospheric neutrino oscillations with the ANTARES neutrino telescope".

Physics Letters B .

714 ( 2– 5): 224– 230.

arXiv : 1206.0645 .

Bibcode : 2012PhLB..714..224A .

doi : 10.1016/j.physletb.2012.07.002 .

S2CID 26970978 .

External links [ edit ] ANTARES home IFREMER homepage KM3NeT neutrino telescope Record for ANTARES on INSPIRE-HEP v t e Neutrino detectors, experiments, and facilities Discoveries Cowan–Reines ( ν e ) Lederman–Schwartz–Steinberger ( ν μ ) DONUT ( ν τ ) Neutrino oscillation SN 1987 neutrino burst Operating (divided by primary neutrino source) Astronomical ANITA ANTARES ASD BDUNT Borexino BUST HALO IceCube LVD NEVOD SAGE Super-Kamiokande SNEWS Reactor CONUS/CONUS+ Daya Bay KamLAND RENO STEREO Accelerator ANNIE COHERENT ICARUS (Fermilab) MicroBooNE MINERνA MiniBooNE NA61/SHINE NOvA NuMI T2K Collider FASER SND@LHC 0νββ AMoRE COBRA CUORE KamLAND-Zen MAJORANA NEXT PandaX SNO+ XMASS Other KATRIN WITCH Construction ARA ARIANNA Baikal-GVD BEST DUNE Hyper-Kamiokande JUNO KM3NeT NUCLEUS SuperNEMO Retired AMANDA ANTARES CDHS Chooz CNGS Cuoricino DONUT Double Chooz ERPM EXO-200 GALLEX Gargamelle GERDA GNO Heidelberg-Moscow Homestake ICARUS IGEX IMB K2K Kamiokande KARMEN KGF LSND MACRO MINOS MINOS+ NARC NEMO OPERA RICE SciBooNE SNO Soudan 2 Utah Proposed CUPID nEXO JEM-EUSO GRAND INO LEGEND LENA Neutrino Factory Nucifer P-ONE SBND UNO WATCHMAN Cancelled DUMAND Project LAGUNA Long Baseline Neutrino Experiment NEMO Project NESTOR Project SOX BOREX See also BNO (Baksan or Baxan Neutrino Observatory) Kamioka Observatory LNGS SNOLAB List of neutrino experiments Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=ANTARES_(telescope)&oldid=1286065874 " Categories : Mediterranean Sea Neutrino observatories Particle experiments CERN experiments Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 April 2025, at 14:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents ANTARES (telescope) 11 languages Add topic

