Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Distribution and habitat 3 Behaviour and ecology Toggle Behaviour and ecology subsection 3.1 Predators 4 Taxonomy Toggle Taxonomy subsection 4.1 Relationship with the domestic goat 5 Threats Toggle Threats subsection 5.1 Hunting 6 In culture Toggle In culture subsection 6.1 Etymology 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Markhor 62 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Diné bizaad Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kotava Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский Scots Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Species of mammal For the village in Iran, see Markhor, Iran .

Markhor Male markhor in captivity at the Augsburg Zoo Conservation status Near Threatened ( IUCN 3.1 ) [ 2 ] CITES Appendix I ( CITES ) [ 2 ] Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Artiodactyla Family: Bovidae Subfamily: Caprinae Tribe: Caprini Genus: Capra Species: C. falconeri [ 1 ] Binomial name Capra falconeri [ 1 ] ( Wagner , 1839) Subspecies See text Distribution of the markhor The markhor ( Capra falconeri ) / ˈ m ɑːr k ɔːr / is a large wild Capra species native to the mountain regions at the crossroads of Central and western South Asia , including the Karakoram and Himalayas . It occurs in parts of Turkmenistan , Uzbekistan , Tajikistan , Afghanistan , Pakistan , and India . It is listed on the IUCN Red List as Near Threatened since 2015.

[ 2 ] The markhor is the national animal of Pakistan, where it is also known as the screw-horn or screw-horned goat . The word "mārkhor" is from Persian word markhar , meaning "curly", because of its curly horns comes from both Pashto and mainly classical Persian languages , referencing the ancient belief that the markhor would actively kill and consume snakes.

[ 3 ] This regional myth is thought to stem from the "snake-like" form of the male markhor's horns, twisting and curling like a snake, possibly leading ancient peoples to associate it with snakes.

Description [ edit ] Markhor adults stand 65 to 115 cm (26 to 45 in) at the shoulder, are 132 to 186 cm (52 to 73 in) long and weigh from 32 to 110 kg (71 to 243 lb).

[ 4 ] They have the highest maximum shoulder height among the species in the genus Capra , but is surpassed in length and weight by the Siberian ibex .

[ 5 ] The coat is of a grizzled, light brown to black colour, and is smooth and short in summer , while growing longer and thicker in winter . The fur of the lower legs is black and white. Markhor are sexually dimorphic , with males having longer hair on the chin, throat, chest, and shanks.

[ 4 ] Females are redder in colour, with shorter hair and a short, black beard, and are maneless.

[ 6 ] Both sexes have tightly curled, corkscrew-like horns, which close together at the head, but spread upwards toward the tips. The horns of males can grow up to 160 cm (63 in) long, and up to 25 cm (9.8 in) in females.

[ 4 ] [ 7 ] Distribution and habitat [ edit ] Female with young, at the Columbus Zoo and Aquarium The markhor is adapted to mountainous terrain and lives at elevations of 600 to 3,600 m (2,000 to 11,800 ft). It inhabits shrub forests made up primarily of oaks ( Quercus ilex ), pines ( Pinus gerardiana ), and junipers ( Juniperus macropoda ).

[ 2 ] In Central Asia, the Bukharan markhor formerly lived in most of the mountains stretching along the north banks of the Upper Amu Darya and the Panj Rivers from Turkmenistan to Tajikistan; two to three scattered populations now occur in a greatly reduced distribution. It is limited to the region between lower Pyanj and the Vakhsh Rivers near Kulyab in Tajikistan, and in the Kugitangtau Range in Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.

[ 2 ] In Afghanistan, the markhor is limited to the east in the high and mountainous monsoon forests of Laghman and Nuristan . Until 1978, it survived in the country only in the Kabul Gorge and the Kohe Safi area of Kapissa , and in some isolated pockets in between. It now lives the most inaccessible regions of its once wider range in the mountains of Kapissa and Kabul Provinces , after having been driven from its original habitat by intensive poaching.

[ 2 ] In Pakistan , it is restricted to the Indus River and Kunar River and their tributaries; its present range consists of many small, isolated areas in Baluchistan , Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Dera Ghazi Khan District . Along the Indus, it inhabits both banks from Jalkot in Kohistan District upstream to near the Tungas village in Baltistan , with Gakuch being its western limit up the Gilgit River , Chalt up the Hunza River , and the Parishing Valley up the Astore River . It occurs also around Chitral and the border areas with Afghanistan, where it inhabits a number of valleys along the Kunar River from Arandu on the west bank and Drosh on the east bank, up to Shoghor along the Lutkho River, and as far as Barenis along the Mastuj River . The largest population currently lives in Chitral National Park in Pakistan.

[ 2 ] In India, the markhor is restricted to a portion of the Pir Panjal range in southwestern Jammu and Kashmir . Throughout this range, markhor populations are scattered, starting east of the Banihal Pass about 50 km (31 mi) from the Chenab River on the Jammu–Srinagar highway westward to the disputed border with Pakistan. It still occurs in catchments of the Limber and Lachipora Rivers in the Jhelum Valley Forest Division and around Shupiyan to the south of Srinagar.

[ 2 ] Behaviour and ecology [ edit ] The markhor is diurnal and mainly active in the early morning and late afternoon. Its diets shift seasonally; in the spring and summer, it grazes , but turns to browsing in winter, sometimes standing on its hind legs to reach high branches. The mating season is during winter, when males fight each other by lunging, locking of horns , and attempting to push each other off balance. The gestation period lasts 135–170 days, and usually results in the birth of one or two kids, and occasionally three. Markhor live in herds, usually numbering nine animals, composed of adult females and their young. Adult males are largely solitary. Adult females and kids comprise most of the markhor population, with adult females making up 32% and kids making up 31%. Adult males comprise 19% of the population, while subadults (males aged 2–3 years) make up 12%, and yearlings (females aged 12–24 months) 9%.

[ 8 ] Their alarm call closely resembles the bleating of domestic goats.

[ 4 ] Early in the season, the males and females may be found together on the open, grassy patches and clear slopes among the forest. During the summer, the males remain in the forest, while the females generally climb to the highest rocky ridges above.

[ 6 ] In the spring, the females stay closer to cliffs in areas with more rock coverage to provide protection for their offspring. The males stay in higher elevated areas with more access to vegetation for foraging so as to improve their body condition.

[ 9 ] Predators [ edit ] Eurasian lynx ( Lynx lynx ), snow leopard ( Panthera uncia ), Himalayan wolf ( Canis lupus chanco ), and brown bear ( Ursus arctos ) are the main predators of the markhor.

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] The golden eagle ( Aquila chrysaetos ) has been reported to prey upon young markhor. The markhor possess keen eyesight and a strong sense of smell to detect nearby predators . Markhor are very aware of their surroundings and on high alert; in exposed areas, they are quick to spot and flee from predators.

[ 11 ] Taxonomy [ edit ] Captive markhor in a zoo in Kanagawa Prefecture , Japan Captive Bukharan markhor in Los Angeles Zoo Aegoceros (Capra) Falconeri was the scientific name proposed by Johann Andreas Wagner in 1839 based on a female specimen from the Indian Himalayas.

[ 12 ] Multiple subspecies have been recognized, often based on horn configuration, but this has been shown to vary greatly even within the same population confined to one mountain range.

[ 13 ] Astor markhor or Astore markhor ( C. f. falconeri ) has large, flat horns, branching widely and then going up nearly straight with only a half turn. It is synonymous with Capra falconeri cashmiriensis or Pir Panjal markhor, which has heavy, flat horns, twisted like a corkscrew.

[ 14 ] Kabul markhor ( C. f. megaceros ) has horns with a slight corkscrew, as well as a twist. A junior synonym is C. f. jerdoni .

[ 6 ] Kashmir markhor ( C. f. cashmiriensis ) Sulaiman markhor ( C. f. jerdoni ) Bukharan markhor ( C. f. heptneri ) Relationship with the domestic goat [ edit ] Some authors have postulated that the markhor is the ancestor of some breeds of the domestic goat . The Angora goat has been regarded by some as a direct descendant of the Central Asian markhor.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Evidence for markhors crossbreeding with domestic goats has been found. One study suggested that 35.7% of captive markhors in the analysis from three different zoos had mitochondrial DNA from domestic goats.

[ 17 ] Other authors have suggested that markhor may have been the ancestor of some Egyptian goat breeds, based on their similar horns, though the lack of an anterior keel on the horns of the markhor belies any close relationship.

[ 18 ] The Changthangi domestic goat of Ladakh and Tibet may derive from the markhor.

[ 19 ] The Girgentana goat of Sicily is thought to have been bred from markhor, [ 20 ] as is the Bilberry goat of Ireland .

[ 21 ] The Kashmiri feral herd of about 200 individuals on the Great Orme limestone headland of Wales are derived from a herd maintained at Windsor Great Park belonging to Queen Victoria .

[ 22 ] Fecal samples taken from markhor and domestic goats indicate that a serious level of competition exists for food between the two species. The competition for food between herbivores is believed to have significantly reduced the standing crop of forage in the Himalaya–Karkoram–Hindukush ranges. Domestic livestock have an advantage over wild herbivores, since the density of their herds often pushes their competitors out of the best grazing areas, and decreased forage availability has a negative effect on female fertility.

[ 23 ] Threats [ edit ] Hunting for meat as a means of subsistence or trade in wildlife parts adds to the growing problem for wildlife managers in many countries.

Poaching , with its indirect impacts as disturbance, increasing fleeing distances and resulting reduction of effective habitat size, is by far the most important factor threatening the survival of the markhor populations.

[ 24 ] The most important types of poachers seem to be local inhabitants, state border guards, the latter usually relying on local hunting guides, and Afghans, illegally crossing the border. Poaching causes fragmentation of the population into small islands, where the remaining subpopulations are prone to extinction.

[ 24 ] The markhor is a valued trophy hunting prize for its spiral horns. The Pakistani government issued several tags in an attempt to save the species, which since the introduction of hunting, the species has seen a remarkable rebound. The continuing declines of markhor populations finally caught the attention of the international community.

[ 25 ] Hunting [ edit ] Markhor In British India , markhor were considered to be among the most challenging game species, because of the danger involved in stalking and pursuing them in high, mountainous terrain.

[ 26 ] According to Arthur Brinckman in his The Rifle in Cashmere , "a man who is a good walker will never wish for any finer sport than ibex or markhoor shooting".

[ 27 ] Elliot Roosevelt wrote of how he shot two markhor in 1881, his first on 8 July, his second on 1 August.

[ 28 ] Although hunting markhor in Afghanistan is illegal, they have been traditionally hunted in Nuristan and Laghman Provinces, and this may have intensified during the War in Afghanistan . In Pakistan, hunting markhor is legal as part of a conservation process; expensive hunting licenses are available from the Pakistani government that allow the hunting of old markhors, which are no longer good for breeding purposes.

[ 29 ] In India,  hunting markhor is illegal, but they are poached for food and for their horns, which are thought to have medicinal properties.

[ 30 ] Markhor have also been successfully introduced to private game ranches in Texas . Unlike the aoudad , blackbuck , nilgai , ibex , and axis deer , however, markhor have not escaped in sufficient numbers to establish free-range feral populations in Texas.

The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources currently classifies the markhor as a near threatened species, because of its relatively small population (2013 estimate: about 5,800 individuals), the absence of a projected total population decline, and its reliance on ongoing conservation efforts to maintain population levels.

[ 2 ] Reservations in Tajikistan are set up to protect the markhors. In 1973, two reservations were established. The Dashtijum Strict Reserve (also called the Zapovednik in Russian) offers markhor protect across 20,000 ha. The Dashtijum Reserve (called the Zakasnik in Russian) covers 53,000 ha. Though these reserves exist to protect and conserve the markhor population, the regulations are poorly enforced, making poaching common, as is habitat destruction .

[ 2 ] [ 8 ] Although markhors still face ongoing threats, recent studies have shown considerable success regarding the conservation approach that began in the 1900s, when a local hunter was persuaded by a hunting tourist to stop poaching markhors. The local hunter established a conservancy that inspired two other local organizations called Morkhur and Muhofiz. These organizations expect that their efforts will not only protect the markhor but also allow for the sustainable exploitation of the species. This approach has proven to be more effective than the protection of lands that lack enforcement and security.

[ 8 ] In India, the markhor is a fully protected (Schedule I) species under Jammu and Kashmir's Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1978.

[ 30 ] On 2 May 2024, the United Nations General Assembly declared 24 May as the International Day of Markhor , recognizing the importance of conservation of the species.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] In culture [ edit ] Markhor on postal stamps of India (left) and Tajikistan (right) The markhor is the national animal of Pakistan .

[ 33 ] It was one of the 72 animals featured on the World Wide Fund for Nature Conservation Coin Collection in 1976. Markhor marionettes are used in the Afghan puppet shows known as buz-baz . The markhor has also been mentioned in a Pakistani computer-animated film known as Allahyar and the Legend of Markhor .

[ 34 ] Etymology [ edit ] The name is thought to be derived from Persian language — a conjunction of mâr ( مار , " snake , serpent ") and the suffix khor ( ‏خور‎ , "-eater"), interpreted to represent the animal's alleged ability to kill snakes, or as a reference to its corkscrew-like horns, which are somewhat reminiscent of coiling snakes.

[ 4 ] In folklore, the markhor is believed to kill and eat serpents. Thereafter, while chewing the cud , a foam-like substance comes out of its mouth that drops on the ground and dries. This foam-like substance is sought after by the local people, who believe it is useful in extracting the poison from snakebites.

[ 35 ] References [ edit ] ^ Grubb, P.

(2005).

"Species Capra falconeri " . In Wilson, D.E.

; Reeder, D.M (eds.).

Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference (3rd ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 701.

ISBN 978-0-8018-8221-0 .

OCLC 62265494 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Michel, S. & Rosen Michel, T. (2016) [errata version of 2015 assessment].

" Capra falconeri " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2015 : e.T3787A97218336.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2015-4.RLTS.T3787A82028427.en . Retrieved 16 January 2022 .

^ Sharma, S. D. (1990).

Semantics and Syntax: Indian Loan Words in English : a Linguistic, Cultural, Literary & Historical Study . Prakash Book Depot. p. 83.

^ a b c d e " Capra falconeri Markhor" .

Ultimate Ungulate . 2007.

Retrieved on 2011-07-10 Archived 2007-12-20 at the Wayback Machine ^ Fedosenko, A. K. & Blank, D. A. (2001).

" Capra sibirica " (PDF) .

Mammalian Species .

675 : 1– 13.

doi : 10.1644/1545-1410(2001)675<0001:CS>2.0.CO;2 .

S2CID 198969400 .

^ a b c Sterndale, R. A. (1884).

" Capra megaceros The Markhor" .

Natural History of the Mammalia of India and Ceylon . Calcutta: Thacker, Spink, and Co. pp.

441– 444.

^ Markham, F. (1854).

Shooting in the Himalayas: a journal of sporting adventures and travel in Chinese Tartary, Ladac, Thibet, Cashmere, &c . R. Bentley.

^ a b c d Michel, S.; Michel, T.; Saidov, A.; Karimov, K.; Alidodov, M.; Kholmatov, I. (2014).

"Population status of Heptner's markhor Capra falconeri heptneri in Tajikistan: challenges for conservation" .

Oryx .

49 (3): 506– 513.

doi : 10.1017/s0030605313000860 .

^ Ahmad, R.; Sharma, N.; Mishra, C.; Singh, N. J.; Rawat, G.S.; Bhatnagar, Y.V. (2017).

"Security, size, or sociality: what makes markhor ( Capra falconeri ) sexually segregate?" .

Journal of Mammalogy .

99 (1): 55– 63.

doi : 10.1093/jmammal/gyx155 .

^ Lyngdoh, S. B.; Habib, B.; Shrotriya, S. (2019).

"Dietary spectrum in Himalayan wolves: comparative analysis of prey choice in conspecifics across high-elevation rangelands of Asia" (PDF) .

Down to Earth . Retrieved 7 August 2020 .

^ Sajjad, A.

"Conservation and status of Markhor ( Capra falconeri ) in the northern parts of North West Frontier Province, Pakistan" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2010.

^ Wagner, J.A. (1839).

"Beschreibung einiger neuer oder wenig bekannter Säugethiere, welche von Herrn Baron von Hügel in Indien gesammelt wurden" .

Gelehrte Anzeigen der Königlich Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu München .

9 (183): 429– 432.

^ Damm & Franco, CIC Caprinae Atlas of the World, CIC/Rowland Ward, 2014 ^ Lydekker, R. (1900).

"The Astor Markhor" .

The great and small game of India, Burma, and Tibet . London: R. Ward. pp.

109– 113.

^ Hayes, J. L. (1868).

The Angora goat; its origin, culture and products . Boston.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Schreiner, O. (1898).

Angora goat ... : and, A paper on the ostrich ...

London: Longmans.

^ Hammer, S. (2008). "Evidence for introgressive hybridization of captive markhor (Capra falconeri) with domestic goat: cautions for reintroduction".

Biochemical Genetics .

46 (3/4): 216– 226.

doi : 10.1007/s10528-008-9145-y .

PMID 18228130 .

S2CID 7408515 .

^ Clutton-Brock, J. (1999).

A natural history of domesticated mammals . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-63495-4 . Retrieved 10 July 2011 .

^ Menrad, M.; Stier, C.-H.; Geldermann, H.; Gall, C.F. (2002). "A study on the Changthangi pashmina and the Bakerwali goat breeds in Kashmir: I. Analysis of blood protein polymorphisms and genetic variability within and between the populations".

Small Ruminant Research .

43 (1): 3– 14.

doi : 10.1016/S0921-4488(01)00265-6 .

^ La Capra Girgentana . Capragirgentana.it. Retrieved on 2011-07-10.

^ "Between a rock and a goat's place in Waterford" .

Irish Times . August 2009.

^ The Great Orem in Llandudno North Wales Archived 2010-09-08 at the Wayback Machine . Llandudno.com. Retrieved on 2011-07-10.

^ Ashraf, N. (2014).

"Competition for food between the markhor and domestic goat in Chitral, Pakistan" .

Turkish Journal of Zoology .

38 (2): 191– 198.

doi : 10.3906/zoo-1306-6 .

^ a b Michel, Stefan.

"CONSERVATION OF TAJIK MARKHOR (Capra falconeri heptneri) AND URIAL (Ovis vignei) IN TAJIKISTAN AND ADJACENT AFGHANISTAN" (PDF) .

^ Rosser, Naseer; Nigel; Alison M., Tareen & Leader-Williams.

"Chapter 4: The Precautionary Principle, Uncertainty And Trophy Hunting: A Review Of The Torghar Population Of Central Asian Markhor Capra Falconeri" . Points of View Reference Center . Retrieved 22 October 2014 .

^ Hindu-Koh: Wanderings and Wild Sport on and Beyond the Himalayas (1853–1854) by Donald Macintyre, published by Asian Educational Services, 1996, ISBN 81-206-0851-8 ^ Arthur Brinckman (1862).

The rifle in Cashmere: a narrative of shooting expeditions in Ladak, Cashmere, Punjaub, etc., with advice on travelling, shooting, and stalking : to which are added notes on army reform and Indian politics . Smith, Elder. pp.

148 – . Retrieved 10 July 2011 .

^ Theodore Roosevelt IV (27 October 2008).

Hunting in Many Lands . Clapham Press.

ISBN 978-1-4437-7183-2 . Retrieved 10 July 2011 .

^ "A $55,000 wild Markhor chase" . dailytimes.com.pk. 31 March 2006 . Retrieved 25 December 2012 .

^ a b "The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species" .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . Retrieved 26 October 2018 .

^ "International Day of the Markhor" .

^ "Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 May 2024 | 78/278. International Day of the Markhor" . United Nations.

^ Taus-Bolstad, Stacy (2003).

Pakistan in Pictures .

Twenty-First Century Books . p. 15.

ISBN 978-0822546825 . Retrieved 25 December 2012 .

^ IMDB(2018) https://www.imdb.com/title/tt7955106/ ^ "Markhor" .

Museo de la Caza Los Yebenes . Retrieved 9 April 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Capra falconeri .

Mueenuddin, N. (2020).

Himalayan Lynx Filmed Hunting Markhor in Pakistan for First Time (Motion picture). WWF Pakistan.

Archived from the original on 22 December 2021.

Markhor Pakistan National Animal v t e Extant Artiodactyla species Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Infraclass: Eutheria Superorder: Laurasiatheria Suborder Ruminantia Antilocapridae Antilocapra Pronghorn ( A. americana ) Giraffidae Okapia Okapi ( O. johnstoni ) Giraffa Northern giraffe ( G. camelopardalis ) Southern giraffe ( G. giraffa ) Reticulated giraffe ( G. reticulata ) Masai giraffe ( G. tippelskirchi ) Moschidae Moschus Anhui musk deer ( M. anhuiensis ) Dwarf musk deer ( M. berezovskii ) Alpine musk deer ( M. chrysogaster ) Kashmir musk deer ( M. cupreus ) Black musk deer ( M. fuscus ) Himalayan musk deer ( M. leucogaster ) Siberian musk deer ( M. moschiferus ) Tragulidae Hyemoschus Water chevrotain ( H. aquaticus ) Moschiola Indian spotted chevrotain ( M. indica ) Yellow-striped chevrotain ( M. kathygre ) Sri Lankan spotted chevrotain ( M. meminna ) Tragulus Java mouse-deer ( T. javanicus ) Lesser mouse-deer ( T. kanchil ) Greater mouse-deer ( T. napu ) Philippine mouse-deer ( T. nigricans ) Vietnam mouse-deer ( T. versicolor ) Williamson's mouse-deer ( T. williamsoni ) Cervidae Large family listed below Bovidae Large family listed below Family Cervidae Cervinae Muntiacus Bornean yellow muntjac ( M. atherodes ) Hairy-fronted muntjac ( M. crinifrons ) Fea's muntjac ( M. feae ) Gongshan muntjac ( M. gongshanensis ) Sumatran muntjac ( M. montanus ) Southern red muntjac ( M. muntjak ) Pu Hoat muntjac ( M. puhoatensis ) Leaf muntjac ( M. putaoensis ) Reeves's muntjac ( M. reevesi ) Roosevelt's muntjac ( M. rooseveltorum ) Truong Son muntjac ( M. truongsonensis ) Northern red muntjac ( M. vaginalis ) Giant muntjac ( M. vuquangensis ) Elaphodus Tufted deer ( E. cephalophus ) Dama European fallow deer ( D. dama ) Persian fallow deer ( D. mesopotamica ) Axis Chital ( A. axis ) Calamian deer ( A. calamianensis ) Bawean deer ( A. kuhlii ) Hog deer ( A. porcinus ) Rucervus Barasingha ( R. duvaucelii ) Eld's deer ( R. eldii ) Elaphurus Père David's deer ( E. davidianus ) Rusa Visayan spotted deer ( R. alfredi ) Philippine sambar ( R. mariannus ) Rusa deer ( R. timorensis ) Sambar ( R. unicolor ) Cervus Thorold's deer ( C. albirostris ) Red deer ( C. elaphus ) Elk ( C. canadensis ) Central Asian red deer ( C. hanglu ) Sika deer ( C. nippon ) Capreolinae Alces Moose ( A. alces ) Hydropotes Water deer ( H. inermis ) Capreolus European roe deer ( C. capreolus ) Siberian roe deer ( C. pygargus ) Rangifer Reindeer ( R. tarandus ) Hippocamelus Taruca ( H. antisensis ) South Andean deer ( H. bisulcus ) Mazama Red brocket ( M. americana ) Small red brocket ( M. bororo ) Merida brocket ( M. bricenii ) Dwarf brocket ( M. chunyi ) Pygmy brocket ( M. nana ) Amazonian brown brocket ( M. nemorivaga ) Little red brocket ( M. rufina ) Central American red brocket ( M. temama ) Ozotoceros Pampas deer ( O. bezoarticus ) Blastocerus Marsh deer ( B. dichotomus ) Pudu Northern pudu ( P. mephistophiles ) ?

Southern pudu ( P. pudu ) Pudella Peruvian Yungas pudu ( P. carlae ) Northern pudu ( P. mephistophiles ) Odocoileus Mule deer ( O. hemionus ) Yucatan brown brocket ( O. pandora ) White-tailed deer ( O. virginianus ) Subulo Gray brocket ( S. gouazoubira ) Family Bovidae Hippotraginae Hippotragus Roan antelope ( H. equinus ) Sable antelope ( H. niger ) Oryx East African oryx ( O. beisa ) Scimitar oryx ( O. dammah ) Gemsbok ( O. gazella ) Arabian oryx ( O. leucoryx ) Addax Addax ( A. nasomaculatus ) Reduncinae Kobus Waterbuck ( K. ellipsiprymnus ) Kob ( K. kob ) Lechwe ( K. leche ) Nile lechwe ( K. megaceros ) Puku ( K. vardonii ) Redunca Southern reedbuck ( R. arundinum ) Mountain reedbuck ( R. fulvorufula ) Bohor reedbuck ( R. redunca ) Aepycerotinae Aepyceros Impala ( A. melampus ) Peleinae Pelea Grey rhebok ( P. capreolus ) Alcelaphinae Beatragus Hirola ( B. hunteri ) Damaliscus Common tsessebe ( D. lunatus ) Bontebok ( D. pygargus ) Alcelaphus Hartebeest ( A. buselaphus ) Connochaetes Black wildebeest ( C. gnou ) Blue wildebeest ( C. taurinus ) Pantholopinae Pantholops Tibetan antelope ( P. hodgsonii ) Caprinae Large subfamily listed below Bovinae Large subfamily listed below Antilopinae Large subfamily listed below Family Bovidae (subfamily Caprinae ) Ammotragus Barbary sheep ( A. lervia ) Arabitragus Arabian tahr ( A. jayakari ) Budorcas Takin ( B. taxicolor ) Capra Wild goat ( C. aegagrus ) West Caucasian tur ( C. caucasia ) East Caucasian tur ( C. cylindricornis ) Markhor ( C. falconeri ) Domestic goat ( C. hircus ) Alpine ibex ( C. ibex ) Nubian ibex ( C. nubiana ) Iberian ibex ( C. pyrenaica ) Siberian ibex ( C. sibirica ) Walia ibex ( C. walie ) Capricornis Japanese serow ( C. crispus ) Red serow ( C. rubidus ) Mainland serow ( C. sumatraensis ) Taiwan serow ( C. swinhoei ) Hemitragus Himalayan tahr ( H. jemlahicus ) Naemorhedus Red goral ( N. baileyi ) Long-tailed goral ( N. caudatus ) Himalayan goral ( N. goral ) Chinese goral ( N. griseus ) Oreamnos Mountain goat ( O. americanus ) Ovibos Muskox ( O. moschatus ) Nilgiritragus Nilgiri tahr ( N. hylocrius ) Ovis Argali ( O. ammon ) Domestic sheep ( O. aries ) Bighorn sheep ( O. canadensis ) Dall sheep ( O. dalli ) Mouflon ( O. gmelini ) Snow sheep ( O. nivicola ) Urial ( O. vignei ) Pseudois Bharal ( P. nayaur ) Rupicapra Pyrenean chamois ( R. pyrenaica ) Chamois ( R. rupicapra ) Family Bovidae (subfamily Bovinae ) Boselaphini Tetracerus Four-horned antelope ( T. quadricornis ) Boselaphus Nilgai ( B. tragocamelus ) Bovini Bubalus Wild water buffalo ( B. arnee ) Domestic water buffalo ( B. bubalis ) Lowland anoa ( B. depressicornis ) Tamaraw ( B. mindorensis ) Mountain anoa ( B. quarlesi ) Bos American bison ( B. bison ) European bison ( B. bonasus ) Bali cattle ( B. domesticus ) Gayal ( B. frontalis ) Gaur ( B. gaurus ) Domestic yak ( B. grunniens ) Zebu ( B. indicus ) Banteng ( B. javanicus ) Wild yak ( B. mutus ) Cattle ( B. taurus ) Pseudoryx Saola ( P. nghetinhensis ) Syncerus African buffalo ( S. caffer ) Tragelaphini Tragelaphus (including kudus ) Nyala ( T. angasii ) Mountain nyala ( T. buxtoni ) Bongo ( T. eurycerus ) Lesser kudu ( T. imberbis ) Harnessed bushbuck ( T. scriptus ) Sitatunga ( T. spekeii ) Greater kudu ( T. strepsiceros ) Cape bushbuck ( T. sylvaticus ) Taurotragus Giant eland ( T. derbianus ) Common eland ( T. oryx ) Family Bovidae (subfamily Antilopinae ) Antilopini Ammodorcas Dibatag ( A. clarkei ) Antidorcas Springbok ( A. marsupialis ) Antilope Blackbuck ( A. cervicapra ) Eudorcas Mongalla gazelle ( E. albonotata ) Red-fronted gazelle ( E. rufifrons ) Thomson's gazelle ( E. thomsonii ) Heuglin's gazelle ( E. tilonura ) Gazella Arabian gazelle ( G. arabica ) Chinkara ( G. bennettii ) Cuvier's gazelle ( G. cuvieri ) Dorcas gazelle ( G. dorcas ) Mountain gazelle ( G. gazella ) Rhim gazelle ( G. leptoceros ) Speke's gazelle ( G. spekei ) Goitered gazelle ( G. subgutturosa ) Litocranius Gerenuk ( L. walleri ) Nanger Dama gazelle ( N. dama ) Grant's gazelle ( N. granti ) Bright's gazelle ( N. notatus ) Peter's gazelle ( N. petersii ) Soemmerring's gazelle ( N. soemmerringii ) Procapra Mongolian gazelle ( P. gutturosa ) Goa ( P. picticaudata ) Przewalski's gazelle ( P. przewalskii ) Saigini Saiga Saiga antelope ( S. tatarica ) Neotragini Dorcatragus Beira ( D. megalotis ) Madoqua Günther's dik-dik ( M. guentheri ) Kirk's dik-dik ( M. kirkii ) Silver dik-dik ( M. piacentinii ) Salt's dik-dik ( M. saltiana ) Neotragus Royal antelope ( N. pygmaeus ) Nesotragus Bates' pygmy antelope ( N. batesi ) Suni ( N. moschatus ) Oreotragus Klipspringer ( O. oreotragus ) Ourebia Oribi ( O. ourebi ) Raphicerus Steenbok ( R. campestris ) Cape grysbok ( R. melanotis ) Sharpe's grysbok ( R. sharpei ) Cephalophini Cephalophus Aders's duiker ( C. adersi ) Brooke's duiker ( C. brookei ) Peters' duiker ( C. callipygus ) White-legged duiker ( C. crusalbum ) Bay duiker ( C. dorsalis ) Harvey's duiker ( C. harveyi ) Jentink's duiker ( C. jentinki ) White-bellied duiker ( C. leucogaster ) Red forest duiker ( C. natalensis ) Black duiker ( C. niger ) Black-fronted duiker ( C. nigrifrons ) Ogilby's duiker ( C. ogilbyi ) Ruwenzori duiker ( C. rubidis ) Red-flanked duiker ( C. rufilatus ) Yellow-backed duiker ( C. silvicultor ) Abbott's duiker ( C. spadix ) Weyns's duiker ( C. weynsi ) Zebra duiker ( C. zebra ) Philantomba Blue duiker ( P. monticola ) Maxwell's duiker ( P. maxwellii ) Walter's duiker ( P. walteri ) Sylvicapra Common duiker ( S. grimmia ) Suborder Suina Suidae Babyrousa Buru babirusa ( B. babyrussa ) North Sulawesi babirusa ( B. celebensis ) Togian babirusa ( B. togeanensis ) Hylochoerus Giant forest hog ( H. meinertzhageni ) Phacochoerus Desert warthog ( P. aethiopicus ) Common warthog ( P. africanus ) Porcula Pygmy hog ( P. salvania ) Potamochoerus Bushpig ( P. larvatus ) Red river hog ( P. porcus ) Sus Palawan bearded pig ( S. ahoenobarbus ) Bornean bearded pig ( S. barbatus ) Visayan warty pig ( S. cebifrons ) Celebes warty pig ( S. celebensis ) Domestic pig ( S. domesticus ) Flores warty pig ( S. heureni ) Oliver's warty pig ( S. oliveri ) Philippine warty pig ( S. philippensis ) Wild boar ( S. scrofa ) Timor warty pig ( S. timoriensis ) Javan warty pig ( S. verrucosus ) Tayassuidae Tayassu White-lipped peccary ( T. pecari ) Catagonus Chacoan peccary ( C. wagneri ) Dicotyles Collared peccary ( D. tajacu ) Suborder Tylopoda Camelidae Lama Llama ( L. glama ) Guanaco ( L. guanicoe ) Alpaca ( L. pacos ) Vicuña ( L. vicugna ) Camelus Domestic Bactrian camel ( C. bactrianus ) Dromedary/Arabian camel ( C. dromedarius ) Wild Bactrian camel ( C. ferus ) Suborder Whippomorpha Hippopotamidae Hippopotamus Hippopotamus ( H. amphibius ) Choeropsis Pygmy hippopotamus ( C. liberiensis ) Cetacea see Cetacea v t e National symbols of Pakistan Main symbols Qaumi Taranah (national anthem) State emblem of Pakistan Flag of Pakistan Faith, Unity, Discipline (motto) Urdu (national language) People Muhammad Ali Jinnah (Father of the Nation) Muhammad Iqbal (National poet) Fatima Jinnah (Mother of the Nation) Other symbols Cedrus deodara (national tree) Chukar partridge (national bird) Jasminum officinale (national flower) Markhor (national animal) Snow leopard (national animal) Structures Faisal Mosque (mosque) Mazar-e-Quaid (mausoleum) Minar-e-Pakistan (monument) Pakistan Monument (monument) Taxon identifiers Capra falconeri Wikidata : Q187927 Wikispecies : Capra falconeri ADW : Capra_falconeri ARKive : capra-falconeri BioLib: 33756 BOLD : 494277 CoL : QS67 EoL : 328691 GBIF : 2441050 iNaturalist : 42356 IRMNG : 10891634 ITIS : 625138 IUCN : 3787 MDD : 1006183 MSW : 14200772 NCBI : 48167 Observation.org : 82249 Open Tree of Life : 202967 Paleobiology Database : 149649 Species+ : 3780 TSA : 3392 Xeno-canto : Capra-falconeri Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Markhor&oldid=1303046860 " Categories : IUCN Red List near threatened species Capra (genus) Fauna of the Himalayas Mammals of Asia Mammals of Pakistan National symbols of Pakistan Mammals described in 1839 Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher Cite IUCN without doi Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from September 2024 Use dmy dates from September 2024 Articles with 'species' microformats Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Persian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Taxonbars with 20–24 taxon IDs This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 20:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Markhor 62 languages Add topic

