Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 On the Moving Sphere 2.2 On Risings and Settings 3 Footnotes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Autolycus of Pitane 28 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 4th-century BC Ancient Greek astromer, mathematician and geographer De sphaera quae movetur liber Autolycus of Pitane ( Greek : Αὐτόλυκος ὁ Πιταναῖος ; c. 360 – c. 290 BC) was a Greek astronomer , mathematician , and geographer . He is known today for his two surviving works On the Moving Sphere and On Risings and Settings , both about spherical geometry .

Life [ edit ] Autolycus was born in Pitane , a town of Aeolis within Ionia, Asia Minor. Of his personal life nothing is known, although he was a contemporary of Aristotle and his works seem to have been completed in Athens between 335–300 BC.

Euclid references some of Autolycus' work, and Autolycus is known to have taught Arcesilaus .

[ citation needed ] The lunar crater Autolycus was named in his honour.

Work [ edit ] Autolycus' two surviving works are about spherical geometry with application to astronomy : On the Moving Sphere and On Risings and Settings (of stars). In late antiquity , both were part of the " Little Astronomy ", [ 1 ] a collection of miscellaneous short works about geometry and astronomy which were commonly transmitted together. They were translated into Arabic in the 9th century, [ 2 ] and with the addition of a few additional works became known as the "Middle Books" (sitting between Euclid's Elements and Ptolemy 's Almagest ). Both were preserved both in Greek and in Arabic, but were unknown in medieval Western Europe. They were translated from Arabic into Latin in the 12th century.

[ 3 ] Later, remaining Greek copies were also translated into Latin.

On the Moving Sphere [ edit ] On the Moving Sphere ( Ancient Greek : Περὶ κινουμένης σφαίρας Perí kinouménis sphaíras ) concerns the movements of points and arcs on the sphere as it rotates on an axis. While the obvious application is the diurnal motion of the stars as the celestial sphere appears to rotate about an immobile Earth (as modeled at the time), Autolycus' treatise never explicitly discusses this application: its content consists entirely of elementary theorems about the arcs of great circles and parallel small circles on an abstract sphere. The work is simple and probably derivative of older works, but each theorem includes a clearly enunciated statement, a figure of the construction alongside its proof, and finally a concluding remark.

[ 1 ] On the Moving Sphere is believed to be the oldest mathematical treatise from ancient Greece that is completely preserved: All prior Greek mathematical works are taken from later summaries, commentaries, or descriptions of the works.

[ 1 ] It shows that by Autolycus' day there was a thoroughly established textbook tradition in geometry that is today regarded as typical of classical Greek geometry. Moreover, it gives indications of what theorems were well known in his day (around 320 BC).

[ 1 ] Two hundred years later Theodosius wrote the Spherics , a treatise establishing the fundamental definitions and constructions in spherical geometry whose content is believed to have a common origin with On the Moving Sphere in some pre-Euclidean textbook, possibly written by Eudoxus .  In contrast to later astronomical analyses by Hipparchus (2nd century BC) and Ptolemy (2nd century AD), but similarly to the planar geometry of Euclid's Elements , both Autolycus's work and Theodosius' does not involve concrete quantification or trigonometry: spherical arcs are compared in size, but not given any numerical measure.

On Risings and Settings [ edit ] In the two-book treatise On Risings and Settings ( Ancient Greek : Περὶ ἐπιτολῶν καὶ δύσεων Perí epitolón kaí dýseon ), Autolycus studied the relationship between the rising and the setting of the stars throughout the year. The second book is an expansion of the first and of higher quality. He wrote that "any star which rises and sets always rises and sets at the same point in the horizon." Autolycus relied heavily on Eudoxus' astronomy and was a strong supporter of Eudoxus' theory of homocentric spheres .

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Boyer, Carl B.

(1968).

A History of Mathematics .

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

§6.13, p. 107.

^ Nikfahm-Khubravan, Sajjad; Eshera, Osama (2019-01-21).

"The Five Arabic Revisions of Autolycus' On the Moving Sphere (Proposition VII)" .

Tarikh-e Elm, Iranian Journal for the History of Science .

16 (2): 7– 71.

doi : 10.22059/jihs.2019.281965.371485 .

ISSN 1735-0573 .

^ "Theodosius of Bithynia" .

encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2 May 2015 .

References [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Autolycus of Pitane ".

Huxley, G. L. (1970). "Autolycus of Pitane".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons . pp.

338– 39.

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

on line at "Autolycus of Pitane" .

HighBeam Research . Retrieved 26 March 2015 .

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

(April 1999), "Autolycus of Pitane" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews External links [ edit ] Autolycus On The Moving Sphere from the Million Books Project (Greek with Latin translation) ΠΕΡΙ ΚΙΝΟΥΜΕΝΗΣ ΣΦΑΙΡΑΣ and ΠΕΡΙ ΕΠΙΤΟΛΩΝ ΚΑΙ ΔΥΣΕΩΝ (Mogenet ed., 1950) v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 WorldCat 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden 2 Poland 2 Vatican 2 Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Autolycus_of_Pitane&oldid=1288940571 " Categories : 3rd-century BC Greek writers Ancient Greek astronomers Ancient Greek geometers Ancient Greek geographers Aeolians 360s BC births 290s BC deaths 4th-century BC geographers 3rd-century BC geographers 4th-century BC Greek mathematicians 3rd-century BC Greek mathematicians 4th-century BC Greek writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 14:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Autolycus of Pitane 28 languages Add topic

