Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Function 2 Scope of application 3 Operating principle Toggle Operating principle subsection 3.1 Variable volume type 3.2 Variable density type 4 Configurations Toggle Configurations subsection 4.1 Adjustable buoyancy life jacket 4.2 Wraparound buoyancy BCs 4.2.1 Jump jacket 4.3 Back inflation 4.3.1 Dual bladder buoyancy compensators 4.3.2 Sidemount BCs 4.4 Rebreather BCs 4.4.1 Integrated with the scuba cylinder 5 Construction Toggle Construction subsection 5.1 Components 5.2 Size and fit 6 Operation Toggle Operation subsection 6.1 Buoyancy control 6.2 Orientation in the water 6.3 Inflation gas supply and consumption 7 Hazards and malfunctions 8 History 9 See also Toggle See also subsection 9.1 Other buoyancy related equipment 10 Notes 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Buoyancy compensator (diving) 16 languages العربية Čeština Dansk Deutsch Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Power inflator ) Equipment for controlling the buoyancy of a diver "Stab jacket" redirects here. For a type of body armor, see stab vest .

Buoyancy compensator Jacket type BC on diving cylinder Acronym BC or BCD Other names Buoyancy control device Uses To adjust and control the overall buoyancy of the diver Related items Backplate and wing A buoyancy compensator ( BC ), also called a buoyancy control device ( BCD ), stabilizer , stabilisor , stab jacket , wing or adjustable buoyancy life jacket ( ABLJ ), depending on design, is a type of diving equipment which is worn by divers to establish neutral buoyancy underwater and positive buoyancy at the surface, when needed.

The buoyancy is usually controlled by adjusting the volume of gas in an inflatable bladder, which is filled with ambient pressure gas from the diver's primary breathing gas cylinder via a low-pressure hose from the regulator first stage, directly from a small cylinder dedicated to this purpose, or from the diver's mouth through the oral inflation valve. Ambient pressure bladder buoyancy compensators can be broadly classified as having the buoyancy primarily in front, surrounding the torso, or behind the diver. This affects the ergonomics , and to a lesser degree, the safety of the unit. They can also be broadly classified as having the buoyancy bladder as an integral part of the construction, or as a replaceable component supported inside the structural body.

The buoyancy compensator requires a significant amount of skill and attention to operate, because control is entirely manual, adjustment is required throughout the dive as weight reduces due to gas consumption, and buoyancy of the diving suit and BC generally varies with depth. Fine buoyancy adjustment can be done by breath control on open circuit, reducing the amount of actual BC volume adjustment needed, and a skilled diver will develop the ability to adjust volume to maintain neutral buoyancy while remaining aware of the surroundings and performing other tasks. The buoyancy compensator is both an important safety device when used correctly and a significant hazard when misused or malfunctioning.

The ability to control trim effectively is dependent on both appropriate buoyancy distribution and ballast weight distribution. This too is a skill acquired by practice, and is facilitated by minimising the required BC gas volume by correct weighting.

Function [ edit ] The buoyancy compensator is used by ambient pressure divers using underwater breathing apparatus to adjust buoyancy underwater or at the surface within the range of slightly negative to slightly positive, to allow neutral buoyancy to be maintained throughout the depth range of the planned dive, and to compensate for changes in weight due to breathing gas consumption during the dive. Where staged cylinders are used, it may also be used to compensate for weight changes when dropping and retrieving these cylinders. Variations in the buoyancy of wetsuits depend on the volume and density of the suit and the ambient pressure, but for thick suits at depth it can be in the order of 10 kg. Variations in the buoyancy of dry suits should be compensated by maintaining a constant volume of gas inside the suit, by manual addition and a combination of automatic and manual dumping, independently of the adjustments to the buoyancy compensator made to compensate for gas usage.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Scope of application [ edit ] The buoyancy compensator is a standard item of scuba diving equipment, though not always necessary, and an optional item for surface-supplied diving , where neutral or positive buoyancy may not be necessary or desirable. Breathhold divers do not have a gas supply to operate a buoyancy compensator, so they cannot use them, though they may wear an inflatable vest lifejacket for positive buoyancy at the surface. Atmospheric pressure diving suits may use a trim tank similar to that on a submarine for small adjustments, but can be ballasted to be almost precisely neutral, and are virtually incompressible within their designed operating range.

[ 2 ] Accurate and reliable depth control is necessary for safe decompression. The surface-supplied diver has the option to use the umbilical for depth control with the assistance of the line tender, and a tethered scuba diver can use the lifeline in the same way. Similarly, any diver using a shotline or jackstay to navigate between the surface and the work site can use it for depth control, making a buoyancy compensator non-essential provided the diver can find the shotline when needed.

[ 3 ] In most recreational and professional scuba, neutral buoyancy during most of the dive is necessary or desirable, as it gives the diver enhanced mobility and maneuverability, and allows the diver to avoid contact with delicate benthic organisms , and to fin without disturbing sediment which can rapidly reduce visibility. For this function a buoyancy compensator is necessary.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Positive buoyancy at the surface is a safety requirement for any diver who must swim to or from the point of descent or surfacing, but this does not need to be precisely controllable buoyancy.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] The buoyancy compensator is intended to control buoyancy of a diver and their personal diving equipment, including stage and bailout cylinders, and for minor additional equipment such as reels, cameras and instruments that are lightweight or near neutral buoyancy. It is not a buoyant lifting device for heavy tools and equipment. If a diving task requires the diver to work heavy, it is almost always better, and always safer, to use surface supplied equipment.

[ 2 ] If used by saturation divers to allow mid-water work, precautions must be taken to limit possible uncontrolled upward excursion. This may be possible by limiting excursion umbilical length.

Operating principle [ edit ] A buoyancy compensator works by adjusting the average density of the diver and their attached equipment to be greater than, equal to, or less than the density of the diving medium.

[ 5 ] This can be done in either of two ways: Variable volume , or inflatable : The volume of a flexible device can be varied by adding or removing ambient pressure gas, which has a relatively low density, [ 5 ] or Variable density or compressible : The density of a rigid device can be varied by compressing or expanding the internal gas by adding or removing incompressible diving medium, which has a relatively high density.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] As of 2021, the overwhelming majority of BCs are variable volume types, inflated by gas at ambient pressure, but the variable density type has been used.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Variable volume type [ edit ] The common type of buoyancy compensator increases buoyancy by adding gas at ambient pressure to a flexible airtight bladder, thereby increasing the volume, and decreases buoyancy by releasing the gas into the water. This volume of gas will compress or expand as the ambient pressure varies with depth, following Boyle's law , and therefore the buoyancy of the system will increase and decrease in proportion to the absolute pressure variation and the volume of gas in the bladder. The variation of buoyancy for a given change of depth will be greater near the surface than at greater depth and greater for a large volume of gas than for a small volume. The range of depths for which the diver can compensate for these changes by voluntary adjustment of lung volume while breathing effectively is therefore dependent on the volume of gas in the bladder and the nominally neutral depth, where breathing at normal tidal volume of about 500 ml results in approximate dynamic equilibrium, and the diver remains at that depth without additional effort. This type of buoyancy compensator functions by increasing buoyancy from the most stable state, which is empty, so weighting is done for neutral buoyancy at the condition of least mass, which is at the end of the dive with the cylinders empty, at which point the diver should be able to stay at the last decompression stop without physical effort.

[ 3 ] A few illustrative examples are presented here. They are simplified but numerically realistic: Example 1a: A diver should be neutrally buoyant at the last decompression stop until breathing gas runs out, so that full use can be made in an emergency of all gas carried. At this point the BC should be empty if weighting is correct, and a dry suit should be at nominal inflation for the undersuit - just enough gas so that the undersuit is at optimum loft for insulation. A wetsuit will be very slightly compressed, so nearly at maximum buoyancy. An empty BC is incompressible and is not affected by depth changes.

Example 1b: If the same diver is decompressing at 3 m with reserve gas in all cylinders, the gas in the BC must support the weight of that reserve gas. A recreational diver with 50 bar of air or nitrox carried in a 12 litre cylinder will have about 0.780 kg of gas, and therefore about 0.78 litres of gas in the BC. A depth change of 1 m upwards will change ambient absolute pressure from 1.3 bar to 1.2 bar so the gas in the BC will expand to 1.3/1.2 × 0.78 = 0.845 litres, a difference of 0.065 litres, which can easily be compensated by reducing lung volume by that amount to stabilise, and a bit more to start sinking back to stop depth. Suit gas will also expand in the same proportion, and is likely to have a larger volume to start, so in practice more gas must be exhaled to get back to depth.

Example 1c: The same diver, but 2 kg overweighted, decompressing at 3 m with 50 bar reserve in a 12 litre cylinder will need about an additional 2 litres of gas in the BC for neutral buoyancy. The same depth change of 1 m upwards will increase the gas volume in the BC to 1.3/1.2 × 2.78 = 3.012 litres, a difference of 0.232 litres.

Example 2: The same diver as in example 1 at 30 m depth at the beginning of the dive with 200 bar in the 12 litre cylinder has about 3.1 kg gas in the cylinder, requiring about 3.1 litres of gas in the BC for neutral buoyancy. At this depth a depth reduction of 1 m will increase the gas volume in the BC to 4/3.9 × 3.1 = 3.18 litres, a difference of 0.08 litres.

Example 3a: A technical diver in a 7 mm wetsuit at the beginning of a dive to 60 m with 200 bar of normoxic trimix 20/30 bottom gas in a manifolded twin 12 litre set with 2 × 11 litre sling cylinders filled to 200 bar with nitrox decompression gases will be carrying about 10 kg of gas and have lost about 6 kg of buoyancy through suit compression, so will need to inflate the BCD with about 16 litres of gas to compensate. At this depth a 1 m decrease of depth will cause the gas in the BC to expand to 7/6.9 × 16 = 16.23 litres, a difference of 0.23 litres.

Example 3b: The same technical diver aborts the dive nearly immediately on reaching 60 m and surfaces with a short decompression obligation of 3 minutes at 3 m. Their back gas is down to 150 bar and the deco gas is unused when they reach the 3 m stop. The suit will have regained almost all of its buoyancy and they are carrying about 7.5 kg of gas so will need about 7.5 litres of gas in the BC to compensate. At this depth a 1 m decrease of depth will cause the gas in the BC to expand to 1.3/1.2 × 7.5 = 8.125 litres, a difference of 0.625 litres.

Variable density type [ edit ] An alternative method of adjusting the buoyancy of the diver is by varying the density of a rigid container of constant displaced volume, by adjusting the volume of added water in a normally gas filled space. This approach can also be described as buoyancy reduction, as opposed to buoyancy addition when gas is added to a flexible ambient pressure space. Such variable buoyancy pressure vessels are used by submersibles and submarines for fine buoyancy and trim control. Water from the surroundings is injected into the tank to decrease buoyancy by ambient pressure difference or by a pump, depending on the internal gas pressure. Water can be removed in a similar way to increase buoyancy. As the tank is rigid and effectively incompressible within the range of diving depths for which it is intended, buoyancy changes due to depth variation during the dive are negligible, and the diver only needs to adjust the buoyancy to account for gas usage and volume variation of the diving suit.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] One way this can be done is by pumping water into a scuba cylinder, using a flexible bladder to keep the gas and water separate, which requires a cylinder made for this purpose, with a water inlet to the space around the internal bladder, connected to a high-pressure pump and control valve system. If the weights have been optimised for the equipment, and the diver is nearly at neutral buoyancy at the start of the dive, very little water needs to be added at the start of the dive, so the gas pressure is not greatly increased. More water is pumped in during the dive to compensate for the mass of gas used, but by this time the pressure will have dropped considerably. A small amount of residual gas pressure on surfacing will be enough to eject the ballast water to establish positive buoyancy. If this system is used with additional sling mounted bailout or decompression cylinders a larger volume of water will be needed to compensate the additional gas usage, and the gas pressure in the buoyancy compensating cylinder will rise a bit more. The Avelo system uses this mechanism, with a rechargeable battery powered pump unit which is demountable from the cylinder.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] This system is inherently more stable with hydrostatic pressure variation, and decreases buoyancy from the initial state, which is with a full cylinder of gas at the start of the dive. To minimise the pressure rise caused by pumping ballast water into the cylinder when it is full, weighting is done for near neutral buoyancy at the start of the dive, with just enough positive buoyancy to safely swim at the surface with a full tank, and pump in a relatively small volume of water to descend, which is periodically increased during the dive to compensate for mass loss of breathing gas. After surfacing, the added mass of water is released to give a comfortable positive buoyancy and minimise equipment weight when getting out of the water. If using a dry suit the initial positive buoyancy at the surface could be controlled by suit inflation in excess of the amount needed for undergarment loft, allowing descent by dumping from the suit.

The depth range in which effectively stable neutral buoyancy can be maintained is inversely proportional to the volume of ambient pressure gas spaces in the diver's equipment (the lung volume is automatically compensated through normal breathing, and the mask is both small and reflexively maintained at constant volume by most divers). When an incompressible buoyancy compensator is used, almost all of the variable volume is in the diving suit, and the depth range of effectively neutral buoyancy is maximised. A diver without a diving suit would be effectively neutrally buoyant over the full depth range of the dive, and only need to adjust buoyancy for mass loss as gas is used.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] A superficially similar system was used in the Dacor (CV Nautilus) system of the 1970s, where the volume of ambient pressure gas in the rigid shell was maintained by a demand regulator automatically sensing a pressure deficit between the internal and external pressures and an automatic dump valve to release internal overpressure, much like the volume control of a rebreather loop by automatic diluent valve (ADV) and overpressure valve , but this reduced buoyancy by flooding the shell with water and increased the buoyancy by adding gas at ambient pressure from the breathing gas supply, rather than reducing the stored gas volume by compressing the gas. Water was added to or removed from the shell to compensate for suit compression and gas use by a manually operated valve. An inherent problem with this system is that the diver must still manually compensate for changes of buoyancy due to suit compression and expansion when changing depth, so the advantages are less marked when used with thick, compressible, diving suits.

[ 8 ] This section needs expansion with: Images of pressure cylinder with pump/battery unit, schematic section of cylinder with internal bladder and ballast filling system, action photos of divers using the equipment, graph of typical breathing gas pressure over a dive, graph of ballast water volume over a dive.. You can help by adding to it .

( December 2021 ) Configurations [ edit ] There are three main configurations of inflatable bladder buoyancy compensation device based on buoyancy distribution: Adjustable buoyancy life jacket [ edit ] Surfaced divers with inflated horsecollar BCs An adjustable buoyancy life jacket (ABLJ) is fitted around the neck and over the chest, secured by straps around the waist and usually between the legs. They are sometimes referred to as " horse collars " because of their resemblance, and are historically derived from the inflatable underwater demolition team (UDT) vest or Mae West life jacket issued to World War II flyers and divers.

[ 9 ] [ 4 ] [ 2 ] They were developed in the 1960s and have been largely superseded by wing and vest type BCs, primarily because the buoyancy is concentrated in front of the diver when full, and behind the neck when partially filled, producing a tendency to shift the diver's centre of buoyancy towards the head with inflation, which adversely affects the diver's trim underwater.

[ 10 ] The ABLJ's location on the diver's chest and round the neck provides the best buoyancy distribution of the buoyancy compensator designs when it comes to floating a distressed, fatigued or unconscious diver face-up on the surface in the event of a problem. They do not normally provide good trim while immersed, as the centre of buoyancy of a horizontally trimmed diver will move towards the back of the neck when the bladder is inflated, inducing a head up trim, which can increase adverse impacts on the benthic environment.

The Dacor Seachute BC4 had unique upper and lower bladders. The upper bladder was around the neck and could be inflated by the Carbon dioxide cartridge for use as a surface life jacket. The lower bladder was over the diver's stomach area, and was inflated by LP gas from the regulator, for buoyancy control underwater. This arrangement provided better buoyancy distribution for trim control while diving than most other front inflation systems.

[ 11 ] Wraparound buoyancy BCs [ edit ] Diver wearing a stabiliser jacket Vest BC, stab jacket, stabiliser jacket, stabilizer, waistcoat or (disparagingly) "Poodle Vest" BCs are inflatable vests worn by the diver around the upper torso, which incorporate the cylinder harness. The air bladder extends from the back around the diver's sides or over the diver's shoulders.

[ 2 ] Wraparound bladders are favored by some divers because they make it easier to maintain upright attitude on the surface. However, some designs have a tendency to squeeze the diver's torso when inflated, and they are often bulky at the sides or front when fully inflated, and may lack sufficient volume to support a full technical rig with a thick wetsuit.

[ 2 ] Vest BCs typically provide up to about 25 kilograms of buoyancy (depending on size) and are fairly comfortable to wear, if of the correct size and adjusted to fit the diver. Vest BCs are the most common type among recreational divers because they can integrate buoyancy control, weights, attachment points for auxiliary gear, and cylinder retention in a single piece of gear. The diver need only attach a cylinder and regulator set in order to have a complete scuba set.  Some "tech-rec" (basically recreational with limited technical capability) vest BC's have the ability to carry multiple cylinders - Twin sets on the back, and sling cylinders at the sides, suspended from D-rings. The lack of flexibility of positioning the D-rings due to structural constraints on some designs is partly remedied by fitting larger numbers of D-rings, some of which may be in the right place for a given diver.

Three main wraparound configurations can be distinguished: The original stabilizer jacket patent by Scubapro featured a buoyancy bladder which allowed air flow around the arms and around the backpack – the trademarked 360° flow-through design. This was a complex bladder to manufacture.

[ 8 ] Over-the-shoulder bladder, separated under the arms, which has a centre of buoyancy fairly high on the body when fully inflated, which tends to hold the diver upright at the surface. These are bulky over the front of the torso, particularly in the shoulder and chest area, and relatively clear to the sides under the arms.

With extensions of the bladder from the lower back forward under the arms, but separated at the shoulders, and no buoyancy on the upper chest, which has a lower centre of buoyancy when fully inflated, and tends to tilt the diver backwards when fully inflated at the surface. These can be very bulky under the arms when integrated weighting and/or pockets are added, and for smaller waisted divers, also to the front of the waist area, but are relatively clear in the chest and shoulder area. The "shell" or bladder casing is usually separate from the cummerbund, which can be snugly fitted while leaving the bladder a relatively loose fit around the torso, to avoid restricting breathing when fully inflated. However, the cummerbund is fitted over the abdomen near the diaphragm and if snugly fitted, may restrict abdominal breathing movement.

BC attachment systems are generally intended to limit the shifting of the BC as a result of the lifting forces, including minimizing the tendency to slide towards the head when the diver is upright while the bladder is inflated. If the diver is wearing a weight belt, this will pull in the opposite direction to BC lift, and can result in the diver sagging down in the jacket when the diver is upright when floating at the surface. Solutions to this problem include the cummerbund (a broad adjustable waist band) and the crotch strap (a strap between the legs). The crotch strap, when adjusted correctly, is effective at preventing this shift, but may prevent the weight belt from falling clear of the diver if dropped in an emergency. Fitting the weight belt over the crotch strap after putting the BC on can be difficult. The cummerbund is an attempt to avoid this problem, as the weight belt can not be snagged on it in the same way, but the weight belt must then be worn either under the cummerbund, obstructing access to the buckle, or below the cummerbund. The effectiveness of a cummerbund depends on a waistline which is smaller than the circumference of the upper torso, and it may constrain free breathing if fitted too tightly.

This tendency of the inflated BC to shift towards the head is less of a problem when the weights are carried in integrated weight pockets on the BC, but it may then have a tendency to slide towards the head when deflated on an inverted diver underwater. This is less of a problem for the average recreational diver, who does not spend much time head down underwater, but can increase the difficulty of recovering from a dry-suit inversion where the air in the suit flows to the feet and the weights in the BC shift towards the head. A crotch strap will prevent this.

[ 3 ] Jump jacket [ edit ] A special case of the jacket type buoyancy control device is the A.P. Valves Jump Jacket Mk.4, which is designed for use by surface-supplied divers. The Mk.4 was designed to be used with the Kirby Morgan lightweight helmets, and is primarily intended for buoyancy control with umbilical supplied gas from the main gas feed via the helmet bailout block, which also provides emergency inflation from the bailout cylinder. The system can also provide cross-connection from one diver's main gas to a second diver's helmet, and pneumo gas emergency supply to a second diver. The jump jacket includes a recovery harness, helmet safety harness and backpack for the bailout set. It is suitable for use on closed bell, wet bell, and dives without a transport platform.

[ 12 ] Back inflation [ edit ] See also: Backplate and wing Back inflation buoyancy compensators are typified by the stainless steel backplate and wing arrangement popular with technical divers, but other arrangements are also available.

Wings or Backplate and wing consist of an inflatable bladder worn between the diver's back and the cylinder(s). Invented by Greg Flanagan in 1979 for North Florida cave divers, and further developed by William Hogarth Main , [ 13 ] the back plate and wing configuration is not a recent development, but has gained popularity because of suitability for technical diving where it is often used, as the technical diver often carries multiple cylinders on his back and/or clipped to D-rings on the harness webbing. The back-mount cylinders or rebreather assembly are fastened over the buoyancy bladder to a backplate which is strapped to the diver by the harness. The wing design frees the divers sides and front and allows for a large volume bladder with high lift capacity (60 lbs /30 liter wings are not uncommon). Some designs use elasticated webbing or bungee cords around the bladder to constrict the bladder when not inflated, although there is dispute regarding the safety and utility of this addition.

[ 14 ] The distance between boltholes on the centreline of the backplate has standardised at 11 inches (280 mm) between centres.

[ 13 ] Other back inflation buoyancy compensators are more like the jacket style regarding the structure, attachment to the diver, and accessories, differing mainly in the bladder position, which is similar to a wing, being entirely behind the diver, without extensions to the sides or front.
Back inflation BCs are less bulky at the sides but may have a tendency to float the diver tilted forward on the surface depending on weight and buoyancy distribution, which presents a possible hazard in an emergency if the diver is unconscious or otherwise unable to keep his or her head above the water.

A few short-lived rigid air compartment back inflation BCs were marketed in the 1970s, [ 8 ] and the Avelo variable density system is back mounted.

[ 6 ] A hybrid arrangement is also possible, which has most of the buoyancy in the back, but has a small amount to the sides below the arms.

Dual bladder buoyancy compensators [ edit ] A small proportion of wing style buoyancy compensators have been produced with a dual bladder arrangement. The intention is that the secondary bladder is a backup in case of failure of the primary bladder. The basic principle is defensible, but the arrangement can present several additional hazards, some of which have caused life-threatening incidents. Safe management of a dual bladder system requires the diver to be aware of the inflation status of each bladder at all times, and to dump gas from the correct bladder or bladders during ascent to prevent a runaway buoyant ascent. Several arrangements have been tried with the intention of making the arrangement acceptably safe. One is to link the inflation and deflation valves together so that both bladders are always used in parallel. In practice this requires a custom modification of two inflator units so that they can be operated together with one hand, as there is no production unit with this function available. Pull dump valves must also be connected in a way that they reliably operate simultaneously in parallel, and the probability of an inlet valve malfunction is doubled as they are in parallel.

Another strategy is to have the inflator mechanisms on opposite sides of the body. As it is possible to inadvertently activate the inflation valve, and it can leak without the diver noticing until the buoyancy has increased significantly, this is only reliable if there is no low pressure inflation hose connected to the backup bladder, so that it can only be inflated orally, and then always inflate the primary using low pressure gas from the regulator. This can be taken a step further by having a different style of oral inflator valve on the secondary bladder.

Dual bladder buoyancy compensators are considered both unnecessary and unsafe in the DIR philosophy. Unnecessary in that there are simpler alternative methods available to a correctly rigged diver to compensate for a defective BC, and unsafe in that there is no obvious way to tell which bladder is holding air, and a leak into the secondary bladder may go unnoticed until the buoyancy has increased to the extent that the diver is unable to stop the ascent, while struggling to empty the air from the wrong bladder. Monitoring the air content of two bladders is unnecessary additional task loading, which distracts attention from other matters.

[ 15 ] This section needs expansion with: More on twin bladder BCs. You can help by adding to it .

( February 2024 ) Diver wearing a wing buoyancy compensator Wings for twin-cylinder set: the cylinders are fastened together by 2 metal bands which are bolted through the wing to the backplate Bladder of a wing buoyancy compensator, showing the side which is away from the diver. The two pairs of slits allow use of cambands to hold a single cylinder Divers preparing for a decompression dive using backplate and wing with sling mounted decompression gas cylinders.

Sidemount BCs [ edit ] A variation on the back mounted buoyancy compensator is used without a backplate for side mount diving This arrangement is functionally similar to wearing the buoyancy compensator sandwiched between the cylinder(s) and backplate, but there is no backplate or back mounted cylinder. The buoyancy cell may be mounted between the sidemount harness and the diver, or on top of the harness. The sides of the bladder may be restrained from floating upwards when inflated by bungee cords clipped to the waistband in front of the diver or clipped to each other, forming an elastic belt across the front of the hips, well below the diaphragm. In this application, back mount keeps the inflated bladder from occupying the space at the diver's sides where the cylinders are suspended.

[ 16 ] Some side mount harnesses are adaptable for use with a back mount cylinder as an option, without the rigid backplate.

[ 16 ] Rebreather BCs [ edit ] Buoyancy compensators are also used with rebreathers. In most cases back-mounted technical diving rebreathers use a wing type bladder integrated with the rebreather harness, with the bladder around the frame of the rebreather. Side mounted rebreathers tend to be suspended from the sides of side-mount harnesses, which include the buoyancy compensator.

This section needs expansion with: Draeger Ray, jacket type modified to include counterlungs and support for the loop and gas cylinder. Use of modified and standards tech backplates and wings, use of earlier military rebreathers with horsecollar BCs. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2024 ) Integrated with the scuba cylinder [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: To be expanded when more detailed source available for Avelo system. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2024 ) Minimalist sidemount harness showing webbing, sliders and D-rings, buoyancy compensator, integrated weight holders and cylinder Top view of sidemount diver Sidemount diver in cave showing 2 cylinders and BC back view Combination sidemount/backmount harness. Front view Combination sidemount/backmount harness. Back view Apeks sidemount harness upper side Apeks sidemount harness underside Construction [ edit ] Inflatable buoyancy compensators of all types have been made in both single skin and casing and bladder arrangements. The strength and damage resistance of both these systems of construction depend more on the design details and quality of materials and manufacture than on the choice of arrangement, though maintenance may vary, as it is quicker to clean, dry and inspect a single skin than a bladder and casing, and the bladder and casing will have more components for an equivalent layout.

A single skin construction uses the material of the buoyancy bladder as the structural material for the unit, and a casing and bladder structure uses the casing for load bearing purposes and to protect the bladder, which is a replaceable part.

Depending on the construction details, the diver may need to carry up to four pounds of lead (two kilos) to counteract the positive buoyancy of an empty BC.

[ 5 ] Components of a buoyancy compensator skin fitting Internal fitting passing through the hole in a buoyancy compensator bladder Buoyancy compensator internal fitting and gasket for filling hose or dump valve in place Corner of sidemount buoyancy compensator wing showing skin fitting assembled Corner of sidemount buoyancy compensator wing showing dump valve assembled Corner of sidemount buoyancy compensator wing showing inflation hose attachment Components [ edit ] Backplate or wing style B.C.and scuba set Regulator first stage Cylinder valve Shoulder straps Buoyancy compensator bladder Relief and bottom manual dump valve Regulator second stages (with "octopus") Console (pressure gauge, depth gauge & compass) Dry-suit inflator hose Backplate BC inflator hose Oral inflation mouthpiece and manual dump valve Crotch strap Waist strap Typical power inflator valve head for buoyancy compensator All ambient pressure gas bladder type buoyancy compensators will have some components in common: A flexible bladder to contain gas which may be added or released during the dive to control buoyancy.

A means of adding gas to the bladder, generally a low pressure direct feed [ notes 1 ] or power inflator [ notes 2 ] that injects gas from a low pressure hose from a diving cylinder's first stage regulator to the bladder of the BC, and usually an oral inflation option. Gas flow is controlled by a spring loaded, normally closed, manual operated inflation valve.

A vent valve [ notes 1 ] or dump valve [ notes 2 ] that allows gas to be released or to escape in a controlled fashion from the bladder(s) of the BC. Most BCs have at least two vents: one at the extreme top and the other at the bottom of the BC, for use as air migrates to whichever part of the BC is uppermost, the vent situated at the shoulder is used when the diver is upright and the vent situated nearer the diver's waist is used when inverted. Venting through the oral inflation system is also usually possible and may be preferred.

The low pressure and oral inflation valves are usually combined as a unit at the end of a corrugated or ribbed rubber inflation hose, with the low pressure inflation valve button on the side opposite the LP hose connector and the combined exhaust and oral inflation valve at the extreme end of the unit, in line with the corrugated hose. Both buttons are operable simultaneously if held correctly. This arrangement makes it easy for the diver to adapt to an unfamiliar BC, as operation has been largely standardised.

An over pressure relief valve that automatically vents the bladder if the diver over inflates the BC by ascending or by injecting too much gas. This is usually a secondary function of the vent or dump valve, and is a necessary safety feature to prevent over-pressure damage. It will not release excess gas automatically during a normal ascent. These vent valves are spring loaded and normally closed, but can be manually operated by pulling a short cord A means of securing the BC to the diver to transfer buoyancy forces, and to hold the BC in the position intended for its designed function. The BC is typically secured to a diver's torso, either with dedicated straps or as part of a multi-functional system integrated with the bladder or casing.

In addition some BCs may include other features: A tough textile casing to contain and protect the bladder, and to which most of the other components are attached, with zippers for access to the bladders; Straps (cambands) to secure back-mount cylinders; A plastic or metal backplate to support back-mount diving cylinders ; A crotch strap may be included in the harness to prevent the BC from sliding towards the head when the diver is upright and the bladder is inflated; A cummerbund is an alternative approach to reduce the tendency for the BC to slide towards the head by providing a close fit around the waist; Pockets for carrying small accessories or tools; An integrated diving weighting system – pockets for lead weights with a quick release mechanism.

[ 17 ] Integrated weights can eliminate the need for a separate weight belt; Trim weight pockets for adjusting the position of the diver's centre of gravity to improve diver trim ; D-rings or other anchor points, for clipping on other equipment such as dive lights, pressure gauge, reels, cameras and stage, bailout, or side-mount cylinders; Emergency inflation cylinders. This can either be a small (about 0.5 litre) air cylinder, filled from the diver's main cylinder, or a small carbon dioxide cylinder; Reflective tape for better visibility; Padding for comfort; A redundant bladder with associated filling and venting components, as a backup in case of failure of the primary bladder; Alternative breathing gas regulator connected to or integrated with the inflation/deflation valve assembly; Bungees to restrain a partially inflated wing.

Size and fit [ edit ] See also: Human factors in diving equipment design § Buoyancy control equipment The buoyancy compensator must fit the diver comfortably and must stay securely in place without constraining the diver's freedom of movement. There is some conflict between allowing easy adjustment to fit a range of diver builds, and setting up the harness to optimum fit for a specific diver in a specific diving suit. This is a particular problem with jacket style BCs which are inherently less adjustable for fit than backplate harnesses, which are more adjustable, but may take more time to adjust.

It is critically important that the fully inflated buoyancy compensator can support the diver with the maximum equipment load on the surface at the start of a dive, and with maximum suit compression at the maximum depth before much gas is used up. There have been fatalities due to overloading the BC. On the other hand, buoyancy control is easiest with the lowest practicable volume of gas in the BC and dry suit, as these volumes change with depth changes, and must be adjusted to remain neutral.

Measurements of volume change of neoprene foam used for wetsuits under hydrostatic compression shows that about 30% of the volume, and therefore 30% of surface buoyancy, is lost in about the first 10 m, another 30% by about 60 m, and the volume appears to stabilise at about 65% loss by about 100 m.

[ 18 ] The total buoyancy loss of a wetsuit is proportional to the initial uncompressed volume. An average person has a surface area of about 2 m 2 , [ 19 ] so the uncompressed volume of a full one piece 6 mm thick wetsuit will be in the order of 1.75 × 0.006 = 0.0105 m 3 , or roughly 10 litres. The mass will depend on the specific formulation of the foam, but will probably be in the order of 4 kg, for a net buoyancy of about 6 kg at the surface. Depending on the overall buoyancy of the diver, this will generally require about 6 kg of additional weight to bring the diver to neutral buoyancy to allow reasonably easy descent  The volume lost at 10 m is about 3 litres, or 3 kg of buoyancy, rising to about 6 kg buoyancy lost at about 60 m. This could nearly double for a large person wearing a farmer-john and jacket for cold water. This loss of buoyancy must be balanced by inflating the buoyancy compensator to maintain neutral buoyancy at depth.

It must be possible to remain neutrally buoyant at the end of the dive, at the shallowest decompression stop, when almost all the diver's breathing gas has been used up. It is not sufficient to only be able to remain neutral with reserve gas, as if the reserve gas is nearly used up due to a problem, the diver will not want to be struggling or unable to stay down to decompress.

[ 5 ] Weighting must be sufficient to allow the diver to stay at the shallowest stop with almost empty cylinders, and available buoyancy volume must allow the BC to support the full cylinders. The absolute minimum acceptable volume for the BC is enough to support the total mass of breathing gas in all the cylinders the diver will carry, plus lost volume due to suit compression at depth. This will be enough only if the diver carries no excess weight. It is easier to allow for a slight weight excess and use a slightly larger volume BC, but if taken to excess this will make buoyancy control more difficult and labour-intensive, and will use more gas, particularly during ascent when it is most critical. A BC designed for recreational diving or for a small person may not have sufficient volume for technical diving.

[ 5 ] An unnecessarily large volume BC constitutes a greater risk of loss of control of ascent rate, particularly when combined with carrying more weight than is necessary to allow neutral buoyancy at the end of the dive with empty cylinders. On the other hand, a large volume gives greater comfort and security when floating at the surface before and after a dive.

Operation [ edit ] The inflatable buoyancy compensator is operated by adjusting the volume of gas contained in the bladder, using an inflation valve to inject gas and one or more deflation valves, or dump valves to release gas. The gas is usually supplied from a low pressure port of the diving regulator on a breathing gas cylinder, or orally, as exhaled gas, though dedicated gas cylinders can be used. At the surface, the bladder is inflated to provide positive buoyancy, allowing the diver to float in a preferred orientation, or deflated to let the diver start to sink to initiate a dive. During the dive, gas is added or released using the same valves, as required to provide the desired buoyancy.

[ 5 ] [ 2 ] Buoyancy control [ edit ] See also: Scuba skills § Buoyancy control The diver needs to be able to establish three states of buoyancy at different stages of a dive: [ 20 ] negative buoyancy: when the diver wants to descend or stay on the seabed. Recreational divers seldom need much buoyancy deficit, but commercial divers may need to be heavy to facilitate some kinds of work. A feet first descent may make ear equalisation easier for some divers, and this is difficult unless buoyancy is slightly negative.

neutral buoyancy: when the diver wants to remain at constant depth, with minimal effort, and no other support. This is the desired state for most of a recreational dive, and allows trim which minimises environmental impact. This state is also optimal for a number of professional diving activities.

positive buoyancy: when the diver wants to float at the surface or ascend under some emergency circumstances .

To achieve negative buoyancy, divers who carry or wear buoyant equipment must be weighted to counteract the buoyancy of both the diver and the equipment.

[ 21 ] When underwater, a diver often needs to be neutrally buoyant and neither sink nor rise. A state of neutral buoyancy exists when the weight of water that the diver and equipment displaces equals the total weight of the diver and equipment. The diver uses a BC to maintain this state of neutral buoyancy by adjusting the volume of gas in the BC and therefore its buoyancy, in response to various effects, which alter the diver's overall volume or weight, primarily: [ 22 ] If the diver's exposure suit is made of a compressible gas-filled material such as foamed neoprene , the volume of the gas bubbles in the material will change (following Boyle's law ) as the pressure changes when the diver descends and ascends.

[ 23 ] The volume of gas in the BC is adjusted to compensate for this.

[ 22 ] Gas contained in the flexible air spaces within the diver's body and equipment (including gas in the BC) is compressed on descent and expands on ascent. The diver normally counteracts this by adding gas to the space or drysuit, in order to avoid "squeeze", or releasing the excess.

[ 23 ] Gas content in the BC is adjusted to correct buoyancy if these other corrections are not enough.

[ 20 ] As the dive proceeds, gas is consumed from the scuba cylinders carried by the diver. This represents a progressive loss of mass which makes the diver more buoyant, and the diver's overall buoyancy must be reduced by venting air from the BC. For this reason the diver needs to configure their equipment to be a little overweight at the beginning of the dive, so that neutral buoyancy can be achieved after the loss of the weight of all the breathing gas carried.

[ 24 ] Air or nitrox weighs about 1.3 grams per litre at standard pressure. Thus, the magnitude of weight change from use of breathing gas during a recreational dive usually varies from roughly 1.8 kilograms (4.0 lb) for a 10-litre 200 bar cylinder breathed down to 50 bar, to roughly 3.5 kilograms (7.7 lb) for a steel 15 litre cylinder 230 bars (3,300 psi) breathed down to 50 bar, or about 5 lbs difference for the common 80 ft 3 aluminium (AL80) cylinder (11.1 litres internal capacity) pressurised to 3000 psi, breathed down to 500psi, though in technical diving using multiple cylinders the mass loss can be considerably more, and in an emergency the reserve gas may also be used.

In practice, the diver doesn't think about all this theory during the dive. To remain neutrally buoyant, gas is added to the BC when the diver is negative (too heavy), or vented from the BC when the diver is too buoyant (too light). There is no stable equilibrium position for a diver with any compressible gas space. Any change in depth from a position of neutral buoyancy and even small changes in volume, including the act of breathing, result in a force toward an even less neutral depth. Thus, maintenance of neutral buoyancy in scuba is a continuous and active procedure—the diving equivalent of balance, in a positive feedback environment. Fortunately, the diver's mass provides a source of inertia, as does the liquid medium, so small perturbations (such as from breathing) can be compensated for easily by an experienced diver.

[ 20 ] There is a depth range in open circuit diving in which effectively stable neutral buoyancy can be maintained by adjusting the lung volume during the breathing cycle.

[ 5 ] This depth range depends on the volume of ambient pressure gas spaces in and connected to the diver, and the ambient pressure, representing the depth, of the neutrally buoyant diver, with a lung at half tidal volume at the reference depth. The volume changes of external ambient pressure gas spaces are the perturbing influence, and the variation of lung volume achievable by the diver is the restoring influence. This pseudo-stable range of depths is greater at greater depths since a larger depth change is needed to change pressure, and thereby volume, by the same proportion. Similarly, the range is greater for a smaller total volume of non-respiratory ambient pressure gas space, as the variation in buoyancy is also proportional to this quantity, while the lung capacity of the diver is almost constant.

[ 21 ] A feature of diving which is often non-intuitive for beginners, is that gas generally needs to be added to the BC when a diver descends in a controlled manner, and vented (removed or dumped) from the BC when the diver ascends in a controlled manner. This gas (added or vented) maintains the volume of the gas in the BC during depth changes; this bubble needs to remain at approximately constant volume for the diver to remain even approximately neutrally buoyant. When gas is not added to the BC during a descent, the gas in the BC decreases in volume due to the increasing pressure, resulting in a decrease in buoyancy and faster descent with greater depth, until the diver hits the bottom. The same runaway phenomenon, an example of positive feedback , can happen during ascent, resulting in uncontrolled ascent, until a diver prematurely surfaces without a safety (decompression) stop. This effect is greatest near the surface where volume change is greatest in proportion to depth change.

[ 22 ] With practice, divers learn to minimise this problem, starting by minimizing the volume of gas required in their BCs. This is done by using the minimum weighting needed for their equipment, which keeps the volume of the gas in the BC as small as possible at the beginning of a dive.

[ 5 ] Just enough gas will be vented from the BC to compensate for the slow loss of weight as the dive progresses, as a result of gas use, which will vary according to the dive, but is limited by the cylinder contents. (in practice, for a recreational diver, this will be about 2 to 4.5 kilograms (4.4 to 9.9 lb) per cylinder). The need to compensate for excessive ballast weight by a larger volume of gas in the BC bladder considerably reduces the depth range in which breath volume adjustment can compensate for changes in BC gas volume.

[ 20 ] Somewhat complex trained reflex behaviors may be developed by experienced divers, involving breathing control and BC gas management during depth changes, which allow them to remain neutrally buoyant from minute to minute during a dive, without having to think much about it.

[ 5 ] Skilled scuba divers may be identified by their ability to maintain constant depth in horizontal trim, without fin use. Ease and accuracy of buoyancy control is affected by awareness of changes of depth. Precision control is relatively easy while there is a clear visual reference, but more difficult when the only reference is instrumentation. The most difficult circumstances for most scuba divers are during ascent in low visibility in mid-water without an ascent line, a time when depth control is most important for decompression safety.

Orientation in the water [ edit ] Main article: Diver trim Divers with neutral buoyancy and horizontal trim with the fins raised are less likely to touch or disturb the bottom The vertical-horizontal orientation, or trim, of the submerged diver is influenced by the BC and by other buoyancy and weight components and contributed to by the diver's body, clothing and equipment. The scuba diver typically wishes to be trimmed nearly horizontally (prone) while under water, to be able to see and swim efficiently, but more nearly vertical and perhaps partly supine, to be able to breathe without a regulator when on the surface.
Buoyancy and trim can significantly affect hydrodynamic drag on a diver and the effort required to swim. The effect of swimming with a head up angle, of about 15° as is quite common in poorly trimmed divers, can be an increase in drag in the order of 50%, which will adversely affect gas consumption.

[ 25 ] The static and stable orientation of an object floating in water, such as a diver, is determined by its centre of buoyancy and its centre of mass. At stable equilibrium, they will be lined up by gravity and buoyancy with the centre of buoyancy vertically above the centre of mass. The diver's overall buoyancy and centre of buoyancy can routinely be adjusted by altering the volume of the gas in the BC, lungs and diving suit . The diver's mass on a typical dive does not generally change by what seems like much (see above—a typical dive-resort "aluminum 80" tank at 207 bars (3,000 psi) contains about 2.8 kilograms (6.2 lb) of air or nitrox, of which about 2.3 kilograms (5.1 lb) is typically used in a dive, although any air spaces such as in the BC and in diving suits will expand and shrink with depth pressure. Larger changes in buoyancy are possible if the diving weights are jettisoned, or a heavy object is picked up.

Generally, the diver has a little control over the position of the centre of buoyancy in the BC during a dive, the air in an incompletely inflated buoyancy compensator will rise to the shallowest part of the bladder unless prevented by a restriction to the flow. The position of this shallow point will depend on the diver trim and the geometry of the bladder. If the diver changes orientation in the water the gas will flow to the new high part if it does not have to flow down first to get there. As a result of this movement of gas, some buoyancy compensators will tend to hold the diver in the new position until actively changed. This is more likely in back mounted wing type bladders, where the gas can flow laterally to the high side and stay there. The diver can change the centre of gravity by adjustment of the equipment setup, which includes its configuration and position of weights, which ultimately influence where the effective BC lift is positioned relative to the centre of gravity .

[ 26 ] Traditionally, weight belts or weight systems are worn with the weights on, or close to, the waist and are arranged with a quick release mechanism to allow them to be quickly jettisoned to provide extra buoyancy in an emergency. Weight carried on a belt can be distributed to shift the weight forward or backward to change the position of the diver's centre of mass.  Systems that integrate the weights into the BC, can provide improved comfort so long as the BC does not have to be removed from the body of the diver, for example in an underwater emergency such as an entanglement. When a weight integrated BC is removed, a diver wearing no weight-belt, and any type of wetsuit or dry suit, will be very buoyant.

[ 2 ] By inflating the BC at the surface, a conscious diver may be able to easily float face-up, depending on their equipment configuration choices. A fatigued or unconscious diver can be made to float face up at the surface by adjustment of their buoyancy and weights, so the buoyancy raises the top and front of the diver's body, and the weights act at the lower back of the body.  An inflated horse-collar BC always provides this orientation, but an inflated vest or wing may float the diver face-down if the centre of buoyancy is behind the centre of gravity. This floating orientation is generally considered undesirable and can be minimised by relocation of some of the weights further to the rear, and using higher density cylinders (typically steel), which also move the centre of mass towards the back of the diver. The BC type can also be selected with this factor in mind, selecting a style with a centre of buoyancy further forward when filled, as this has the same net effect. Any or all of these options can be utilised to trim the system out to its desired characteristics [ 27 ] and many factors can contribute, such as the number and position of diving cylinders , the type of diving suit , the position, size, and buoyancy distribution of stage cylinders, the size and shape of the diver's body and the wearing of ankle weights, or additional dive equipment. Each of these influence a diver's preferred orientation under the water (horizontal) and at the surface (vertical to supine) to some degree.

Inflation gas supply and consumption [ edit ] The usual inflation system is through a low-pressure hose from the primary breathing gas supply, but a dedicated direct feed pony bottle was common on early buoyancy compensators, and remains an option for some models. Most BCs allow oral inflation both underwater and on the surface. This could theoretically reduce gas consumption, but is generally not considered worth the effort and the slight additional hazard of taking the DV out of the mouth underwater, and possibly having to purge it before breathing again. Oral inflation is, however, an effective alternative inflation method in case of a failure of the pressurised inflation system. Emergency inflation by expendable CO 2 cartridge is provided on some older BCs.

[ 4 ] Gas consumption varies depending on the dive profile and diver skill. The minimum consumption is by a diver who uses the correct amount to neutralise buoyancy and does not waste gas by overfilling, or by excessive weighting. The actual volume of the bladder should not affect gas consumption by a skilled user, as only enough gas to achieve neutral buoyancy is needed. Deep dives will require more gas, and dives in which the diver ascends and descends by large amounts and/or frequently, will require venting for each ascent and inflation for each descent. The amount of gas used during the dive during US Navy trials was generally below 6% of the total gas consumption, [ 11 ] and the use of small dedicated cylinders for inflation was considered adequate, but not necessary. For deep technical diving it is considered prudent to supply the BC from a different regulator or cylinder to dry suit inflation gas, as this reduces the risk of simultaneous failure of both buoyancy control options by an order of magnitude.

[ 3 ] When used with a full-face mask or helmet, or with a rebreather, oral inflation becomes impracticable or impossible, and the reliability of the inflation system becomes safety-critical. Divers wearing dry suits have an alternative gas source available if the quick-connector systems for suit and BC are compatible and the gas supplies independent. The dry suit can also usually be used for additional buoyancy in an emergency. The use of compatible quick connectors for both the dry suit and buoyancy compensator is also a way of reducing the risk of both items becoming unavailable during a dive, providing the diver has the dexterity and strength to disconnect and reconnect the fittings underwater.

[ 15 ] [ 3 ] Hazards and malfunctions [ edit ] See also: List of diving hazards and precautions § Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Although a correctly fitted and competently operated buoyancy compensator is one of the most important items of equipment for diver safety, convenience, and comfort, particularly for scuba divers, it is also a significant hazard if used wrongly or in case of some kinds of malfunction: [ 28 ] There is a risk that an emergency inflation cylinder can be accidentally opened during a dive causing a rapid ascent and barotrauma to the diver.

Carbon dioxide , being poisonous at high partial pressures , is a dangerous gas to have in a BC if the diver may inhale it from the bag underwater.

[ 29 ] The risk of this happening is fairly low, as the diver may be aware that the emergency inflation has been operated, and divers are no longer trained to use the BC gas as an alternative breathing gas supply. Most BCs do not have a CO 2 inflation option, which eliminates this hazard.

Redundant bladders may be inadvertently filled, either by unintended action of the diver, or by malfunction of the filling mechanism, and if the failure is not recognised and dealt with promptly, this may result in a runaway uncontrolled ascent, with associated risk of decompression illness . There is a risk that the diver will not recognise which bladder is full and attempt to dump from the wrong one. The risk can be reduced by ensuring that the filling mechanisms are clearly distinguishable by both feel and position, and not connecting a low pressure supply hose to the reserve until needed, so it is impossible to add gas by accident. Another strategy for avoiding the problem of confusion between bladders in use is to strap the inflator valves together and assume that both are always in use. For this to work reasonably reliably the dump valves must also always be operated together.

Catastrophic bladder failure due to puncture, tearing, or failure of the dump valve or inflation assembly can leave the diver with inadequate buoyancy to make a safe ascent, particularly if diving deep with large gas supply and insufficient ditchable weight. The risk can be mitigated by diving in a dry suit, which can be inflated to add buoyancy in an emergency, by carrying a DSMB, which can be deployed to provide a surface float, and by using distributed ditchable weights – ditching the whole weightbelt or too much weight may result in the opposite problem of excessive buoyancy and the inability to maintain neutral buoyancy at decompression stops.

Inflator valve malfunction can inflate the bladder when the buoyancy is not needed, and if not recognised and dealt with promptly, can result in uncontrolled ascent with associated risk of decompression illness . This can happen more quickly with inflators combined with alternative demand valves as they must use a larger bore hose connector to be capable of supplying sufficient breathing gas at depth to a stressed diver. However, the standard overpressure and dump valves provided are able to vent air faster than the inflator valve can fill the bladder.

[ 11 ] [ 28 ] This can be mitigated by the ability to disconnect the inflator hose under pressure, a skill which is trained by some agencies.

Ineffective or poorly adjusted cambands may let the cylinder slip and it may fall off the harness. Twin cambands provide redundancy against a camband being inadvertently released.

Excessive gas volume, to compensate for over-weighting or carrying heavy equipment, may increase in volume during ascent faster than the diver can vent and result in a runaway ascent, particularly with large volume BCs. This is avoided by using a bladder volume which matches the buoyancy requirements, and avoiding over-weighting.

Some designs of BC combined with poor weight and buoyancy distribution may support an unconscious diver face down at the surface.

[ 11 ] In some cases an excessively large jacket BC can cause an unconscious diver to be supported face down at the surface.

[ 11 ] A loose-fitting BC without a crotch strap may slide up the diver and fail to keep their head out of the water at the surface, particularly in combination with a weight belt weighting system.

A tight cummerbund may restrict the ability of the diver to breathe freely. As the work of breathing increases with depth this may result in ineffective ventilation leading to carbon dioxide buildup, toxicity, a desperate urge to breathe, hyperventilation, and eventually panic. Panic underwater has been associated with many fatalities. A crotch strap eliminates the need for a cummerbund, but a cummerbund is more easily adjusted to fit the diver, and is popular for rental equipment.

Insufficient buoyancy to achieve neutral buoyancy at maximum depth of a dive due to mismatch of BC volume with weighting and wetsuit compression. This can be caused by excessive weighting or by an undersized BC. A larger volume is needed with large or multiple cylinders to compensate for the greater mass of gas which may be used during the dive.

If the diver runs out of gas while negatively buoyant, not only will they lack breathing gas for the ascent, but will also have to swim harder to ascend at a time of great stress, and it may be necessary to ditch ballast weights.

History [ edit ] In 1957, F. G. Jensen and Willard F. Searle Jr began testing methods for manual and automatic buoyancy compensation for the United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU).

[ 30 ] In their early tests, they determined that manual systems were more desirable due to the size of the automatic systems.

[ 30 ] Later that year, the Walter Kidde and Co. sent a prototype buoyancy compensating tank for use with two cylinders to NEDU for evaluation.

[ 31 ] The valves of this aluminium tank system leaked and testing was delayed until 1959 when it was recommended for field testing.

[ 31 ] The ABLJ was developed by Maurice Fenzy in 1961.

[ 10 ] Early versions were inflated by mouth underwater. Later versions had their own air inflation cylinder. Some had carbon dioxide inflation cartridges (a holdover, for surface use, of the Mae West flyer's lifejacket) to facilitate emergency ascent.  This was abandoned when valves that allowed divers to breathe from the BC's inflation bag were introduced. The Fenzy ABLJ provided a proof of concept for buoyancy compensation, however the large-volume ring behind the diver's neck caused the jacket to ride up against the diver's throat, [ citation needed ] despite the crotch strap.

In 1968, dive shop owners Joe Schuch and Jack Schammel developed a more comfortable buoyancy compensator vest that featured a smaller buoyancy ring behind the diver's head, and a midriff section with sufficient volume to lift the diver's head out of the water in the event that one or both of its CO 2 cartridges were activated for emergency ascent.

[ 5 ] In 1969, the original Control Buoyancy Jacket or "CBJ" was manufactured by Waverly Air Products of Chemung, NY and sold in dive shops throughout the east coast of the United States. By 1970, a push-button inflator using air from the diver's SCUBA tank augmented the manual inflation hose.

Since 1970 most BCs have mainly used gas from one of the diver's main cylinders for inflation, and oral inflation valves have been generally retained for contingency use when there is no high pressure gas left, or a malfunction of an inflator hose occurs, both underwater and at the surface.

Scubapro introduced the stabilizer jacket in 1971, with a patented "360° flow through design", which allowed air to flow over the shoulders and under the arms, and around the cylinder mount.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Later products from competitors avoided patent infringement by eliminating some of the air path options, such as separating the bladder under the arms or over the shoulders.

[ 8 ] These modifications also simplified the structure of the bladder. One of these later models was the Seatec Manta, with shoulder buckles and a softpac structure (without a rigid backpack) [ 8 ] In 1972, Watergill developed the At Pac wing , the first wing-style BC, which was provided with a cummerbund and padded shoulder straps, and an integrated weight system.

[ 8 ] In 1985 Seaquest, Inc. introduced the Advanced Design Vest (ADV), a design featuring an under-arm wrap, shoulder buckles and a cummerbund. This design was duplicated by other manufacturers and continues to be produced as of 2013 [ 8 ] Rigid shell back inflation buoyancy compensators were marketed by U.S. Divers (UDS-I system) and Dacor (CV Nautilus) for a short period in the mid 70s. The Nautilus had an automatic inflation system using a regulator to maintain a constant volume, but the changes in buoyancy due to wetsuit compression and gas usage were not well compensated and the system never caught on.

[ 8 ] More recent innovations for jacket BCs include weight pouches to adjust trim, carrying the weights on the BC rather than on a weightbelt, integrated regulators, heavily reinforced 1050 denier ballistic nylon . Innovations for backplate and wing include redundant bladders, stainless steel backplates, lightweight soft nylon backplates, and 85 lb lift bladders. Some of these have improved safety or convenience.

Dive Rite marketed the first commercially manufactured backplates in 1984, [ 13 ] and a wing for diving twin cylinders in 1985.

[ citation needed ] Other tech diving wing manufacturers include Ocean Management Systems , Halcyon , Apeks and Oxycheq . Other BC manufacturers include Sherwood , Zeagle , Scubapro , Mares , AP Diving and Cressisub .

By 2000 Mares S.p.A.

introduced the HUB integrated buoyancy compensator and scuba regulator system, a jacket style BC using a pneumatic control valve on the left side of the harness to operate inflation and deflation valves. The pneumatic inflation and deflation control valve made it unnecessary to lift the dump valve to get outflow as it remotely operated the valve which was positioned to be at a high point in normal operation. Air pressure from the regulator was also used to tension the strap attaching the cylinder to the harness, The regulator was assembled specifically for use on this unit, with non-standard hose lengths and a low pressure manifold to distribute the gas through attached hoses. Two second stage demand valves were supplied, and a submersible pressure gauge. There was also a manual inflation hose normally tucked away under a flap, and weight pockets. As the assembly included a scuba regulator and a buoyancy compensator it was subject to both EN 250 and EN1809 .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] See also [ edit ] Ascending and descending (diving) – Procedures for safe ascent and descent in underwater diving Buoyancy control in scuba diving – Essential safety skill Diver trim – Balance and orientation skills of an underwater diver Emergency ascent – Ascent to the surface by a diver in an emergency Human factors in diving equipment design – Influence of the interaction between the user and the equipment on design List of inflatable manufactured goods – Links to Wikipedia articles on notable classes of inflatable goods Low impact diving – Scuba diving that has minimal environmental effect Scuba skills – Skills required to scuba-dive safely Other buoyancy related equipment [ edit ] There are other types of equipment worn by divers that affect buoyancy: Backplate – Type of back-mount scuba harness Diving cylinder – Container to supply high pressure gas for diving operations Diving weighting system – Ballast carried to counteract buoyancy Dry suit – Watertight clothing that seals the wearer from cold and hazardous liquids Wetsuit – Garment worn to provide thermal protection while wet Notes [ edit ] ^ a b European terminology ^ a b North American terminology References [ edit ] ^ Barsky, Steven M.; Long, Dick; Stinton, Bob (1999).

Dry Suit Diving: A Guide to Diving Dry (3rd ed.). Ventura, Calif.: Hammerhead Press.

ISBN 0-9674305-0-X .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Busuttili, Mike; Holbrook, Mike; Ridley, Gordon; Todd, Mike, eds. (1985). "Using basic equipment".

Sport diving – The British Sub-Aqua Club Diving Manual . London: Stanley Paul & Co Ltd.

ISBN 0-09-163831-3 .

^ a b c d e f Beresford, M.; Southwood, P. (2006).

CMAS-ISA Normoxic Trimix Manual (4th ed.). Pretoria, South Africa: CMAS Instructors South Africa.

^ a b c British Sub-Aqua Club members (1982).

British Sub-Aqua Club Diving Manual (10th ed.). Ellesmere Port, Cheshire: British Sub-Aqua Club.

ISBN 0950678619 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Raymond, Kieth A; West, Brian; Cooper, Jeffrey S. (January 2021).

Diving Buoyancy . Updated 2021 Jun 29. Treasure Island, FL.: StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 29261960 .

Archived from the original on 2024-03-19 . Retrieved 2021-12-29 – via StatPearls [Internet].

CC-by-sa-4.0 ^ a b c d e f "Technology: The Avelo Solution" .

diveavelo.com . Avelo Labs.

Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ a b c d e "New Tank Lets Scuba Divers Ditch Their BCD" .

Scuba Diving . PADI Media. 22 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g h McLean, David (2006).

"History of buoyancy compensators" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-06-26 . Retrieved 2011-12-22 .

^ "Exhibit of the month: Adjustable Buoyancy Life Jacket (ABLJ)" .

www.divingmuseum.co.uk . 14 July 2021.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 22 September 2024 .

^ a b Osgeby, Bill (2006). "Raptures of the Deep: Leisure, Lifestyle and Lure of Sixties Diving".

Historicizing Lifestyle: Mediating Taste, Consumption and Identity from the 1900s to 1970s ((Hardcover) ed.). Ashgate.

ISBN 978-0-7546-4441-5 .

^ a b c d e Middleton, J.R. (1980). Evaluation of Commercially Available Buoyancy Compensators.

www.dtic.mil/ (Report). US Department of Defense Technical Information Center.

^ Jones, Gary (June 2008).

"The Jump Jacket MK4 Instruction Manual" (PDF) . A.P.Valves.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2024 . Retrieved 27 June 2025 .

^ a b c Lunn, Rosemary E. (24 March 2016).

"#TBT – How The 11 Inch Standard Was Born" .

TecRec Blog .

Archived from the original on 2 January 2018 . Retrieved 1 January 2018 .

^ "What Size BC Wing Should I Buy?: Bungied Wings" .

www.baue.org . Bay Area Underwater Explorers. Archived from the original on 2018-01-02 . Retrieved 2008-05-06 .

^ a b Jarrod, Jablonski (2006).

Doing it Right: The Fundamentals of Better Diving . Global Underwater Explorers.

ISBN 0-9713267-0-3 .

^ a b Kakuk, Brian; Heinerth, Jill (2010).

Side Mount Profiles . High Springs, FL: Heinerth Productions.

ISBN 978-0-9798789-5-4 .

^ "Mares SLS Slide And Lock Weight Pocket System" .

SDS Scuba Equipment .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 12 June 2018 .

^ Bardy, Erik; Mollendorf, Joseph; Pendergast, David (October 21, 2005). "Thermal conductivity and compressive strain of foam neoprene insulation under hydrostatic pressure".

Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics .

38 (20): 3832– 3840.

Bibcode : 2005JPhD...38.3832B .

doi : 10.1088/0022-3727/38/20/009 .

S2CID 120757976 .

^ Gallo, Richard L. (June 2017).

"Human Skin Is the Largest Epithelial Surface for Interaction with Microbes" .

The Journal of Investigative Dermatology .

137 (6): 1213– 1214.

doi : 10.1016/j.jid.2016.11.045 .

PMC 5814118 .

PMID 28395897 .

^ a b c d Lippmann, John.

"The Ups and Downs of Buoyancy Control" .

Divers Alert Network medical articles . Divers Alert Network S.E. Asia-Pacific.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .

^ a b "3 Secrets of Buoyancy Control to Dive as An Expert Diver" .

www.dresseldivers.com . 28 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2021 . Retrieved 29 December 2021 .

^ a b c Williams, Todd (13 February 2018).

"A Comprehensive Guide to Improving Buoyancy Control" .

www.deepblu.com .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2021 . Retrieved 29 December 2021 .

^ a b Williams, Guy; Acott, Chris J. (2003). "Exposure suits: a review of thermal protection for the recreational diver".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

33 (1).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ Fead, L. (1979). "Is dropping your weight belt the right response?".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal (Reprinted from: NAUI News, September 1978) .

9 (1).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ Passmore, M.A.; Rickers, G. (2002).

"Drag levels and energy requirements on a SCUBA diver" .

Sports Engineering .

5 (4). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science Ltd: 173– 182.

doi : 10.1046/j.1460-2687.2002.00107.x .

S2CID 55650573 . Archived from the original on 2016-11-24 . Retrieved 2016-12-02 .

^ "Swimming Position Centroid Calculation Methodology illustration" .

huntzinger.com .

Archived from the original on 2011-07-12 . Retrieved 2008-05-06 .

^ "Surface Buoyancy Moment Arm illustration" .

huntzinger.com .

Archived from the original on 2011-07-12 . Retrieved 2008-05-06 .

^ a b Acott, Chris J. (1996). "An evaluation of buoyancy jacket safety in 1,000 diving incidents".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

26 (2).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ Nelson, Lewis.

"Carbon Dioxide Poisoning" .

www.emedmag.com . Archived from the original on 18 July 2007.

^ a b Jensen, F.G.; Searle, Willard F. (1957). Buoyancy Control of Open Circuit Scuba.

United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report (Report). Vol. NEDU-RR-8-57.

^ a b Janney, G.M.; Hanger, G.W. (1960). Walter Kiddie and Co. - Buoyancy Compensating Tank.

United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report (Report). Vol. NEDU-Evaluation-7-60.

^ Hanauer, Eric (1994).

Diving Pioneers: An Oral History of Diving in America . Aqua Quest Publications, Inc.

ISBN 9780922769438 .

^ Krestovnikoff, Miranda; Halls, Monty (2008).

Scuba Diving . Eyewitness Companions. Dorling Kindersley Ltd.

ISBN 9781405334099 .

^ h.u.b. system: Human underwater breathing user manual (cod. 46200032 - Rev. A - 03/02 ed.). Rapallo, Italy: HTM Sport S.p.A.

Archived from the original on 9 January 2022 . Retrieved 9 January 2022 – via pdf.nauticexpo.com.

^ "Integrated System H.U.B.".

Mares Service Manual (Revised 2001 ed.). Mares S.P.a. 2002. pp. H 1-28 to H 1-39.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Buoyancy compensators at Wikimedia Commons v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐67f6f55df8‐w8wkw
Cached time: 20250818084254
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.249 seconds
Real time usage: 1.521 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7338/1000000
Revision size: 87546/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 579223/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5502/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 180235/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.678/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16988709/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1105.002      1 -total
 32.66%  360.847      2 Template:Reflist
 16.86%  186.290      1 Template:UnderwaterDiving
 16.60%  183.410     13 Template:Annotated_link
 16.30%  180.087      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.76%  152.092     12 Template:Cite_book
  9.80%  108.246     35 Template:Navbox
  7.31%   80.722     13 Template:Cite_web
  7.13%   78.746      1 Template:Short_description
  4.99%   55.093      6 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:460801:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818084254 and revision id 1298318414. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Buoyancy_compensator_(diving)&oldid=1298318414#Components " Categories : Underwater diving safety equipment Diver buoyancy control equipment Inflatable manufactured goods Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from December 2021 Articles to be expanded from December 2021 All articles to be expanded Articles to be expanded from February 2024 Articles to be expanded from September 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 19:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Buoyancy compensator (diving) 16 languages Add topic

