Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Styles 2 History 3 False writing systems 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 Notes Toggle the table of contents Asemic writing 11 languages العربية Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wordless open semantic form of writing Asemic writing from Marco Giovenale [ 1 ] Asemic writing is a wordless open semantic form of writing .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The word asemic / eɪ ˈ s iː m ɪ k / means "having no specific semantic content", or "without the smallest unit of meaning".

[ 5 ] With the non-specificity of asemic writing there comes a vacuum of meaning, which is left for the reader to fill in and interpret. All of this is similar to the way one would deduce meaning from an abstract work of art . Where asemic writing distinguishes itself among traditions of abstract art is in the asemic author's use of gestural constraint, and the retention of physical characteristics of writing such as lines and symbols. Asemic writing is a hybrid art form that fuses text and image into a unity, and then sets it free to arbitrary subjective interpretations. It may be compared to free writing or writing for its own sake, instead of writing to produce verbal context. The open nature of asemic works allows for meaning to occur across linguistic understanding; an asemic text may be "read" in a similar fashion regardless of the reader's natural language.

[ 6 ] Multiple meanings for the same symbolism are another possibility for an asemic work, that is, asemic writing can be polysemantic or have zero meaning, infinite meanings, or its meaning can evolve over time.

[ 7 ] Asemic works leave for the reader to decide how to translate and explore an asemic text; in this sense, the reader becomes co-creator of the asemic work.

In 1997, visual poets Tim Gaze [ 8 ] and Jim Leftwich first applied the word asemic to name their quasi-calligraphic writing gestures.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] They then began to distribute them to poetry magazines both online and in print. The authors explored sub-verbal and sub-letteral forms of writing, and textual asemia as a creative option and as an intentional practice. Since the late 1990s, asemic writing has blossomed into a worldwide literary/ art movement . It has especially grown in the early part of the 21st century, though there is an acknowledgement of a long and complex history, which precedes the activities of the current asemic movement, especially with regards to abstract calligraphy, wordless writing, and verbal writing damaged beyond the point of legibility. Jim Leftwich has recently stated that an asemic condition of an asemic work is an impossible goal, and that it is not possible to create an art/literary work entirely without meaning. He has begun to use the term "pansemic" too.

[ 11 ] In 2020, he also explained: "The term 'pansemia' did not replace the term 'asemia' in my thinking (nor did 'pansemic' replace 'asemic'); it merely assisted me in expanding my understanding of the theory and practice of asemic writing".

[ 12 ] Others such as author Travis Jeppesen have found the term asemic to be problematic because "it seems to infer writing with no meaning." [ 13 ] Styles [ edit ] Asemic writing exists in many different forms. It is often created with a pen or brush, but can range from being hand drawn in the sand with a stick and documented by photography, [ 14 ] or to works on canvas, paper, computer images, and animations. The key to asemic writing is that even though it is traditionally "unreadable" it still maintains a strong attractive appeal to the reader's eye. Various asemic writing includes pictograms , or ideograms the meanings of which are sometimes suggested by their shapes, though it may also flow as an abstract expressionist scribble which resembles writing but avoids words. Asemic writing, at times, exists as a conception or shadow of conventional writing practices. Reflecting writing, but not completely existing as a traditional writing system, asemic writing seeks to make the reader hover in a state between reading and looking.

[ 15 ] Asemic writing has no verbal sense, though it may have clear textual sense.

[ 16 ] Through its formatting and structure, asemic writing may suggest a type of document and, thereby, suggest a meaning. The form of art is still writing, often calligraphic in form, and either depends on a reader's sense and knowledge of writing systems for it to make sense, [ 16 ] or can be understood through aesthetic intuition.

[ 2 ] True asemic writing occurs when the creator of the asemic piece cannot read their own asemic writing. Relative asemic writing is a natural writing system that can be read by some people but not by everyone (e.g.

ciphers , wildstyle , etc.). Most asemic writing lies between these two extremes.

[ 17 ] Influences on asemic writing are illegible, invented , or primal scripts ( cave paintings , doodles , children's drawings, etc.). But instead of being thought of as mimicry of preliterate expression, asemic writing may be considered to be a global postliterate style of writing that uses all forms of creativity for inspiration. Other influences on asemic writing are alien languages in science fiction , artistic languages , sigils , undeciphered scripts , and graffiti .

[ 18 ] Uses for asemic writing include mental and creative idea stimulation, non-verbal communication , meditation , hoaxes , curing writer's block , privacy , and general authorial self-expression.

History [ edit ] Newsletter from Mirtha Dermisache [ 19 ] Asemic writing occurs in avant-garde literature and art with strong roots in the earliest forms of writing .

[ 20 ] The history of today's asemic movement stems from two Chinese calligraphers: "crazy" Zhang Xu , a Tang dynasty ( c.

800 CE ) calligrapher who was famous for creating wild illegible calligraphy, and the younger "drunk" monk Huaisu who also excelled at illegible cursive calligraphy.

[ 21 ] Japanese calligraphers subsequently expanded upon Chinese abstract calligraphic expression by Hitsuzendō (the way of Zen through brush), allowing their works to move past formal presentation and "breathe with the vitality of eternal experience".

In the 1920s, Man Ray , who was influenced by Dada , created an early work of wordless writing with his poem Paris, Mai 1924 .

[ 22 ] Later in the 1920s, Henri Michaux , who was influenced by Asian calligraphy, Surrealism , and Automatic writing , began to create wordless works such as Alphabet (1925) and Narration (1927).

[ 23 ] Michaux referred to his calligraphic works as "interior Gestures". The writer and artist Wassily Kandinsky was an early precursor to asemic writing, with his linear piece Indian Story (1931) exemplifying complete textual abstraction.

In the 1950s, there is Brion Gysin (whose calligraphy was influenced by Japanese and Arabic calligraphy ), Isidore Isou (who founded Lettrisme/Letterism ), Cy Twombly (a former US Army Cryptologist ), and Morita Shiryū / Bokujin-kai Group (Ink Human Society) [ 24 ] all of whom expanded writing into illegible, abstract, and wordless visual mark-making; they would help lay the foundation for asemic writers of the future.

Mira Schendel was an artist from Brazil who created many illegible works over the course of her life, for example her piece Archaic Writing (1964).

Mirtha Dermisache is another writer who had created asemic writing since the 1960s.

[ 25 ] Dermisache actively said that even though her graphisms have no meaning, they still retained the full rights of an autonomous work.

Angus MacLise was a musician and poet who also created asemic calligraphic works in the 1960s.

[ 26 ] 1971 was the year when Alain Satié released his work Écrit en prose ou L'Œuvre hypergraphique which contains asemic writing throughout the entire collage graphic novel .

[ 27 ] León Ferrari was another artist/poet who created many asemic works in the 1960s and 1970s, such as Escritura (1976).

[ 28 ] 1974 saw the release of Max Ernst 's work Maximiliana: The Illegal Practice Of Astronomy: hommage à Dorothea Tanning ; this book is a major influence on asemic writers such as Tim Gaze, Michael Jacobson, [ 29 ] and Derek Beaulieu .

[ 30 ] Roland Barthes was also involved with asemic writing; he titled his asemic works Contre-écritures.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Irma Blank was another important contributor to asemic writing.

[ 33 ] A modern example of asemic writing is Luigi Serafini 's Codex Seraphinianus (1981). Serafini described the script of the Codex as asemic in a talk at the Oxford University Society of Bibliophiles held on 8 May 2009.

[ 34 ] In the 1980s, Chinese artist Xu Bing created Tiānshū , or A Book from the Sky which is a work of books and hanging scrolls on which were printed 4000 hand carved meaningless characters.

[ 35 ] The 1980s also saw artist Gu Wenda begin the first of a series of projects centered on the invention of meaningless, false Chinese ideograms, depicted as if they were truly old and traditional. One exhibition of this type was held in Xi'an in 1986, featuring paintings of fake ideograms on a massive scale.

[ 36 ] Also in China, during the 1990s, an abstract calligraphy movement known as "Calligraphy-ism" came into existence, a leading proponent of this movement being Luo Qi. Calligraphy-ism is an aesthetic movement that aims to develop calligraphy into an abstract art. The characters do not need to retain their traditional forms or be legible as words. In Vietnam during the 2000s, a calligraphy group called the Zenei Gang of Five appeared. To this group of young artists, "Wordless" means that which cannot be said, that which is both before and beyond the specificity of naming. To be without words is saying nothing and saying everything.

Satu Kaikkonen, a contemporary asemic artist/writer from Finland , had this to say about asemic writing: As a creator of asemics, I consider myself an explorer and a global storyteller. Asemic art, after all, represents a kind of language that's universal and lodged deep within our unconscious minds. Regardless of language identity, each human's initial attempts to create written language look very similar and, often, quite asemic. In this way, asemic art can serve as a sort of common language—albeit an abstract, post-literate one—that we can use to understand one another regardless of background or nationality. For all its limping-functionality, semantic language all too often divides and asymmetrically empowers while asemic texts can't help but put people of all literacy-levels and identities on equal footing.

[ 37 ] Bruce Sterling comments about asemic writing on his Wired magazine blog Beyond the Beyond : Writing that doesn't have any actual writing in it whatsoever. You would think that this must be some kind of ultimate literary frontier, a frozen Antarctica of writing entirely devoid of literary content, but I wonder.
What is "beyond asemic writing"? Maybe a neural brain-scan of an author *thinking about* asemic writing. Maybe *generative asemic writing*. Maybe "asemic biomimicry". Maybe nanoasemic writing inscribed with atomic force microscopes by Artificial Intelligences.

[ 38 ] False writing systems [ edit ] False writing systems are artificially constructed alphabets or scripts used (sometimes within the context of a false document) to convey a degree of verisimilitude . Examples of this include alien dialogue in comic strips, animated cartoons , and graphic novels (such as Alan Moore 's The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen , and the Valérian and Laureline series).
The script in Luigi Serafini 's 1981 Codex Seraphinianus was confirmed by the author to have no occult meaning. The Voynich manuscript uses an undeciphered writing system which some have speculated to be a hoax.

Gallery [ edit ] Math Minus Math: a text of asemic math by Rosaire Appel Asemic writing from Jean-Christophe Giacottino Title page of Tiānshū ( A Book from the Sky ) by Xu Bing , in pseudo-Chinese characters. The characters "天書" (Tiānshū) do not appear anywhere in the book.

Asemic Post-Graffiti from Nuno de Matos (AKA Matox) [ 39 ] The Wheels of Transformation – asemic writing by Tatiana Roumelioti See also [ edit ] Writing portal Arche-writing – Concept in the philosophy of language Glossolalia – Phenomenon in which people speak words apparently in languages unknown to them Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Pseudo-Kufic – Imitations of Arabic in European Middle Ages and Renaissance art Rorschach test – Projective psychological test created in 1921 Sound poetry – Artistic form bridging literacy and musical composition Notes [ edit ] ^ Marco Giovenale and SJ Fowler.

"Maintenant #65: Marco Giovenale" .

3:AM Magazine .

^ a b Michael Jacobson (7 April 2017).

"Works & Interviews" .

Post-Asemic Press .

^ "Tim Gaze" .

Asemic Magazine .

^ Peter Schwenger.

"Asemic: The Art of Writing" .

University of Minnesota Press .

^ From Greek : asemos (ἄσημος) = without sign, unmarked, obscure, or ignoble.

^ "Satu Kaikkonen interview" .

SCRIPTjr.nl .

^ "Samplekannon interview with Michael Jacobson" .

Samplekannon . 18 January 2013.

^ "Tim Gaze: Writer & Poet" .

Litro . 4 January 2009.

^ "The Nearness Of Asemic Writing by Jim Leftwich" .

Galatea Resurrects . 8 February 2018.

^ "An Interview With Tim Gaze" .

Sam Woolfe . 9 January 2023.

^ "Jim Leftwich: "asemic writing definitions and contexts, 1998–2016" " .

Slowforward . 13 March 2016.

^ "Jim Leftwich responds to New pansemic vispo (June 10, 2020)" .

asemicfront2 . 14 June 2020.

^ "Hans Ulrich Obrist in Conversation About Inventing New Languages" .

Sleek Magazine . Archived from the original on 2 February 2018 . Retrieved 8 December 2016 .

^ Thelma Mort.

"Cape Town artist Andrew van der Merwe carves out beach calligraphy niche" .

BusinessDay .

^ Jaime Morrison.

"Nonism: Asemic Art" .

The Handstand .

^ a b Geof Huth.

"Varieties of Visual Poetry" .

dbqp .

^ "PRATE, Michael Jacobson interview" .

Full of Crow . Fullofcrow.com. 6 August 2009. Archived from the original on 1 August 2014 . Retrieved 7 August 2009 .

^ Quimby Melton.

"Michael Jacobson interview" .

SCRIPTjr.nl .

^ dermisache-9 Newsletters & 1 Reportaje 2000: Newsletter, 2000 from Mirtha Dermisache, Nueve Newsletters & Un Reportaje, Buenos Aires : El borde, Marseille : Mobil-Home, Montpellier : Manglar, 2004. Offset printing, 440 copies.

^ "An Anthology of Asemic Handwriting" . Punctum Books.

^ Nicholls, Sarah.

"Center for Book Arts: Making Sense of Asemic Writing" .

Centerforbookarts.blogspot.com .

^ Ben Jenner.

"Asemic Writing" . Retrieved 18 May 2023 .

^ " 'Leaking the Squalls': The Art and Letters of Henri Michaux" .

natalie ferris . 26 January 2014 . Retrieved 10 November 2014 .

^ Kathryn Simon phd.

"Calligraphy The Bokujin-Kai Group and Shiryu Morita" .

Vermillionmedia.blogspot.com .

^ Patrick Durgin.

"Witness Mirtha Dermisache" .

Jacket2.org .

^ Angus MacLise.

"Artist's Books by Angus MacLise" . Pleasure Editions.

^ Alain Satie, Écrit en Prose, Éditions PSI, 1971.

^ Buzz Poole (16 July 2010).

"The Writing of Art, The Art of Writing" .

Printmag.com .

^ "Volodymyr Bilyk in conversation with Michael Jacobson" .

Medium.com . 31 August 2019.

^ Kenneth Goldsmith, Uncreative Writing, Columbia University Press, 20 September 2011 ^ Nicole Rudick (5 December 2012).

"Vispo" .

Theparisreview.org . The Paris Review.

^ "Drawings on Writing" .

Drawingsonwriting.org .

^ "IRMA BLANK (1934–2023)" . Artforum.

^ Jeff Stanley (2010).

"To Read Images Not Words: Computer-Aided Analysis of the Handwriting in the Codex Seraphinianus (MSc dissertation)" (PDF) .

NC State University Libraries . North Carolina State University at Raleigh: 8– 9.

^ "Free writing" .

stalker . 2 July 2008 . Retrieved 10 November 2014 .

^ Donna Tull.

"Asemic Writing" .

Lacon4.wordpress.com .

^ "SCRIPTjr.nl" .

^ Sterling, Bruce (13 July 2009).

"Web Semantics: Asemic writing" .

Wired.com .

^ "asemic-writing-matox" .

Post Graffiti :: Urban Skins . February 2012.

v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism v t e Hidden messages Main Subliminal message Audio Backmasking list Hidden track list pregap list Phonetic reversal Reverse speech Numeric Chronogram Numerology Theomatics Bible code Cryptology Visual Fnord Hidden text Paranoiac-critical method Pareidolia Psychorama Sacred geometry Steganography Visual cryptography Other Apophenia Asemic writing Clustering illusion Cryptic crossword Anagram Easter egg Observer-expectancy effect Pattern recognition Palindrome Simulacrum Synchronicity Unconscious mind v t e Literacy Learning Adolescent literacy Emergent literacy Family literacy Functional illiteracy Phonics Post-literacy Whole language Locations List of countries by literacy rate Canada India Bihar New Zealand Tokelau Romania United States Institutions International Literacy Association International Literacy Day National Council of Teachers of English No Child Left Behind Act People Marie Clay Ruth Johnson Colvin Paulo Freire James Paul Gee Griffith Jones Frank Laubach Brian Street Other types AI Agricultural Braille Carbon Computational Computer Critical Cultural Data Digital Diaspora Ecological Electracy Emotional Faith Financial Geo-literacy Graph Health Mental health Occupational Safety and Health Information Information literacies Information and media Legal Media Metaliteracy Multiliteracies Musical Numeracy Object Oracy Political Power Physical Psychological Racial Religious Scientific Social Statistical Technological Transliteracy Visual Web Related Aliteracy Asemic writing Children's literature Composition studies Dick and Jane Dyslexia Literacy test Media consumption Orality Oral literature Post-literate society Reading Writing Writing system Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Asemic_writing&oldid=1299894928 " Categories : Writing systems Writing systems introduced in 1997 Nonsense Poetry Language and mysticism Pseudoscripts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Articles containing French-language text Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 01:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Asemic writing 11 languages Add topic

