Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Arrows 2 Objects 3 Products and functors 4 Related categories 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Category of metric spaces 4 languages Español 日本語 Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Category whose objects are metric spaces and whose morphisms are metric maps In category theory , Met is a category that has metric spaces as its objects and metric maps ( continuous functions between metric spaces that do not increase any pairwise distance) as its morphisms . This is a category because the composition of two metric maps is again a metric map. It was first considered by Isbell (1964) .

Arrows [ edit ] The monomorphisms in Met are the injective metric maps. The epimorphisms are the metric maps for which the domain of the map has a dense image in the range . The isomorphisms are the isometries , i.e. metric maps which are injective, surjective , and distance-preserving.

As an example, the inclusion of the rational numbers into the real numbers is a monomorphism and an epimorphism, but it is clearly not an isomorphism; this example shows that Met is not a balanced category .

Objects [ edit ] The empty metric space is the initial object of Met ; any singleton metric space is a terminal object . Because the initial object and the terminal objects differ, there are no zero objects in Met .

The injective objects in Met are called injective metric spaces . Injective metric spaces were introduced and studied first by Aronszajn & Panitchpakdi (1956) , prior to the study of Met as a category; they may also be defined intrinsically in terms of a Helly property of their metric balls, and because of this alternative definition Aronszajn and Panitchpakdi named these spaces hyperconvex spaces . Any metric space has a smallest injective metric space into which it can be isometrically embedded , called its metric envelope or tight span .

Products and functors [ edit ] The product of a finite set of metric spaces in Met is a metric space that has the cartesian product of the spaces as its points; the distance in the product space is given by the supremum of the distances in the base spaces. That is, it is the product metric with the sup norm . However, the product of an infinite set of metric spaces may not exist, because the distances in the base spaces may not have a supremum. That is, Met is not a complete category , but it is finitely complete. There is no coproduct in Met .

The forgetful functor Met → Set assigns to each metric space the underlying set of its points, and assigns to each metric map the underlying set-theoretic function. This functor is faithful , and therefore Met is a concrete category .

Related categories [ edit ] Met is not the only category whose objects are metric spaces; others include the category of uniformly continuous functions , the category of Lipschitz functions and the category of quasi-Lipschitz mappings . The metric maps are both uniformly continuous and Lipschitz, with Lipschitz constant at most one.

See also [ edit ] Category of groups – Category whose objects are groups and whose morphisms are group homomorphisms Category of sets – Category whose objects are sets and whose morphisms are functions Category of topological spaces – Category whose objects are topological spaces and whose morphisms are continuous maps Category of topological spaces with base point – Topological space with a distinguished point Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Category of topological vector spaces References [ edit ] Aronszajn, N.

; Panitchpakdi, P. (1956), "Extensions of uniformly continuous transformations and hyperconvex metric spaces" , Pacific Journal of Mathematics , 6 (3): 405– 439, doi : 10.2140/pjm.1956.6.405 .

Deza, Michel Marie ; Deza, Elena (2009), "Category of metric spaces", Encyclopedia of Distances , Springer-Verlag, p. 38, ISBN 9783642002342 .

Isbell, J. R.

(1964), "Six theorems about injective metric spaces" , Comment. Math. Helv.

, 39 (1): 65– 76, doi : 10.1007/BF02566944 , S2CID 121857986 .

v t e Metric spaces ( Category ) Basic concepts Metric space Cauchy sequence Completeness Equivalent metrics Metrizable space Triangle inequality Main results Baire category theorem Banach fixed-point Kuratowski embedding Lebesgue's number lemma Metrization theorems : Bing Nagata–Smirnov Urysohn's Maps Contraction Metric map Dilation Equicontinuity ( Quasi- ) Isometry Lipschitz continuity Metric derivative Metric outer measure Metric projection Motion Quasisymmetric Stretch factor Uniform continuity Isomorphism Uniform convergence Types of metric spaces Complete Convex Doubling Hyperbolic Injective Length metric space Metric space aimed at its subspace Polish Totally bounded Tree-graded Ultrametric space Uniformly disconnected Urysohn universal Sets Balls Borel Bounded Delone Diameter Distance set Gromov product Gromov–Hausdorff convergence Hausdorff distance Kuratowski convergence Meyer Packing dimension Porous Positively separated sets Tight span Examples Manifolds Euclidean distance Riemannian Functional analysis and Measure theory Chebyshev distance Inner product space Lévy metric Lévy–Prokhorov metric Metrizable topological vector space Normed space Taxicab geometry Wasserstein metric General topology Discrete space Intrinsic metric Laakso space Product metric Related Category of metric spaces Cantor space Generalizations Approach space Cauchy space Coarse structure Cosmic space Diversity Generalised metric Measure space Probabilistic metric space Proximity space Pseudometric space Uniform space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Category_of_metric_spaces&oldid=1290411297 " Categories : Categories in category theory Metric geometry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 17:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Category of metric spaces 4 languages Add topic

