Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Diaspora history Toggle Diaspora history subsection 1.1 19th-century migration 1.2 White Australia policy 1.3 Second wave of migration 1.4 21st century 1.5 Return migration 2 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 2.1 Locations 2.2 Religious diversity 3 Business 4 Arts, culture, terminology 5 Notable Lebanese Australians 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Lebanese Australians 3 languages العربية اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia People of Lebanese descent resident in Australia Ethnic group Lebanese Australians Total population 87,343 (by birth, 2021 ) [ 1 ] 248,430 (by ancestry, 2021 ) [ 1 ] ( 0.9% of the Australian population ) [ 1 ] Regions with significant populations Greater Sydney (55,979 L-born 2016), [ 2 ] Melbourne (16,394 L-born, 2016) [ 3 ] and other urban areas Languages Australian English , Lebanese Arabic , Standard Arabic , French , Armenian , Aramaic-Syriac Religion Catholicism (48.2%), Islam (35.1%), Eastern Orthodox (9.9%), No religion (3.4%) and Protestant/Evangelical (3.4%) [ 4 ] Related ethnic groups Lebanese British , Lebanese Americans , Lebanese Canadians , Lebanese New Zealanders Part of a series of articles on Lebanese people Emblem of Lebanon ( Lebanese cedar ) Lebanese people Lebanese people by religion : Lebanese Muslims Shia Sunni Druze Lebanese Christians Maronite Greek Orthodox Melkite Protestant Communities Native communities outside of Lebanon : Cyprus Syria Lebanese diaspora : Europe Germany France United Kingdom Sweden Greece Spain Overseas United States Canada Australia New Zealand Argentina Brazil Mexico Colombia Uruguay Chile Ecuador Venezuela Haiti Jamaica Paraguay Ivory Coast Senegal Sierra Leone South Africa Middle East Egypt Kuwait United Arab Emirates Qatar Saudi Arabia Iran Culture Lebanese culture Religion Cultural Heritage sites Architecture Art Literature Music Cinema Cuisine Sport History History of ancient Lebanon History of Lebanon Timeline of Lebanese history Phoenicia County of Tripoli Ottoman rule 1860 conflict Mount Lebanon Mutasarrifate 1958 Lebanon crisis Greater Lebanon Lebanese Civil War South Lebanon conflict Taif Agreement Language Arabic Lebanese Arabic Foreign French French language in Lebanon English Politics Lebanese politics President Prime Minister List of political parties in Lebanon National Pact Lebanese nationalism Phoenicianism Coat of arms of Lebanon Flag of Lebanon Lebanon portal v t e Lebanese Australians ( Arabic : اللبنانيون الأستراليون ) refers to citizens or permanent residents of Australia of Lebanese ancestry. The population is diverse, having a large Christian religious base, being mostly Maronite Catholics , while also having a large Muslim group of Sunni and Shia branches.

Lebanon , in both its modern-day form as the Lebanese state (declared 1920; independent 1943), and its historical form as the region of the Lebanon, has been a source of migrants to Australia since the 1870s. 248,430 Australians (about 1% of the total population) claimed some Lebanese ancestry in 2021. The 2021 census reported 87,343 Lebanese-born people in Australia, with nearly 66,000 of those resident in Greater Sydney .

Diaspora history [ edit ] 19th-century migration [ edit ] As part of a large-scale emigration in the 1870s,  Lebanese Christians fleeing Ottoman Empire’s declining economy, migrated to the United Kingdom , Brazil , Argentina and other Latin American nations, particularly Venezuela , Colombia , and Ecuador . Many also went to the United States , Canada and Australia , primarily  the eastern states, and New South Wales in particular.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In the 1890s, the numbers of Lebanese immigrants to Australia rose, part of the mass emigration from the area of Lebanon that became the modern Lebanese state and  the Anti-Lebanon Mountains region that became Syria .

[ 7 ] White Australia policy [ edit ] Under the White Australia policy of the late nineteenth century (and with Lebanon being located in the Middle East, geographically known as South West Asia ) Lebanese migrants were classified as Asians and came within the scope of the so-called White Australia policy, which intentionally restricted non-white immigration to Australia. Lebanese migrants, like others deemed non-white by various colony laws from 1875–1888, were excluded from citizenship, the right to vote and employment, and were treated as enemy aliens during World War I and World War II .

[ 5 ] In 1897 Lebanese store keepers and businesses were accused of fraud by state border Customs officers during Queensland customs prosecution cases.

[ 7 ] Prior to 1918, Lebanese immigrants to Australia were not habitually distinguished from Turks because the area of modern Lebanon was a province of the Turkish Ottoman Empire . Administration then passed to the French Mandate for several decades, which ruled it together with what would become Syria , its neighbour. Hence, for that period, the Lebanese were not distinguished from Syrians .

[ 8 ] People with Lebanese ancestry as a percentage of the population in Sydney divided geographically by postal area, as of the 2011 census One dot denotes 100 Lebanese-born Melbourne residents From 1920, people from Lebanon (and Syria) were granted access to Australian citizenship as the Nationality Act 1920 removed the racial disqualification from the naturalisation laws.

[ 7 ] By 1947, there were 2,000 Lebanese-born in Australia, [ 9 ] almost all Christian.

After the 1948 Arab–Israeli War , the Southern Lebanon border—which had been part of Southern Lebanon with connections  and ties to Palestine before the imposition of the 1920s border by the French—became a conflict zone affected by poverty, leading to the emigration of South Lebanese inhabitants to different places, including Australia.

[ 10 ] Second wave of migration [ edit ] The Lebanese-born population numbered 5,000 in 1971. Following the outbreak of the Lebanese Civil War in 1975–1990, this wave of migrants were often poor and for the first time, over half of them were Muslim.

[ 9 ] This influx of new migrants changed the character of the established Lebanese community in Australia significantly, especially in Sydney where 70% of the Lebanese-born population were concentrated.

[ 9 ] Christian Maronite and Orthodox Lebanese Christians that settled in Australia over the last two centuries were able to gain some influence within Australian politics. In late 1975, unrest in Lebanon caused a group of influential Maronite Australians to approach Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser and his immigration minister, Michael MacKellar regarding the resettling of Lebanese civilians with their Australian relatives. Immediate access to Australia could not be granted under normal immigration categories, thus the Lebanese people were categorised as refugees. This was not in the traditional sense as the Lebanese people were not fleeing from persecution but escaping from internal conflict between Muslim and Christian groups. This action was known as the "Lebanon Concession".

[ 11 ] Between 1975–1990, more than 30,000 civil war refugees arrived in Australia.

[ 9 ] Most immigrants were Muslim Lebanese from deprived rural areas who learned of Australia's Lebanon Concession and decided to seek a better life. They were Muslims from northern Lebanon as Christian and Muslim Lebanese were unwilling to leave the capital city, Beirut . Immigrants of the Lebanese Concession primarily settled in south-west Sydney; Sunnis in Lakemba and Shias in Arncliffe .

[ 11 ] 21st century [ edit ] Following the trials for a series of gang rape attacks in Sydney in 2000 by a group of Lebanese Muslims, the Lebanese Muslim Australian community came under significant scrutiny by the tabloid media and " Shock jocks ", in addition to a more general anti-Muslim backlash after the 11 September attacks in 2001.

[ 12 ] Community concern and divisiveness continued in the wake of the 2005 Cronulla riots in Sydney, in which an altercation between some youths of Middle Eastern appearance and local surf livesavers blew up into a full-blown racially motivated riot the following weekend, helped along by tabloid journalism and shock jocks .

[ 13 ] In November 2016, Immigration Minister , Peter Dutton said that it was a mistake of a previous Liberal administration to have brought out Lebanese Muslim immigrants.

[ 14 ] Foreign Minister , Julie Bishop said Dutton was making a specific point about those charged with terrorism offences, [ 15 ] but Dutton was criticised for his comments in the media by politicians, terrorism experts and others.

[ 16 ] Return migration [ edit ] Lebanese Australians have a moderate rate of return migration to Lebanon . In December 2001, the Department of Foreign Affairs estimated that there were 30,000 Australian citizen residents in Lebanon.

[ 17 ] During the 2006 Israel-Lebanon conflict , the Australian Government organised mass evacuations of Australian residents in Lebanon.

[ 18 ] Demographics [ edit ] Worldwide, most people of Lebanese ancestry today live outside Lebanon, and are known as the Lebanese diaspora which numbers from 8 [ 19 ] to possibly 14 million.

[ 20 ] Locations [ edit ] In New South Wales , most Lebanese Australians were reported to reside in the Western Sydney council areas of City of Bankstown , with City of Holroyd , City of Canterbury and City of Parramatta (all pre-2016 council areas). The area included suburbs such as Lakemba , Greenacre and Punchbowl .

[ 21 ] In Victoria , like most Middle-Easterners, Lebanese Australians are mostly found in the North and West of Melbourne, in areas such as the City of Hume , City of Merri-bek , and the City of Whittlesea , particularly in suburbs such as Broadmeadows , Campbellfield , Altona North , and Glenroy .

[ 22 ] Religious diversity [ edit ] Religion of Lebanon-born Australians [ 4 ] Catholicism (48.2%) Eastern Orthodox (9.90%) Protestantism (3.40%) Islam (35.1%) Druze (3.40%) According to the 2021 census , 48.2% of Australians, who were born in Lebanon were Catholics , 9.9% were Eastern Orthodox , 3.4% were Protestant , 35.1% were Muslims , and 3.4% followed secular or no religious beliefs.

[ 4 ] Business [ edit ] The peak business body is the Australian Lebanese Chamber of Commerce, with associations in both Sydney and Melbourne.

Arts, culture, terminology [ edit ] In 1996, Lebanon...Imprisoned Splendour the first Australian documentary about the impact of the Lebanese Civil War on Australian Lebanese was released by journalist Daizy Gedeon who was deputy foreign editor at The Australian newspaper. The film featured Omar Sharif and won global acclaim. In 2014, a series of documentaries on Lebanese Australians was presented by SBS under the title Once Upon a Time in Punchbowl .

[ 23 ] The Lebanese Film Festival was launched in Sydney in 2012. Every year since then, it has showcases films which are either filmed or based in Lebanon, or made by Lebanese film makers throughout the world. The organisation is based in Bankstown , but the film festival travels to cinemas in Newcastle and Bowral in NSW, as well as Adelaide , Canberra , Melbourne and Brisbane from August to November each year.

[ 24 ] In 2017–8, two seasons of the sitcom Here Come the Habibs , featuring a Lebanese Australian family who win the lottery and move to the posh eastern suburbs of Sydney, aired on Channel 9 .

[ 25 ] Michael Mohammed Ahmad 's 2018 comic novel The Lebs was shortlisted for the 2019 Miles Franklin Award . He had previously written an essay entitled "Lebs and Punchbowl Prison", the prison referring to his alma mater , Punchbowl Boys' High School. At his school, the term "Lebs" did not refer just to boys from Lebanese family, but to anyone whose family came from the Middle East, and even included boys with African and Indonesian backgrounds.

[ 26 ] The term "Leb" or "Lebo" has been used as a derogatory term, mostly in Sydney, and gained more widespread use after the 2005 Cronulla Riots. It is listed in the Collins English Dictionary as "Australian (offensive, slang), a person from Lebanon or of Lebanese origin".

[ 27 ] Ahmad wishes to help reclaim the word through his writing.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Notable Lebanese Australians [ edit ] See also: List of Lebanese Australians See also [ edit ] Australia portal Lebanon portal List of Lebanese people in Australia Arab Australian References [ edit ] ^ a b c Community profile 2021 abs.gov.au ^ "Greater Sydney: Birthplace" .

id.community . AustraliaCommunity profile. Archived from the original on 2 November 2023 . Retrieved 15 July 2019 .

^ "Greater Melbourne: Birthplace" .

id.community . AustraliaCommunity profile. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017 . Retrieved 15 July 2019 .

^ a b c "2021 People in Australia who were born in Lebanon, Census Country of birth QuickStats | Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

^ a b "El Australie - a history of Lebanese migration to Australia" .

Hindsight - ABC Radio National . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 3 February 2008.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2019.

^ "History of immigration from Lebanon" .

Origins:Immigrant Communities in Victoria . Museum of Victoria. Archived from the original on 1 August 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ a b c Monsour, Anne (2005).

"Chapter 10. Religion Matters: The experience of Syrian/Lebanese Christians in Australia from the 1880s to 1947" .

Humanities Research Journal .

XII (1, 2005: Bigotry and Religion in Australia, 1865– 1950). Australian National University E Press.

ISSN 1834-8491 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ This was a common enough practice in Australian immigration information – for example, the UK and Ireland were not statistically separated until as late as 1996).

[ citation needed ] ^ a b c d Humphrey, Michael (2004).

"Lebanese identities: between cities, nations and trans-nations" .

Arab Studies Quarterly (Winter). Association of Arab-American University Graduates: 8 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Khayyat, Munira (2022).

A Landscape of War. Ecologies of Resistance and Survival in South Lebanon . University of California Press. p. 98.

^ a b "Concession that led to debacle" . 22 May 2015.

^ "... For Being Lebanese" .

Four Corners (TV program) . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 16 September 2002 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ jackson, Liz (13 March 2006).

"Riot and Revenge (Program transcript)" .

Four Corners (TV program) . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 2 January 2010 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Davidson, Helen (18 November 2016).

"Australia is paying for Malcolm Fraser's immigration mistakes, says Peter Dutton" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 27 November 2016 .

^ "Julie Bishop defends Peter Dutton's comments on Lebanese immigration" .

Nine.com.au . 23 November 2016 . Retrieved 27 November 2016 .

^ Hunter, Fergus; McIlroy, Tom (24 November 2014).

"Peter Dutton blames Bill Shorten for whipping up hysteria over Lebanese-Muslim comments" .

Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 15 July 2019 .

^ "Estimates of Australian Citizens Living Overseas as at December 2001" (PDF) . Southern Cross Group ( DFAT data). 14 February 2001. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ "Govt to foot Lebanon evacuation bill" .

ABC News . 22 July 2006 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Bassil promises to ease citizenship for expatriates ^ "Country Profile: Lebanon" .

FCO . 3 April 2007. Archived from the original on 6 February 2008.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Top Sydney Council Areas: Residents of Lebanese Ancestry Heat Map" .

Microburbs . Retrieved 15 July 2019 .

^ "Census 2016, Ancestry by Birthplace of Parents (SA2+)" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Archived from the original on 10 March 2021 . Retrieved 5 August 2020 .

^ Once Upon a Time in Punchbowl at SBS On Demand, 3 July 2014. Retrieved 7 July 2014 ^ "About us" .

Lebanese Film Festival . Retrieved 15 July 2019 .

^ Cronin, Seanna (8 June 2017).

"Here Come the Habibs star to keep pushing boundaries" . Sunshine Coast Daily . Retrieved 15 July 2019 .

^ Ley, James (25 May 2018).

"I'm with stupid: The Lebs by Michael Mohammed Ahmad" . Sydney Review of Books . Retrieved 15 July 2019 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Leb" .

Collins Dictionary . Retrieved 15 July 2019 .

^ Dumas, Daisy (20 February 2018).

"What it means to be a 'Leb' in Australian culture" .

SBS . Retrieved 15 July 2019 .

^ Nicholls, Claire (12 July 2019).

"Miles Franklin shortlist – The Lebs by Michael Mohammed Ahmad" (Audio + text) .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . RN: The Bookshow . Retrieved 15 July 2019 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Lebanese Settlement" .

Migration Heritage Centre, NSW .

Australian Lebanese Historical Society Lebanese-Australian Embassy The Lebanese Australian - A community-based hub created with the aim of bringing together Lebanese people living in Australia United Australian Lebanese movement World Lebanese Cultural Union (WLCU) Geographic-Regional Council (GRC) for Australia and New Zealand Anne Monsour and Paul Convy - Australian Lebanese Historical Society (2008).

"Lebanese" .

Dictionary of Sydney . Retrieved 4 October 2015 .

(History of Lebanese in Sydney) v t e Lebanese people and diaspora Countries Africa Egypt Syro-Lebanese Ghana Democratic Republic of the Congo Guinea Ivory Coast Nigeria Senegal Sierra Leone South Africa Americas Argentina Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Ecuador Guadeloupe island Haiti Jamaica Mexico Paraguay United States Detroit Uruguay Venezuela Asia Cyprus Iran Israel Jews Prisoners Kuwait Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria Turkey United Arab Emirates Europe Austria Belgium Bulgaria Denmark France Germany Greece Italy Netherlands Romania Serbia Spain Sweden United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Personalities Africa Egypt Ghana Liberia Nigeria Sierra Leone South Africa Americas Argentina Brazil Canada Caribbean Curaçao Dominican Republic Haiti Jamaica Puerto Rico Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Guatemala Mexico United States Uruguay Venezuela Western-Asia Cyprus Syria Saudi Arabia Turkey United Arab Emirates Europe Belgium Bulgaria Denmark France Germany Italy Monaco Netherlands Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand v t e North African and Middle Eastern Australians Arab Algerian Egyptian Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Palestinian Saudi Arabian Syrian Emirati Jewish Israeli Peoples of the Sudan South Sudanese Sudanese Other Coptic Iranian Kurdish Turkish Assyrian Mandaean Topics Antisemitism Anti-Arabism Anti–Middle Eastern sentiment Islamophobia Organized crime North African diaspora West Asian diaspora v t e Arab diaspora Africa Ghana Ivory Coast Kenya Senegal Sierra Leone Asia Afghanistan Afghan Arabs India Indonesia Iran Khorasan Khuzestan Japan Malaysia Pakistan Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka Turkey Caucasus Europe North Denmark Finland Sweden United Kingdom Southeast Bulgaria Dobruja Romania Serbia South Greece Italy Malta Spain West Austria Belgium France Beur Paris Germany Berlin Netherlands Switzerland North America Canada Cuba El Salvador Haiti Honduras Mexico United States Detroit Oceania Australia New Zealand South America Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador El Salvador Paraguay Uruguay Venezuela v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lebanese_Australians&oldid=1305379949 " Categories : Australian people of Lebanese descent Lebanese diaspora in Australia Lebanese diaspora by country Asian diaspora in Australia Muslim communities of Australia Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2008 CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 Use Australian English from October 2011 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 18:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lebanese Australians 3 languages Add topic

