Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Historical background 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Social visualization Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Way of perceiving information for social purposes This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Social visualization" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Social visualization is an interdisciplinary intersection of information visualization to study creating intuitive depictions of massive and complex social interactions for social purposes.

[ 1 ] By visualizing those interactions made not only in the cyberspace including social media but also the physical world, captured through sensors, it can reveal overall patterns of social memes or it highlights one individual's implicit behaviors in diverse social spaces. In particular, it is the study “primarily concerned with the visualization of text, audio, and visual interaction data to uncover social connections and interaction patterns in online and physical spaces.

[ 2 ] ACM Computing Classification System has classified this field of study under the category of Human-Centered Computing (1st) and Information Visualization (2nd) as a third level concept in a general sense.

[ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] Social visualization is a subset of information visualization . According to Karrie G. Karahalios and Fernanda Viégas , one of the most distinctive aspect of social visualization is that "social visualization focuses on people, the groups they form, their patterns, their interactions, and how they related to their communities." rather than other digital information. In this perspective, there are many challenges and questions drives this field of study to the interdisciplinary research context, ranging from the analytical (what are the most relevant and appropriate data and is it right to use data in terms of privacy?) to the critical (what do the patterns imply and does it allow us to demonstrate it publicly? ) to the creative (how can we both accurately represent the implication the data and also express its intrinsic meaning through fundamental visual design principles) perspectives.

[ 1 ] One of the common misperception of social visualization is that the relationship between Network Analysis or Social Network Visualization and Social Visualization; they are loosely related. Social network visualization is a traditional form of social visualization.

[ 4 ] It is more appropriate to consider in the context of visualization in social sciences. i.e.

John Snow's maps of the 1854 cholera outbreak in Soho and Charles Booth's maps of poverty in London 1889 Due to the interdisciplinary nature, research methodology in this field is truly diversified from researchers to researchers; they adopt related technology used in computer science from data mining, machine learning, natural language processing to statistical models widely recognized in social science/communication, so that they could capture, process, analyze and represent its essence.

[ citation needed ] Historical background [ edit ] There has been a long history of visualization in a social science perspective, which enables us to witness the power of social visualizations and their implications. However, changes in visualization methodology and tools in the last few decades are fundamentally affecting the way in which the social sciences and computational social science are researched, and in which studies are communicated (Olson 1997 [ 5 ] ). These changes have been largely initiated by the rapid development of computing power and visualization technology since the 1980s, resulting in the availability of affordable computing and visualization. Many researchers had contributed to define and understand the potential power of this field with emerging media and information. In this regard, McCormick et al. indicates a visualization as offering "a method for seeing the unseen. (McCormick et al. 1989) [ 6 ] " After that, many computer scientists dedicated their academic careers for nurturing the field of social visualization with strong emphasis on applying computational methods.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Human–computer interaction Infographic Information visualization Social network analysis Social science Theory of Visualization Visual analytics Visualization (computer graphics) References [ edit ] ^ a b "MAS 961: Social Visualization" . Smg.media.mit.edu. 1993-10-29 . Retrieved 2013-10-24 .

^ "Social Visualization: Exploring Text, Audio, and Video Interactions" (PDF) . 2006-04-22. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-01-14.

^ "The 2012 ACM Computing Classification System — Association for Computing Machinery" . Acm.org . Retrieved 2013-10-24 .

^ Karahalios, Karrie G.; Viégas, Fernanda B. (2006-04-21). "Social visualization".

CHI '06 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems - CHI EA '06 . Dl.acm.org. p. 1667.

doi : 10.1145/1125451.1125758 .

ISBN 1595932984 .

S2CID 33989930 .

^ Olsen, Kai A.; Korfhage, Robert R.; Sochats, Kenneth M.; Spring, Michael B.; Williams, James G. (1993). "Visualization of a document collection: The vibe system".

Information Processing .

29 : 69– 81.

doi : 10.1016/0306-4573(93)90024-8 .

^ Defanti, T.A.; Brown, M.D.; McCormick, B.H. (1989). "Visualization: Expanding scientific and engineering research opportunities".

Computer .

22 (8): 12– 16.

doi : 10.1109/2.35195 .

S2CID 17357523 .

Further reading [ edit ] D. Fisher, I. Popov, S. Drucker, and  m. c. schraefel, “Trust me, i’m partially right: incremental visualization lets analysts explore large datasets faster,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 1673–1682.

“Pulse of the Nation: U.S. Mood Throughout the Day inferred from Twitter.” [Online]. Available: http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/amislove/twittermood/ X. Le, I. Lancashire, G. Hirst, and R. Jokel, “Longitudinal Detection of Dementia through Lexical and Syntactic Changes in Writing: A Case Study of Three British Novelists,” Lit Linguist Computing, May 2011.

J.-B. Michel, Y. K. Shen, A. P. Aiden, A. Veres, M. K. Gray, The Google Books Team, J. P. Pickett, D. Hoiberg, D. Clancy, P. Norvig, J. Orwant, S. Pinker, M. A. Nowak, and E. L. Aiden, 2010 “Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books,” Science, vol. 331, no. 6014, pp. 176–182.

S. Vieweg, A. L. Hughes, K. Starbird, and L. Palen, “Microblogging during two natural hazards events: what twitter may contribute to situational awareness,” in Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems, 2010, pp. 1079–1088.

C. Ratti, S. Sobolevsky, F. Calabrese, C. Andris, J. Reades, M. Martino, R. Claxton, and S. H. Strogatz, “Redrawing the Map of Great Britain from a Network of Human Interactions,” PLoS ONE, vol. 5, no. 12, p. e14248, Dec. 2010.

J. Heer, M. Bostock, and V. Ogievetsky, “A tour through the visualization zoo,” Commun. ACM, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 59–67, Jun. 2010.

J. Heer and M. Bostock, “Crowdsourcing graphical perception: using mechanical turk to assess visualization design,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 203–212.

D. Boyd, S. Golder, and G. Lotan, “Tweet, Tweet, Retweet: Conversational Aspects of Retweeting on Twitter,” in 2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), 2010, pp. 1–10.

T. Sakaki, M. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuo, “Earthquake shakes Twitter users: real-time event detection by social sensors,” in Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World Wide Web, New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 851–860.

K. Lerman and R. Ghosh, “Information Contagion: an Empirical Study of the Spread of News on Digg and Twitter Social Networks,” arXiv:1003.2664, Mar. 2010.

G. Leshed, D. Perez, J. T. Hancock, D. Cosley, J. Birnholtz, S. Lee, P. L. McLeod, and G. Gay, “Visualizing real-time language-based feedback on teamwork behavior in computer-mediated groups,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 537–546.

B. J. Jansen, M. Zhang, K. Sobel, and A. Chowdury, “Twitter power: Tweets as electronic word of mouth,” Journal of the American society for information science and technology, vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 2169–2188, 2009.

C. Honey and S. C. Herring, “Beyond microblogging: Conversation and collaboration via Twitter,” in System Sciences, 2009. HICSS’09. 42nd Hawaii International Conference on, 2009, pp. 1–10.

T. Bergstrom and K. Karahalios, “Social mirrors as social signals: transforming audio into graphics,” Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 22–32, 2009.

A. Java, X. Song, T. Finin, and B. Tseng, “Why we twitter: understanding microblogging usage and communities,” in Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 workshop on Web mining and social network analysis, 2007, pp. 56–65.

F. B. Viégas, S. Golder, and J. Donath, “Visualizing email content: portraying relationships from conversational histories,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 979–988.

F. B. Viégas, M. Wattenberg, and K. Dave, “Studying cooperation and conflict between authors with history flow visualizations,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2004, pp. 575–582.

G. Levin and Z. Lieberman, “In-situ speech visualization in real-time interactive installation and performance,” in Proceedings of the 3rd international symposium on Non-photorealistic animation and rendering, New York, NY, USA, 2004, pp. 7–14.

J. Donath and D. Boyd, “Public Displays of Connection,” BT Technology Journal, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 71–82, Oct. 2004.

T. Erickson and W. A. Kellogg , “Social translucence: an approach to designing systems that support social processes,” ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 59–83, Mar. 2000.

v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_visualization&oldid=1270996164 " Category : Data and information visualization Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 This page was last edited on 22 January 2025, at 05:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social visualization Add languages Add topic

