Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Techniques 2 Uses Toggle Uses subsection 2.1 In Sumer 2.2 In Judaism 2.3 In the Golden Dawn 2.4 In Wicca 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 Works cited 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Magic circle 17 languages Čeština Deutsch Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский සිංහල Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Protective device in ritual magic For other uses, see Magic circle (disambiguation) .

The Magic Circle by John William Waterhouse (1886) A Solomonic circle with a triangle of conjuration in the East A magic circle is a circle of space marked out by practitioners of some branches of ritual magic , which they generally believe will contain energy and form a sacred space, or will provide them a form of magical protection, or both. It may be marked physically, drawn in a material like salt, flour, or chalk, or merely visualised.

Techniques [ edit ] The figure of a magic circle for the first hour of the Lord's day in spring Traditionally, circles are believed by ritual magicians to form a protective barrier between themselves and what they summon.

[ 1 ] One text known as the Heptameron says of the circle, 'But because the greatest power is attributed to the circles; (for they are certain fortresses to defend the operators safe from the evil spirits); in the first place we will treat concerning the composition of a circle.' [ 2 ] Moreover, as magician and historian Jake Stratton-Kent writes, 'In short a circle is not an obsolete symbol of a superstitious fear of spirits, but an intentionally created ritual space for various purposes. It is not always required for all kinds of ritual work, but neither is it of no value, quite the contrary. Making sacred space is among the most primal of rituals, such intentional actions are as worthy of the term psychoactive as any substance.' [ 3 ] Circles may or may not be physically marked out on the ground, and a variety of elaborate patterns for circle markings can be found in grimoires and magical manuals, often involving angelic and divine names . Such markings, or a simple unadorned circle, may be drawn in chalk or salt , or indicated by other means such as with a cord .

[ 1 ] Some traditions include tracing or circumambulation .

Uses [ edit ] In Sumer [ edit ] The Sumerians called the practice of using ritual circles zisurrû , meaning "magic circle drawn with flour ", [ 4 ] and inscribed ZÌ-SUR-RA -a . This was an ancient Mesopotamian method of delineating, purifying and protecting from evil by the enclosing of a ritual space in a circle of flour. It involved ritual drawings with a variety of powdered cereals to counter different threats and is accompanied by the gloss : SAG.BA SAG.BA , Akkadian : māmīt māmīt , the curse from a broken oath, in The Exorcists Manual , where it refers to a specific ritual on two tablets the first of which is extant.

[ 5 ] In Judaism [ edit ] Examples of Jewish customs showing the use of the magic circle can be found in the birth protection rituals of Alsace and the surrounding area. As early as 1560, a text by the rabbi Naphtali Hirsch ben Elieser Treves notes a custom in which a circle is drawn around the birthing woman to protect her from Lilith and demons. This was done using a Krasmesser (circle knife) which would be wielded by the midwife or the father of the child.

[ 6 ] Paul Christian Kirchner ’s description of Jewish birthing customs from 1734 includes an illustration showing a knife or a sword near the bed, and likewise Johann Christian Georg Bodenschatz describes a sword placed near the pregnant woman in the eighteenth century, indicating the likelihood that this custom continued through the centuries. Oral accounts from 20th century Baden-Württemberg in a publication by the Jewish Museum of Switzerland also reference circling movements with a knife in order to protect a woman in childbirth.

[ 6 ] In the Golden Dawn [ edit ] The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , which has had one of the largest influences on contemporary Western esotericism , introduced the practices of the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram and the Opening by Watchtower . The Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram (LBRP) is typically used as a daily practice and is also performed before any magical working, while the Watchtower ritual is much more involved.

[ how?

] Both rituals are now used by a wide array of practitioners, including ceremonial magicians , Hermetic Qabalists , Neopagans , and Thelemites .

[ citation needed ] In Wicca [ edit ] In Wicca , as also in traditional European grimoires, a magic circle is typically nine feet in diameter, though the size can vary depending on the purpose of the circle, and the preference of the caster.

[ 7 ] Some varieties of Wicca use the common ceremonial colour attributions for 'quarter candles': yellow for air in the east, red for fire in the south, blue for water in the west and green for earth in the north (though these attributions differ according to geographical location and individual philosophy).

[ citation needed ] The common technique for raising energy within the circle is by means of a cone of power .

[ 1 ] The barrier is believed to be fragile, so that leaving or passing through the circle would weaken or dispel it.

[ 8 ] This is referred to as "breaking the circle".

[ 9 ] It is generally advised that practitioners do not leave the circle unless absolutely necessary.

In order to leave a circle and keep it intact, Wiccans believe a door must be cut in the energy of the circle, normally on the east side. Whatever was used to cast the circle is used to cut the doorway, such as a sword, staff or knife ( athame ), a doorway is cut in the circle, at which point anything may pass through without harming the circle.

[ 10 ] This opening must be closed afterwards by reconnecting the lines of the circle.

The circle is usually closed by the practitioner after they have finished by drawing in the energy with the athame or whatever was used to make the circle including their hand (usually in a widdershins : that is, counter-clockwise fashion). This is called 'closing the circle' or 'releasing the circle'.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Mandala – Spiritual and ritual symbol in Hinduism, Jainism and Buddhism Sigil – Magical symbol Yantra – Mystical diagram in Tantric traditions References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c Cunningham (2001) , pp. 55–56 ^ Agrippa (2009) , p. 191 ^ Stratton-Kent (2010) , p. 46 ^ zisurrû CAD Z, p. 137–138.

^ Geller (2000) , p. 233.

^ a b Lubrich (2022) , p. 31 ^ Buckland (2002) , pp. 43, 64 ^ Starhawk (1989) , p. 83 ^ Buckland (2002) , p. 224 ^ a b Cunningham (2001) , pp. 119–120 Works cited [ edit ] Agrippa, Heinrich Cornelius (2009) [1655]. Donald Tyson (ed.).

The Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy . Llewellyn.

ISBN 978-0-7387-1876-7 Buckland, Raymond (2002).

Buckland's Complete Book of Witchcraft (2nd ed.). Llewellyn Publications.

ISBN 0-87542-050-8 .

Cunningham, Scott (2001).

Wicca: A Guide for the Solitary Practitioner . Llewellyn Publications.

ISBN 0-87542-118-0 .

Geller, M. J. (2000). "Incipits and rubrics". In A. R. George; Irving Finkel (eds.).

Wisdom, Gods and Literature: Studies in Assyriology in Honour of W.G. Lambert . Eisenbrauns.

Lubrich, Naomi, ed. (2022).

Birth Culture. Jewish Testimonies from Rural Switzerland and Environs . Basel: Schwabe Verlagsgruppe AG Schwabe Verlag.

ISBN 978-3796546075 .

Starhawk (1989).

The Spiral Dance: A Rebirth of the Ancient Religion of the Great Goddess . Harper & Row.

ISBN 978-0062508140 .

Stratton-Kent, Jake (2010).

Geosophia: The Argo of Magic . Vol. 1. Scarlet Imprint.

ISBN 978-0-9567203-0-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Jung, Carl Gustav (1968).

Psychology and Alchemy . Collected Works. Vol. 12. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-01831-6 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Magic circles (occult) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Places of worship Baháʼí Faith Baháʼí House of Worship Buddhism Buddhist Monastery or Vihāra Chaitya Pagoda Shaolin Monastery Stupa Wat Christianity Church Hinduism Hindu temple or Mandir Balinese temple or Pura Jainism Jain temple or Derasar or Basadi Judaism Synagogue or Shul Islam Mosque Dargah Gongbei Mandaeism Mandi or Mashkhanna or Beth Manda Paganism & modern paganism Heathen hof or Germanic pagan temple Magic circle Shintoism Shinto Shrine or Jinja Sikhism Gurdwara Taoism Taoist temple or Dàoguàn Zoroastrianism Fire temple or Agiary or Atashkadeh or Atashgah or Dar-e Mehr Varying religions and beliefs Altar Cult Architecture Asylum Cult image Sacred space Sanctuary Shrine Temple Sun temple Note: Sorted alphabetically except the last one v t e Magic and witchcraft Types Region Africa Azande Ghana Witch smeller Asia Jhākri Philippines Europe Italy Akelarre Benandanti Cunning folk Greece and Rome Seiðr Völva Witch-cult hypothesis Anglo-Saxon England Britain Latin America Middle East Oceania Mākutu Form Chaos magic Goetia Hoodoo Medieval Neopagan Wicca Renaissance Solitary practitioner Warlock Witch doctor Practices Animism Apotropaic magic Black magic Ceremonial magic Magical formula Coven Curse Anathema Damnation Jinx Demon Divination Entheogen Evocation Familiar Gray magic Incantation Jinn Love magic Mediumship Moon magic Necromancy Occultism Shamanism Black Regional Yellow Sex magic Sigils Spiritism Spiritualism Sympathetic magic Witches' Sabbath White magic Objects Amulet Athame Broom besom Censer Cloak of invisibility Crystal ball Flying ointment Goofer dust Grimoire Incense Julleuchter Kitchen witch Love charm Magic carpet Magic circle Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Mojo bag Nkisi Nkondi Poppet Potions Sator Square Talisman Wand Witch ball Witch's ladder Folklore and mythology Agamede Aradia Baba Yaga Circe Dayan Drude Elbow witch Hecate Huld Kalku Medea Morgan le Fay Muma Pădurii Nine sorceresses Obayifo Pasiphaë Sebile Sorginak Spearfinger Three Witches Witches of Benevento Witch of Endor Yama-uba Major historic treatises Witchcraft and divination in the Old Testament (8th–2nd centuries BC) Directorium Inquisitorum (1376) De maleficis mulieribus (1440) Formicarius (1475) Summis desiderantes affectibus (1484) Malleus Maleficarum (1487) De Lamiis et Pythonicis Mulieribus (1489) Laienspiegel (1509) De praestigiis daemonum (1563) The Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584) Newes from Scotland (1591) A Dialogue Concerning Witches and Witchcrafts (1593) Daemonolatreiae libri tres (1595) Daemonologie (1597) Magical Investigations (1599) Compendium Maleficarum (1608) A Guide to Grand-Jury Men (1627) The Discovery of Witches (1647) Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants (1751) Persecution Modern Jamyi Witch hiring controversy accusations against children India Nepal Papua New Guinea Witch camp Early Modern Americas Maryland New York Salem Virginia Eastern Europe Hungary Northern Moravia Poland Russia Northern Europe Baltic Denmark England Finland Iceland Norway Scotland Sweden Western Europe France Geneva Italy Spain Basque Classical Witch trials in the Holy Roman Empire Related Witch hunt Witch's mark Pricking List of people executed for witchcraft In popular culture Magic in fiction Witches in fiction Related Witch (word) Witch (archetype) Christian views on magic Magical organization Maleficium Left-hand path and right-hand path Feminist interpretations of witch trials in the early modern period Folk religion Adept v t e Neopagan witchcraft History History of Wicca Etymology of Wicca Wicca and LGBT people Dettmer v. Landon Traditions British Traditional Alexandrian Wicca Blue Star Wicca Central Valley Wicca Chthonioi Alexandrian Wicca Gardnerian Wicca Other 1734 Tradition Celtic Wicca Church and School of Wicca Cochrane's Craft Coven of Atho Dianic Wicca Faery Wicca Feri Georgian Wicca Odyssean Wicca Reclaiming Seax-Wica Stregheria Universal Eclectic Wicca Notable figures Gerald Gardner Doreen Valiente Alex Sanders Maxine Sanders Sybil Leek Dafo Margot Adler Victor Anderson Artemis Gavin Bone Lois Bourne Jack Bracelin Raymond Buckland Eddie Buczynski Zsuzsanna Budapest Charles Cardell Ipsita Roy Chakraverti Patricia Crowther Vivianne Crowley Robert Cochrane Scott Cunningham Phyllis Curott Cerridwen Fallingstar Janet Farrar Stewart Farrar Raven Grimassi Gavin Frost Yvonne Frost Philip Heselton Frederic Lamond Rosaleen Norton Silver RavenWolf Starhawk Joseph Wilson Deities Triple Goddess Horned God Green Man Spirit of nature Holly King / Oak King Mother goddess Key concepts Wicca Wiccan morality Wiccan Rede Rule of Three Wiccan views of divinity Coven Craft name Magic Witchcraft White magic Otherworld The Summerland Reincarnation Karma Skyclad Summoner Watchtower Familiar Animism Rites and ritual Drawing down the Moon Great rite Handfasting Wiccaning Fivefold kiss Magic circle Cone of power Herbal medicine Scrying Spellwork / Incantation Banishing Divination Invocation Initiation Rite of passage Eko Eko Azarak Solitary practitioner Spiral dance Holidays Wheel of the Year Solstice Equinox Imbolc Ostara Beltane Midsummer Lughnasadh Mabon Samhain Yule Esbat Wild Hunt Paraphernalia Magical tools in Wicca Altar Amulet Athame Bell Besom Boline Book of Shadows Candles Cauldron Censer Chalice/Goblet Horn Incense Parchment Pentacle Runes Scourge Statue Talisman Tarot deck Wand Witch's ladder Literature Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches The Meaning of Witchcraft The Spiral Dance What Witches Do Witchcraft Today Charge of the Goddess Enchanted Feminism Related List of Wiccan organisations Bricket Wood coven New Forest coven Neopagan witchcraft Witch-cult hypothesis Left-hand path and right-hand path Cunning folk in Britain European witchcraft Malleus Maleficarum Granny woman Cunning folk Magical alphabets Runes Theban Hebrew Witching hour Witch hunt Witches' Sabbath Flying ointment Museum of Witchcraft and Magic Witchcraft Research Association Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Magic_circle&oldid=1295313463 " Categories : Ceremonial magic Magic items Magic rituals Magic symbols Wicca Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 01:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Magic circle 17 languages Add topic

