Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Institution 3 Historical records 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Gaṇasaṅgha 8 languages 한국어 हिन्दी Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 தமிழ் Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political structure in South Asia Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Gana-Sangha [ 1 ] (Tribal Assembly) or Gana-Rajya [ 2 ] (Tribal State) was a type of tribe and clan structure of aristocratic republics in ancient India .

[ 3 ] Etymology [ edit ] The Mahajanapadas were the sixteen most powerful states in Ancient India . Among the Mahajanapadas and other smaller states around them, some of the states followed a republican form of government The Gaṇasaṅghas of Ancient India .

The word gaṇa ( / ˈ ɡ ʌ n ə / ; Sanskrit : गण) in Sanskrit and Pali means group or community. It can also be used to refer to a body of attendants and can refer to any assemblage or association of men formed for the attainment of the same aims, denotes the gathering of a given community. The word sangha [ 4 ] in Sanskrit means association, assembly, company or community. For instance, in Buddhism , sangha refers to the monastic community of bhikkhus (monks) and bhikkhunis (nuns).

The phrase gana sangha can be translated as (rule by) tribal assembly. In ancient Buddhist texts like the Anguttara Nikaya [ 5 ] which make frequent reference to the great states in ancient India , the texts often use the phrase to refer a type of aristocratic rule, contrast to monarchy (साम्राज्य samarajya in Sanskrit).

Among the mahajanapadas , the sixteen great states in ancient India, two followed the gana sangha rule: Vajji and Mallakas . Many smaller states and tribes near these great states also had the gana sangha form of government, such as the Koliyas , and the Shakyas , the small tribal state which Gautama Buddha was born to.

[ 6 ] The gana sanghas were generally located in the periphery of the major ancient Indian states, both geographically and culturally, and tend to occupy the higher ground near the Himalayas .

[ 1 ] The gana sanghas of Vajji, Malla, Koliya, and Shakya mentioned above all situated at the foothills of Himalayas, near eastern Uttar Pradesh , Bihar , Terai region of Nepal . In contrast, the states which followed a monarchical government ( saamarajya ) were generally located in the flood plains of the Ganges .

Institution [ edit ] According to the Buddhist sources, key characteristics of the gana sangha seem to include a gana mukhya (chief), [ 7 ] and a deliberative assembly ( sangha ). Elected by the gana sangha , the chief apparently always belonged to a family of the noble class of Kshatriya Varna . The chief coordinated his activities with the assembly; in some states, he did so with a council of other nobles.

[ 8 ] The assembly met regularly, and would discuss all major state decisions. This body also had full financial, administrative, and judicial authority. Other officers, who rarely receive any mention, obeyed the decisions of the assembly.

The general make-up of the gana sanghas was either that of a single clan (e.g.

Shakya ), or a confederacy of clans (e.g. Vajji). Most of the gana sanghas are aristocratic in nature: For instance, the Licchavis , the ruling clan of Vajji, had a primary governing body of 7,077 rajas , the heads of the most important families. On the other hand, the smaller state of Shakyas and Koliyas, during the period around Gautama Buddha , had the assembly open to all men, rich and poor.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Historical records [ edit ] The gana sanghas in India it is generally believed existed as early as the 6th century BC, and persisted in some areas until the 4th century. The ancient Buddhist texts provide many accounts of the various ancient Indian states at the time of the Buddha , including their forms of governments and political workings. Among the larger mahajanapadas , Mallas , centered in the city of Kusinagara , and the Vajji (or Vṛji) confederation, centered in the city of Vaishali , existed as early as the 6th century BC, and both of their administrations were divided into executive, judicial, and military functions.

[ 11 ] Even in the other kingdoms of the mahajanapadas , their monarchical rule would also include republican communities such as the Community of Rajakumara , The villages at this era also had their own assemblies under their village heads called gramakas .

The Arthashastra , an ancient Indian handbook for monarchs on how to rule efficiently, sometimes referred to as " The Prince of Ancient India ", also contains a chapter on how to deal with the sanghas (assemblies), which includes injunctions on manipulating the noble leaders. Yet the chapter does not mention how to influence the mass of the citizens, indicating that the gana sangha is more of an aristocratic or oligarchical body, rather than democracy in a modern or even Athenian sense.

[ 12 ] Outside Indian sources, Diodorus , a Greek historian who wrote two centuries after the time of Alexander the Great 's invasion of India (now Pakistan and northwest India) mentions that independent and democratic states existed in India.

[ 13 ] Scholars differ over how best to describe the gana sangha governments, and the vague, sporadic quality of the evidence allows for wide disagreements. Some emphasize the central role of the assemblies and thus tout them as democracies; other scholars focus on the upper-class domination of the leadership and possible control of the assembly and see an oligarchy or an aristocracy .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The rulers always belonged to warrior class. This is mentioned in Hindu, Buddhist and Jain texts.

[ 14 ] The aristocrats were always from kshatriya (warrior) class. This leads many scholars to claim that the true nature of gana sanghas is not comparable to truly democratic institutions.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Janapada Mahajanapada Magadha-Vajji war History of India Monarchy in ancient India References [ edit ] ^ a b Thapar, Romila (2002).

Early India: From the Origins to AD 1300 . University of California. pp.

146– 150.

ISBN 9780520242258 . Retrieved 28 October 2013 .

^ Majumdar, Asoke Kumar (1977), Concise History of Ancient India: Political theory, administration and economic life , Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers, p. 140 ^ Witzel, Michael (1997): 'The Development of the Vedic Canon and its Schools: The Social and Political Milieu (Materials on Vedic Śåkhås, 8)' in Witzel, Michael (ed.) Inside the texts, Beyond the Texts , Harvard University Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, p. 313 ^ "sangha" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on July 5, 2020.

^ Anguttara Nikaya I. p. 213; IV. pp. 252, 256, 261 ^ Pletcher, Kenneth (2010). The History of India. Rosen Education Service. p. 64.

ISBN 978-1615301225 ^ https://www.learnsanskrit.cc/translate?search=chief&dir=au [ bare URL ] ^ Robinson, 1997, p. 22 ^ Robinson, 1997, p. 23 ^ Sharma (1968).

Republics in ancient India . Brill Archive. pp. 93–. GGKEY:HYY6LT5CFT0.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Raychaudhuri Hemchandra (1972), Political History of Ancient India , Calcutta: University of Calcutta, p. 107 ^ Trautmann T. R., Kautilya and the Arthashastra , Leiden 1971 ^ Diodorus 2.39 ^ a b Bongard-Levin, 1996, pp. 61–106 ^ a b Sharma 1968, pp. 109–22 ^ Thapar, Romila (2002).

Early India: From the Origins to AD 1300 . University of California Press. pp.

148– 149.

ISBN 0-520-24225-4 .

Further reading [ edit ] Gadkari, Jayant (1 January 1996), Society and Religion: From Rugveda to Puranas , Popular Prakashan, pp. 100–, ISBN 978-81-7154-743-2 Handa, O. C. (2004), Naga Cults and Traditions in the Western Himalaya , Indus Publishing, pp.

63– 64, ISBN 978-81-7387-161-0 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gaṇasaṅgha&oldid=1305824159 " Categories : Ancient India Local government in India Oligarchy Republics Religion and democracy Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2025 CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 08:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gaṇasaṅgha 8 languages Add topic

