Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of ventilation 2 Methods 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ventilation (firefighting) 3 languages Deutsch Español Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Firefighting tactic For other uses, see Ventilation (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ventilation" firefighting – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ventilation is a part of structural firefighting tactics, and involves the expulsion of heat and smoke from a burning building, permitting the firefighters to more easily and safely find trapped individuals and attack the fire. It is frequently performed from the outside of a burning building while the fire is being extinguished on the inside.  If a large fire is not properly ventilated, it is much harder to fight, and can build up enough poorly burned smoke to create a smoke explosion or enough heat to create a flashover . Poorly placed or timed ventilation can increase the fire's air supply, causing it to grow and spread rapidly. Flashover from inadequate ventilation can cause the temperature inside the building to peak at over 1,000 °C (1,830 °F).

[ 1 ] Types of ventilation [ edit ] In general, there are two types of ventilation; vertical and horizontal . Their names refer to the general locations of the intended exit points of the heat and smoke to be ventilated. Vertical ventilation takes place through holes cut in the roof, typically by truck companies during the early stages of a fire in a process known collectively as roof operations , while horizontal ventilation usually takes place through doors and windows.  The goal of each is to clear heat and smoke to increase chances of survival for trapped occupants, and/or so that water lines can be advanced into the structure, to more effectively battle the flames.  While their goals are similar, their applications are different; both require good timing and coordination so that increased air flow through a structure doesn't contribute to fire spread.

[ 2 ] Methods [ edit ] Positive pressure fan Mechanical fans can be used to provide positive pressure ventilation by breaking or removing windows , skylights or heat/smoke vents on the roof; or by cutting new exhaust vents in the building.  If there is no suitable existing hole, firefighters may use their equipment to make one, such as specialized saws for cutting a large hole in the roof. A conical hose-stream aimed around an opening—of a window or door, etc.— entrains smoke and thus increases the exhaust rate of smoke from the space. This is a process called hydraulic ventilation . This strategy might be used when the fire is small and protecting property from smoke damage can be achieved safely. It can also be used more aggressively when a structure is "fully involved" and the smoke is obstructing the nozzleman's view of the hotspots.

High-rise buildings sometimes also incorporate fans to produce a positive pressure in stairwells and elevator shafts to reduce smoke infiltration into those spaces.

When glass windows in a burning structure burst from internal pressure and heat, or the fire burns through the roof, it may be said to have "auto-ventilated" or "self-ventilated." Negative pressure ventilation is another method of ventilation sometimes used in firefighting efforts. The method of negative pressure ventilation is a process of using smoke ejectors to remove the smoke from a building.

[ 3 ] Negative pressure ventilation is not used as much as positive pressure ventilation for the reason that positive pressure can move more air throughout the structure and clear out more smoke in a timely manner.

Hydraulic ventilation is another method of ventilation that is very useful if vertical ventilation or positive pressure ventilation is either unsafe or not a feasible strategy.

[ 4 ] Hydraulic ventilation is done by setting up a hose line on a fog stream and directing it out a window. The air that a fog stream draws in also draws out the smoke and ejects it outside. This method can be useful during overhaul operations as long as there is another hose line in place in the immediate area.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ventilation (firefighting) .

Look up ventilation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Glossary of firefighting References [ edit ] ^ Feasey, R.

"Post-Flashover Design Fires" (PDF) .

^ LaFemina, Fred.

"Ventilation Basics" . Retrieved 2011-11-07 .

^ "Negative Pressure Ventilation" .

Ventry Solutions . 2 March 2016 . Retrieved 2020-11-05 .

^ "Throw Back to Basics: Hydraulic Ventilation" .

Fire Engineering . 2015-11-19 . Retrieved 2020-11-05 .

External links [ edit ] Ventilation Basics The When and Why of Ventilation Archived 2020-10-01 at the Wayback Machine Equipment Used in Ventilation v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐jg8ss
Cached time: 20250812044225
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.333 seconds
Real time usage: 0.450 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 928/1000000
Revision size: 5644/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 54945/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 885/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 27742/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.222/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7543844/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  389.165      1 -total
 26.07%  101.466      1 Template:Reflist
 23.25%   90.488      4 Template:Cite_web
 22.32%   86.856      1 Template:Fire_fighting
 21.97%   85.516      2 Template:Navbox
 14.41%   56.067      1 Template:Short_description
 13.25%   51.575      1 Template:Refimprove
 11.87%   46.203      1 Template:Ambox
  9.60%   37.371      1 Template:Commonscat
  9.41%   36.609      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4554236:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812044225 and revision id 1303296345. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ventilation_(firefighting)&oldid=1303296345 " Category : Firefighting Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2008 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 04:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ventilation (firefighting) 3 languages Add topic

