Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Three dimensions Toggle Three dimensions subsection 1.1 Subgroups 2 As an indirect isometry 3 Physical systems 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Improper rotation 9 languages Català Deutsch Español Français 日本語 Română Simple English Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Proper rotation ) Rotation composed with a reflection In geometry , an improper rotation [ 1 ] (also called rotation-reflection , [ 2 ] rotoreflection, [ 1 ] rotary reflection , [ 3 ] or rotoinversion [ 4 ] ) is an isometry in Euclidean space that is a combination of a rotation about an axis and a reflection in a plane perpendicular to that axis. Reflection and inversion are each a special case of improper rotation. Any improper rotation is an affine transformation and, in cases that keep the coordinate origin fixed, a linear transformation .

[ 5 ] It is used as a symmetry operation in the context of geometric symmetry , molecular symmetry and crystallography , where an object that is unchanged by a combination of rotation and reflection is said to have improper rotation symmetry .

Example polyhedra with rotoreflection symmetry Group S 4 S 6 S 8 S 10 S 12 Subgroups C 2 C 3 , S 2 = C i C 4 , C 2 C 5 , S 2 = C i C 6 , S 4 , C 3 , C 2 Example beveled digonal antiprism triangular antiprism square antiprism pentagonal antiprism hexagonal antiprism Antiprisms with directed edges have rotoreflection symmetry.

p -antiprisms for odd p contain inversion symmetry , C i .

Three dimensions [ edit ] Further information: Point groups in three dimensions In 3 dimensions, improper rotation is equivalently defined as a combination of rotation about an axis and inversion in a point on the axis.

[ 1 ] For this reason it is also called a rotoinversion or rotary inversion . The two definitions are equivalent because rotation by an angle θ followed by reflection is the same transformation as rotation by θ + 180° followed by inversion (taking the point of inversion to be in the plane of reflection). In both definitions, the operations commute.

A three-dimensional symmetry that has only one fixed point is necessarily an improper rotation.

[ 3 ] An improper rotation of an object thus produces a rotation of its mirror image . The axis is called the rotation-reflection axis .

[ 6 ] This is called an n -fold improper rotation if the angle of rotation, before or after reflexion, is 360°/ n (where n must be even).

[ 6 ] There are several different systems for naming individual improper rotations: In the Schoenflies notation the symbol S n (German, Spiegel , for mirror ), where n must be even, denotes the symmetry group generated by an n -fold improper rotation. For example, the symmetry operation S 6 is the combination of a rotation of (360°/6)=60° and a mirror plane reflection. (This should not be confused with the same notation for symmetric groups ).

[ 6 ] In Hermann–Mauguin notation the symbol n is used for an n -fold rotoinversion ; i.e., rotation by an angle of rotation of 360°/ n with inversion. If n is even it must be divisible by 4. (Note that 2 would be simply a reflection, and is normally denoted "m", for "mirror".) When n is odd this corresponds to a 2 n -fold improper rotation (or rotary reflexion).

The Coxeter notation for S 2 n is [2 n + ,2 + ] and , as an index 4 subgroup of [2 n ,2], , generated as the product of 3 reflections.

The Orbifold notation is n ×, order 2 n .

Subgroups for S 2 to S 20 .

C 1 is the identity group .

S 2 is the central inversion .

C n are cyclic groups .

Subgroups [ edit ] The direct subgroup of S 2 n is C n , order n , index 2, being the rotoreflection generator applied twice.

For odd n , S 2 n contains an inversion , denoted C i or S 2 .

S 2 n is the direct product : S 2 n = C n × S 2 , if n is odd.

For any n , if odd p is a divisor of n , then S 2 n / p is a subgroup of S 2 n , index p . For example S 4 is a subgroup of S 12 , index 3.

As an indirect isometry [ edit ] In a wider sense, an improper rotation may be defined as any indirect isometry ; i.e., an element of E (3)\E + (3): thus it can also be a pure reflection in a plane, or have a glide plane . An indirect isometry is an affine transformation with an orthogonal matrix that has a determinant of −1.

A proper rotation is an ordinary rotation. In the wider sense, a proper rotation is defined as a direct isometry ; i.e., an element of E + (3): it can also be the identity, a rotation with a translation along the axis, or a pure translation. A direct isometry is an affine transformation with an orthogonal matrix that has a determinant of 1.

In either the narrower or the wider senses, the composition of two improper rotations is a proper rotation, and the composition of an improper and a proper rotation is an improper rotation.

Physical systems [ edit ] When studying the symmetry of a physical system under an improper rotation (e.g., if a system has a mirror symmetry plane), it is important to distinguish between vectors and pseudovectors (as well as scalars and pseudoscalars , and in general between tensors and pseudotensors ), since the latter transform differently under proper and improper rotations (in 3 dimensions, pseudovectors are invariant under inversion).

See also [ edit ] Isometry Orthogonal group References [ edit ] ^ a b c Morawiec, Adam (2004), Orientations and Rotations: Computations in Crystallographic Textures , Springer, p. 7, ISBN 978-3-540-40734-8 .

^ Miessler, Gary; Fischer, Paul; Tarr, Donald (2014), Inorganic Chemistry (5 ed.), Pearson, p. 78 ^ a b Kinsey, L. Christine ; Moore, Teresa E. (2002), Symmetry, Shape, and Surfaces: An Introduction to Mathematics Through Geometry , Springer, p. 267, ISBN 978-1-930190-09-2 .

^ Klein, Philpotts (2013).

Earth Materials . Cambridge University Press. pp.

89– 90.

ISBN 978-0-521-14521-3 .

^ Salomon, David (1999), Computer Graphics and Geometric Modeling , Springer, p. 84, ISBN 978-0-387-98682-1 .

^ a b c Bishop, David M. (1993), Group Theory and Chemistry , Courier Dover Publications, p. 13, ISBN 978-0-486-67355-4 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Improper_rotation&oldid=1229265731 " Categories : Euclidean symmetries Lie groups Hidden categories: Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 15 June 2024, at 20:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Improper rotation 9 languages Add topic

