Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Reception 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents One-Dimensional Man 18 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1964 book by Herbert Marcuse One-Dimensional Man Cover of the first edition Author Herbert Marcuse Language English Subjects Capitalism , communism , democracy , industrialization Publisher Beacon Press Publication date 1964 Publication place United States Media type Print Pages 257 ISBN 0-415-07429-0 (2. ed.) Part of a series on the Frankfurt School Major works Dialectic of Enlightenment Eclipse of Reason Eros and Civilization Escape from Freedom Minima Moralia Negative Dialectics One-Dimensional Man Reason and Revolution The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere The Theory of Communicative Action " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " Notable theorists Adorno Apel Benjamin Fromm Forst Grünberg Geuss Habermas Honneth Horkheimer Jaeggi Kluge Kracauer Kirchheimer Kompridis Kuhlmann Löwenthal Marcuse McCarthy Negt Neumann Offe Pollock Schmidt Sohn-Rethel Wellmer Wingert Important concepts Advanced capitalism Antipositivism Communicative rationality Critical theory Culture industry Dialectic Legitimation crisis Non-identity Popular culture Praxis Privatism Psychoanalysis Related topics Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Freudo-Marxism Marxist humanism Recognition Reification Social alienation Western Marxism Philosophy portal Society portal v t e One-Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society is a 1964 book by the German–American philosopher and critical theorist Herbert Marcuse , in which the author offers a wide-ranging critique of both the contemporary capitalist society of the Western Bloc and the communist society of the Soviet Union , documenting the parallel rise of new forms of social repression in both of these societies, and the decline of revolutionary potential in the West. He argues that the "advanced industrial society " created false needs , which integrated individuals into the existing system of production and consumption via mass media , advertising , industrial management, and contemporary modes of thought.

[ 1 ] This result in a "one-dimensional" universe of thought and behavior, in which aptitude and ability for critical thought and oppositional behavior wither away. Against this prevailing climate, Marcuse promotes the "great refusal" (described at length in the book) as the only adequate opposition to all-encompassing methods of control. Much of the book is a defense of "negative thinking" as a disrupting force against the prevailing positivism .

[ 1 ] Marcuse also analyzes the integration of the industrial working class into capitalist society and new forms of capitalist stabilization, thus questioning the Marxian postulates of the revolutionary proletariat and the inevitability of capitalist crisis . In contrast to orthodox Marxism , Marcuse champions non-integrated forces of minorities , outsiders, and radical intelligentsia , attempting to nourish oppositional thought and behavior through promoting radical thinking and opposition. He considers the trends towards bureaucracy in supposedly Marxist countries to be as oppositional to freedom as those in the capitalist West.

[ 1 ] One-Dimensional Man bolstered Marcuse's fame as a contemporary Western philosopher .

[ 2 ] Summary [ edit ] Marcuse strongly criticizes consumerism and modern " industrial society ", which he claims is a form of social control . Marcuse argues that while the system the West lives in may claim to be democratic , it is actually totalitarian . A form of technological rationality has imposed itself on every aspect of culture and public life , and has become hegemonic . Through our identification with this hegemonic ideology of modern industrial society , this ideology doesn't only represent a form of " false consciousness ", yet rather has succeeded in becoming reality .

Modern industrial societies have furthermore created an " affluent society ", which in increasing comfort have disguised the exploitative nature of the system, and have therefore strengthened means of domination and control. Modern "affluent society" therefore limits opportunities for political revolution against capitalism.

Marcuse contends that in contemporary consumer societies , a select few wield the power to shape our conceptions of freedom by offering us the means to purchase our own happiness.

[ 3 ] In this state of "unfreedom", [ 4 ] consumers act irrationally by working more than they are required to in order to fulfill actual basic needs, by ignoring the psychologically destructive effects, by ignoring the waste and environmental damage it causes, and by searching for social connection through material items.

[ 5 ] It is even more irrational in the sense that the creation of new products, calling for the disposal of old products, fuels the economy and encourages the need to work more to buy more. An individual loses his humanity and becomes a tool in the industrial machine and a cog in the consumer machine. Additionally, advertising sustains consumerism, which disintegrates societal demeanor , delivered in bulk and informing the masses that happiness can be bought, an idea that is psychologically damaging.

There are alternatives to counter the consumer lifestyle.

Anti-consumerism is a lifestyle that demotes any unnecessary consumption, as well as unnecessary work, waste, etc. But even this alternative is complicated by the extreme interpenetration of advertising and commodification because everything is a commodity, even those things that are actual needs.

Reception [ edit ] The critical theorist Douglas Kellner asserted that One-Dimensional Man stands out as a paramount work of the 1960s and remains one of the most subversive literary contributions of the twentieth century. Despite its pessimism, represented by the citation of the words of Walter Benjamin at the end of this book that " Nur um der Hoffnungslosen willen ist uns die Hoffnung gegeben " [ 6 ] ("It is only for the sake of those without hope that hope is given to us" [ 7 ] ), it influenced many in the New Left as it articulated their growing dissatisfaction with both capitalist societies and Soviet communist societies.

[ 1 ] Marcuse praised Paul Mattick's critique of the book .

The philosopher Ronald Aronson wrote in 2014 that One-Dimensional Man is more prescient than Marcuse could have ever realized and that it is more relevant than ever.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Repressive desublimation Totalitarian democracy Minority rights J. L. Talmon Drux Flux , an animated short inspired by One-Dimensional Man .

[ 9 ] Unflattening , a scholarly graphic novel expanding on many ideas from One-Dimensional Man .

Critical theory Criticism of capitalism Inverted totalitarianism Superficiality References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Kellner, Douglas (1991). "Introduction to the Second Edition".

Herbert Marcuse, One-dimensional Man: Studies in Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society . London: Routledge. pp. xi.

ISBN 978-0-415-07429-2 .

^ McLellan, David (1975).

Marx . Glasgow: Fontana. p. 81.

ISBN 0-333-63947-2 .

^ Marcuse, Herbert (1991). "Introduction to the Second Edition".

One-dimensional Man: studies in ideology of advanced industrial society . London: Routledge. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-415-07429-2 .

^ Marcuse, Herbert (1991). "Introduction to the Second Edition".

One-dimensional Man: studies in ideology of advanced industrial society . London: Routledge. pp. 1, 7.

ISBN 978-0-415-07429-2 .

^ Marcuse, Herbert (1991). "Chapter 1".

One-dimensional Man: studies in ideology of advanced industrial society . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-07429-2 .

^ W. Benjamin, Goethes Wahlverwandtschaften, Gesammelte Schriften I.1 , Frankfurt am Main 1991, p. 201.

^ Marcuse, Herbert (1991).

One-dimensional Man: Studies in Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society . New York: Routledge. p. 261.

ISBN 978-0-415-07429-2 .

^ Aronson, Ronald (17 November 2014).

"Marcuse Today" .

Boston Review .

^ Ushev, Théodore (2008).

"Drux Flux" .

Animated short . National Film Board of Canada . Retrieved 29 December 2009 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Herbert Marcuse .

Bibliographic listing including reviews and courses using the book Full text on-line at marcuse.org v t e Herbert Marcuse Books Hegel's Ontology and the Theory of Historicity (1932) Reason and Revolution (1941) Eros and Civilization (1955) Soviet Marxism: A Critical Analysis (1958) One-Dimensional Man (1964) A Critique of Pure Tolerance (1965) An Essay on Liberation (1969) Counterrevolution and Revolt (1972) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Concepts Repressive desublimation Technological rationality Miscellaneous Secret Reports on Nazi Germany v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Spain Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=One-Dimensional_Man&oldid=1302467541 " Categories : 1964 non-fiction books Books critical of capitalism Beacon Press books English-language non-fiction books Sociology books Works by Herbert Marcuse Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 15:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents One-Dimensional Man 18 languages Add topic

