Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Women and society 2 Political representation 3 History of the Haitian women's movement 4 Sexual violence 5 Education Toggle Education subsection 5.1 Women's Education History 5.2 The Overall System 5.3 Post 2010 Earthquake 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Women in Haiti 7 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی Français עברית Kreyòl ayisyen اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Feminism in Haiti ) Women in Haiti General Statistics Maternal mortality (per 100,000) 350 (2010) Women in parliament 3.5% (2013) Women over 25 with secondary education 22.5% (2012) Women in labour force 60.6% (2012) Gender Inequality Index [ 1 ] Value 0.635(2021) Rank 163rd out of 191 Part of a series on Women in society Society Women's history ( legal rights ) Woman Animal advocacy Business Female entrepreneurs Gender representation on corporate boards of directors Combat Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Economic development Explorers and travelers Education Feminism Womyn Government Conservatives in the US Heads of state or government Legislators Queen regnant List Health Journalism Law Law enforcement Military Mother Nobel Prize laureates Piracy Positions of power Reproductive rights Sex segregation Feminist In Islam Venture capital Violence and abuse Voting rights Workforce Exchange of women Science Technology Computing Engineering Geology Medicine dentistry in the United States Organizations Science Science, technology, engineering and mathematics Space Telegraphy Arts Humanities Architecture Arts Art history field Women's cinema Dance Film "Chick flicks" Fine arts Literature Science fiction Philosophy Feminist philosophy Photographers Music Jazz Punk rock In Shakespeare's works Religion Theological figures Baháʼí Faith Bible Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Opus Dei Hinduism Islam Imams Mahr Segregation Women's testimony Judaism Sikhism Taoism Zoroastrianism Popular culture Comics Portrayal in American comics Film industry Music Fictional pirates Speculative fiction Video games Gender representation in video games Women in the video game industry Sports Auto racing Baseball Basketball Boxing Cricket Curling Cycling Fastpitch softball Football / soccer Golf Gymnastics Ice hockey Lacrosse Mixed martial arts Netball Paralympic Games Rodeo Roller derby Rowing Surfing Swimming Tennis Track and field Volleyball Winter sports See also: List of sports By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Belgium Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Croatia Cuba Cyprus ( North ) Denmark DR Congo Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Ethiopia FS Micronesia Fiji Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Iceland Italy India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Ivory Coast Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Libya Madagascar Malaysia Maldives Mali Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal New Zealand Niger Nigeria North Korea Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Spain Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Sudan Suriname Sri Lanka Sweden Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Tonga Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Trinidad and Tobago Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen v t e Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Women in Haiti have equal constitutional [ 2 ] rights as men in the economic , political , cultural and social fields, as well as in the family.

However, the reality in Haiti is quite far from the law. The structural issues of the country, in combination with patriarchal views that dominate the culture, bar Haitian women’s ability to experience full autonomy in the eyes of the state. These trends have been consistent throughout the history of the country irrespective to times of peace or political unrest.

[ 3 ] Women and society [ edit ] Some Haitian scholars argue that Haitian peasant women are often less restricted socially than women in Western societies or even in comparison to more westernized elite Haitian women.

[ 4 ] Compared to their Latin-American counterparts, the participation of Haitian women in agriculture, commerce and industry has been high.

[ 5 ] During the US occupation of Haiti (1915-1934) peasant women actively participated in guerilla warfare and anti-US intelligence gathering to free the country.

[ 6 ] Because of their involvement in commerce, Haitian peasant women have accumulated resources independent of their partners in contrast to more westernized elite Haitian women.

[ 7 ] Political representation [ edit ] Michele Pierre-Louis , former Prime Minister has proven a fervent promoter of women's rights in Haiti The Haitian government contains a Ministry of Women's Affairs, but it also lacks the resources to address issues such as violence against women and harassment in the workplace. A number of political figures such as Michele Pierre-Louis , Haiti's second female Prime Minister, have adopted a determined agenda in order to fight inequalities and persecutions against women. Her position in office as Prime Minister has had positive effect on female political leadership in a country where the percentage of women in government at ministerial level was 25% in 2005.

[ 8 ] History of the Haitian women's movement [ edit ] Women have been involved in social movements in Haiti since the battle for independence.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] A women's movement emerged in Haiti in the 1930s during an economic crisis which is thought to have forced some middle-class Haitian women to work outside the home for the first time unlike peasant women who had always done so.

[ 4 ] This was also a time at which more elite women began to pursue post-secondary education and when L'Université D'Etat d'Haiti opened its doors to women.

[ 4 ] The first Haitian woman to receive a secondary education graduated during this period in 1933.

[ 4 ] One of the first established feminist organizations in Haiti was called the Ligue Féminine d'Action Sociale ( Feminine League for Social Action ) and was created in 1934.

[ 11 ] Its mostly elite initial members included: Madeleine Sylvain , Alice Garoute , Fernande Bellegarde, Thérèse Hudicourt, Alice Mathon , Marie-Thérèse Colimon , Léonie Coicou Madiou , Marie-Thérèse Poitevien.

[ 12 ] The Ligue was banned by the government two months after its founding.

[ 12 ] The league was reestablished when it agreed to study its goals instead of immediately implementing them.

[ 12 ] The league is credited for the granting of voting rights for women in 1957.

[ 12 ] In 1950, writer and feminist Paulette Poujol-Oriol joined the league. She later served as President of the League from 1997 until her death on March 11, 2011. She was also a founding member of L'Alliance des Femmes Haitiennes, an umbrella organization for more than 50 women's groups.

[ 13 ] Some women were appointed to government leadership positions under François Duvalier: Rosalie Adolphe (aka Madame Max Adolphe ) was appointed head of the secret police Volontaires de La Sécurité Nationale , also known as the Tonton Macoute, while Lydia O. Jeanty was named Under-Secretary of Labor in 1957 and Lucienne Heurtelou , the widow of former president Dumarsais Estimé , was Haiti's first female ambassador.

[ citation needed ] Marie-Denise Duvalier nearly succeeded her father in 1971.

[ 4 ] Sexual violence [ edit ] Main article: Sexual violence in Haiti Women in Haiti may suffer threats to their security and well-being because of rape, kidnapping and human trafficking. Women suffer the most from Haiti's chronic political instability.

Documented cases of politically motivated rape, massacres, forced disappearance , and violent assaults on entire neighborhoods increased greatly at the end of 1993 under the military dictatorship of Raoul Cédras . Reports from women's rights groups in Haiti revealed that women were targeted for abuse in ways and for reasons that men were not. Uniformed military personnel and their civilian allies threatened and attacked women's organizations for their work in defense of women's rights and subjected women to sex-specific abuse ranging from bludgeoning women's breasts to rape.

[ 14 ] The troubles before the 2004 coup were seen by most of the nationwide women's group as a reminder of the 1991–94 coup d'etat tactics with the use of rape, kidnapping and murders as forms of intimidation. If most of the feminist activists in Haiti campaigned for the election of Jean-Bertrand Aristide before his first term (1991–1995), many of them, especially intellectuals like Myriam Merlet or Magalie Marcelin , condemned how the first democratically elected president of Haiti ruled the country during his second term (2000–2004).

[ 15 ] Other observers, more favorable of the Fanmi Lavalas party, were more inclined to criticise the period after the coup as a "rewind" back to the same dictatorship tactics, "a terror campaign employing rape, murder and disappearance as tactics, and rapidly increasing insecurity undermining all economic activity of the informal sector." [ 16 ] To this day, Haiti is "gripped by shocking levels of sexual violence against girls"; of particular concern is the number of cases of sexual violence reported in the run-up to or during Carnival.

[ 17 ] Amnesty International [ 18 ] and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights [ 3 ] have laid particular pressure on the duty of the state to act in due diligence necessary to prevent and eradicate violence and discrimination against women.

Though the MINUSTAH has come with a peace-keeping mandate, a number of cases have arisen where the UN soldiers were found to have abused women.

[ 19 ] A Haitian woman Education [ edit ] Further information: Education in Haiti Women's Education History [ edit ] Women in Haiti do not benefit from an equal access to education, this has been an issue for a long time. When researching the history of women's education in Haiti, there are no accounts that start before 1844 since a male dominated society with colonial origins didn't allow girls and women to go to school. This formally changed with The Constitution in 1843, but the first actual account of a primary school establishment for girls was in Port-au-Prince the following year, 1844. The Although the political leadership tried to do something about the unequal education at that time, the economic and social barriers made it very difficult to reach that goal, and it wasn't as late as 1860, that there was a difference in the number of girls going to school. However, secondary school for women developed faster than the girls. The first secondary educational school was established by Marie-Rose Léodille Delaunay in 1850. Organized after the law of 1893, by 1895 the government had established six secondary institutions for women.

[ 20 ] Though most Latin American countries have achieved universal or near universal primary education for all children, for Haiti primary education, the enrollment rate of boys was still somewhat higher than that of girls by 1987.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and politician Mirlande Manigat in 2011 The Overall System [ edit ] The education system in Haiti is one that is underdeveloped. Although there are primary, secondary, and tertiary schools, attendance and graduation from these schools, and upper levels is low, being that the majority of the population are combating poverty and are focused on labour income in order to live. How the system is structured is that formal education begins at preschool followed by 9 years of fundamental education. Starting from the second year of secondary education, students are allowed to seek vocational training programs. Higher education after the completion of second year studies is not common but highly appraised being that most children don't have the chance to begin in the first place. Tuition rates have dramatically increased in the past starting from the preschool level. What once cost 1628 gourdes ($41) in 2004, increased to 4675 gourdes ($117) in 2007. This increase was 187% in the 3 years that most families simply cannot afford, [ 21 ] especially for families in rural Haiti. The rural-urban difference is also considerable as nearly 25% of the women in urban areas have finished secondary school, compared with less than 2 percent in rural areas. Overall, according to a study by the Haitian Institute of Statistics and IT, 39% of Haitians has never attended school. There's a high percentage especially in the 6-12 age range that's at 37.7%.

[ 21 ] Situations only worsened after the 2010 earthquake.

Post 2010 Earthquake [ edit ] More than 4,000 schools (preschool fundamental, secondary, higher education, and vocational institutions) were damaged and over 1,200 destroyed. The deaths of teachers and students were plenty more. The entire education system had to be shut down, not least because the Ministry of Education itself collapsed.

[ 22 ] “ With a lack of stable infrastructure. supplies, and a high demand for educated school officials, children, especially women, had to help their family in informal ways. A pre-earthquake study by the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights concluded that almost all Haitian girls work in the informal market, primarily between the ages of 5 and 9. Although sources would like to announce that educational inequality is narrowing as the average growth enrollment has been significantly greater for girls than for boys, it is simply not the case. As of 2015, only 60.7% of the population is literate.

[ 23 ] Males are more educated, about  64.3% of them know how to learn and write while women, constricted by gender roles and violence are only at 57.3%.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Sexual violence in Haiti Solidarite Fanm Ayisyèn [1] General: Human rights in Haiti References [ edit ] ^ "Human Development Report 2021/2022" (PDF) . HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORTS . Retrieved 23 December 2022 .

^ Constitution of the Republic of Haiti , Title III: 
"Art. 17: All Haitians, regardless of sex or marital status, who have attained twenty-one years of age may exercise their political and civil rights if they meet the other conditions prescribed by the Constitution and by the law.
Art. 18: Haitians shall be equal before the law, subject to the special advantages conferred on native-born Haitians who have never renounced their nationality." ^ a b Report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights on "The Right of Women in Haiti to be Free from Violence and Discrimination." OEA/Ser.L/V/II, Doc. 64, 10 March 2009.

^ a b c d e Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick (2004).

Haiti: The Breached Citadel (2nd ed.). Ontario: Canadian Scholars Press. p.

38 .

ISBN 1-55130-268-3 .

^ Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick (2004).

Haiti: The Breached Citadel (2nd ed.). Ontario: Canadian Scholars Press. p.

40 .

ISBN 1-55130-268-3 .

^ Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick (2004).

Haiti: The Breached Citadel (2nd ed.). Ontario: Canadian Scholars Press. p.

41 .

ISBN 1-55130-268-3 .

^ Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick (2004).

Haiti: The Breached Citadel (2nd ed.). Ontario: Canadian Scholars Press. p.

44 .

ISBN 1-55130-268-3 .

^ UNDP 2007/2008 Human Development Report, Haiti Factsheet ^ Bell, Beverly.

Walking on fire : Haitian women's stories of survival and resistance . p.

94 .

ISBN 978-0-8014-8748-4 .

^ Charles, Carolle (1995). "Gender and politics in contemporary Haiti".

Feminist Studies .

21 : 146.

^ Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick (2004).

Haiti: The Breached Citadel (2nd ed.). Ontario: Canadian Scholars Press. pp.

38 –39.

ISBN 1-55130-268-3 .

^ a b c d Bellegarde-Smith, Patrick (2004).

Haiti: The Breached Citadel (2nd ed.). Ontario: Canadian Scholars Press. p.

39 .

ISBN 1-55130-268-3 .

^ Ulysse, Gina Athéna.

"The Legacy of Haitian Feminist Paulette Poujol-Oriol" .

Ms. Magazine Blog . Retrieved 8 March 2015 .

^ Rape in Haiti: A Weapon of Terror, Human Rights Watch (HRW), 1 July 1994 ^ Myriam Merlet (2 February 2004).

"Forces vives d'Haiti décrétent le Gouvernement Lavalas hors la loi" . ENFOFANM.

^ "Rewinding History: The Rights of Haitian Women" 2005 Report of the Let Haiti Live Women's Rights Delegation sponsored by the Ecumenical Program on Central America and the Caribbean (EPICA), January 2005. Obtained June 3rd 2009 ^ Amnesty International, Press Release, Embargoed Until Noon, Thursday, Nov. 27, 2008. Obtained June 3, 2009 ^ Amnesty International launched a grass-roots campaign to send postcards to the Prime Minister of Haiti to remind her of her duty to protect Haitian women. The text of the letter was such:

"Dear Prime Minister:

I am writing to you to express my deep concern at the levels of sexual violence perpetrated against girls in Haiti, particularly during the carnival period. While the true extent of sexual violence against girls is not known, every year, in Port-au-Prince alone, dozens of girls report being raped at gunpoint by groups of young men.

I therefore urge you and your government to implement all necessary measures to prevent rape and protect girls' right to live free from violence, to ensure that the perpetrators are brought to justice and that the victims receive adequate support and reparation.

Yours respectfully," ^ "108 Sri Lankan peacekeepers in Haiti to be repatriated after claims they paid prostitutes" . International Herald Tribune. 2007-11-02.

^ Clement, Job B. “History of Education in Haiti: 1804-1915.” Revista De Historia De América, no. 88, 1979, pp. 33–74. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/20139335.

^ a b c Suzata, Eriko. 2011. Education in Haiti: An Overview of Trends, Issues, and Plans. World Innovative Summit for Education. Retrieved 24 November 2012. [20]Archived 14 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ UNICEF (2011) Children in Haiti: One year adter- The long road from relief to recovery, New York: UNICEF ^ The Central America :: Haiti — The World Factbook - Central Intelligence Agencyhttps://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ha.html ^ d’Adesky, Anne-Christine. “The Haiti Gender Shadow Report” 2010 Haiti Equality Summit. Genderaction.

http://www.genderaction.org/publications/2010/gsr.pdf ^ Gordon, D., Lenoel, A., & Nandy, S. (2012). Multidimensional child poverty in Haiti. In Nandy S. & Minujin A. (Eds.), Global child poverty and well-being: Measurement, concepts, policy and action(pp. 357-378).Bristol: Bristol University Press. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt9qgppd.20 Bibliography [ edit ] Haiti Rapes , Lyn Duff, Pacific News Service, Haiti Action Net, 10 March 2005 Walking on Fire: Haitian Women's Stories of Survival and Resistance , Beverly Bell. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 2001 Gender and Politics in Contemporary Haiti: The Duvalierist State, Transnationalism, and the Emergence of a New Feminism (1980–1990) , Carolle Charles. Feminist Studies. 1995 Challenging Violence: Haitian Women Unite Women's Rights and Human Rights , Anne Fuller, Association of Concerned African Scholars . Spring/Summer 1999 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Women of Haiti .

Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund: Haiti [2] Haitian Women’s Rights Organizations [3] v t e Haiti articles History Timeline Taíno chiefdoms Captaincy General of Santo Domingo Colonial governors Devastations of Osorio Atlantic slave trade Maroons Peace of Ryswick Saint-Domingue Colonial governors Slavery Le Jeune Case Haitian Revolution 1804 massacre First Empire State Kingdom Republic 1806–1820 1820–1849 Unification of Hispaniola Second Empire Post-imperial Republic U.S. occupation Duvalier family Anti-Duvalier protest movement 1991 coup d'état 2004 coup d'état 2010 earthquake 2010s cholera outbreak Hurricane Matthew Crisis (2018–present) Gang war 2022 fuel protests COVID-19 pandemic 2021 earthquake List of massacres List of revolutions and coups d'état Geography Administrative divisions Arrondissements Border Cities Deforestation Departments Earthquakes Environment Hispaniola Islands National parks Rivers Wildlife World Heritage Sites Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT rights Law enforcement Military Commanders-in-chief Parliament Senate Chamber of Deputies Political parties President List Prime Minister List Supreme Court Economy Agriculture Central bank External debt Foreign aid Gourde (currency) Poverty Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Crime Demographics Education Ethnic groups Health Religion People Social class Squatting Water and sanitation Culture Art Coat of arms Cinema Citadelle Laferrière Cuisine Flag Languages Haitian Creole Haitian French Literature Media Music Mythology National anthem Sans-Souci Palace Public holidays Television The Unknown Maroon Outline Index Category Portal v t e Women in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Haiti portal Politics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Women_in_Haiti&oldid=1288767669#History_of_the_Haitian_women's_movement " Categories : Women in Haiti Women's rights in Haiti Feminism in Haiti Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 17:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Women in Haiti 7 languages Add topic

