Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Taxonomy Toggle Taxonomy subsection 1.1 Extant species 1.2 Fossils 2 Description 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Uria 36 languages العربية Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kotava Кыргызча Latviešu Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Murres ) Genus of birds For other uses, see Uria (disambiguation) .

"Murre" redirects here; not to be confused with Murree .

For ships named Murre , see MV Murre and NOAAS Murre II .

Uria Temporal range: Late Miocene–present PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N Common murre between two thick-billed murres Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Aves Order: Charadriiformes Family: Alcidae Genus: Uria Brisson , 1760 Type species Colymbus aalge Pontoppidan , 1763 Species Uria aalge Uria lomvia Uria is a genus of seabirds in the auk family known in Europe as guillemots , in most of North America as murres , and in Newfoundland and Labrador as turr . These are medium-sized birds with mainly brown or black plumage in the breeding season. They breed on the coasts of the northern Atlantic and Pacific oceans.

Taxonomy [ edit ] The genus Uria was introduced by the French zoologist Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760 with the common murre ( Uria aalge ) as the type species .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The genus name is from Ancient Greek ouria , a waterbird  mentioned by Athenaeus .

[ 3 ] The English "guillemot" is from French guillemot probably derived from Guillaume , "William".

[ 4 ] "Murre" is of uncertain origins, but may imitate the call of the common guillemot.

[ 5 ] Uria auks are relatives of the razorbill , little auk and the extinct great auk and together make up the tribe Alcini.  Despite the similar British common names, they are not so closely related to the Cepphus guillemots, which form the tribe Cepphini.

Extant species [ edit ] The genus contains two species: [ 6 ] Genus Uria – Brisson , 1760 – two species Common name Scientific name and subspecies Range Size and ecology IUCN status and estimated population Common murre or common guillemot Uria aalge (Linnaeus, 1758) Seven subspecies U. a. aalge U. a. albionis U. a. hyperborea U. a. intermedia U. a. spiloptera U. a. inornata U. a. californica' North Pacific, Japan, Eastern Russia, Alaska, California, Oregon, Washington, British Columbia, Canada, Greenland, Iceland, northern Ireland and Britain, southern Norway, possibly New England Size : Habitat : Diet : LC Thick-billed murre or Brünnich's guillemot Uria lomvia (Linnaeus, 1758) Four subspecies U. l. lomvia – ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) U. l. eleonorae – (Portenko, 1937) U. l. heckeri – (Portenko, 1944) U. l. arra – ( Pallas , 1811) Northern Hemisphere Size : Habitat : Diet : LC Fossils [ edit ] Uria brodkorbi , a fossil murre from the Monterey Formation of southern California Some prehistoric Uria species are also known: Uria bordkorbi Howard, 1981 ( Monterey or Sisquoc , Late Miocene of Lompoc, USA) Uria affinis (Marsh, 1872) (Late Pleistocene of E USA) - possibly a subspecies of U. lomvia Uria paleohesperis Howard, 1982 (Late Miocene of W USA) Uria onoi Watanabe, Matsuoka & Hasegawa, 2016 (Middle-Late Pleistocene of Japan) U. brodkorbi is notable insofar as it is the only known occurrence of the Alcini tribe in the temperate to subtropical Pacific , except for the very fringe of the range of U. aalge . It suggests that the Uria species, which are the sister taxon to all the other Alcini, and like them are usually believed to have evolved in the Atlantic, may have evolved in the Caribbean or possibly close to the Isthmus of Panama . The modern Pacific distribution would then be part of a later arctic expansion, whereas most other auk lineages form clades with a continuous range in the Pacific, from arctic to subtropical waters.

Description [ edit ] These birds breed in large colonies on coastal cliffs, laying single elongated conical eggs directly on cliff ledges. They move south in winter to keep in ice-free waters.

They dive for food from the surface, swimming underwater and being among the deepest divers of all birds, using their stubby wings to routinely dive to more than 100 meters, and feeding on fish and crustaceans , also some molluscs , insects and plant material.

[ 7 ] Adult birds are black or brown on the head, neck, back and wings with white underparts. The bill is long and pointed.  They have a small rounded black tail. The lower face becomes white in winter.

The flight is strong and direct, and these species have fast wing beats due to the short wings.

Uria guillemots produce a variety of harsh cackling calls at the breeding colonies, but are silent at sea.

References [ edit ] ^ Brisson, Mathurin Jacques (1760).

Ornithologie, ou, Méthode Contenant la Division des Oiseaux en Ordres, Sections, Genres, Especes & leurs Variétés (in French and Latin). Paris: Jean-Baptiste Bauche.

Vol. 1, p. 52 , Vol. 6, p. 70 .

^ Peters, James Lee , ed. (1934).

Check-list of Birds of the World . Vol. 2. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 352.

^ Jobling, James A (2010).

The Helm Dictionary of Scientific Bird Names . London: Christopher Helm. p. 396.

ISBN 978-1-4081-2501-4 .

^ "Guillemot" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "Murre" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Gill, Frank ; Donsker, David, eds. (2019).

"Noddies, gulls, terns, auks" .

World Bird List Version 9.2 . International Ornithologists' Union . Retrieved 24 June 2019 .

^ National Geographic Society.

"Thick-Billed Murres, Thick-Billed Murre Pictures, Thick-Billed Murre Facts - National Geographic" . Archived from the original on January 21, 2010.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Uria .

Hunting ‘Turr’ in Newfoundland’s Frigid Waters , New York Times, 4 Dec. 2016 v t e Genera of shorebirds and their extinct allies Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Aves Infraclass: Neognathae Clade: Neoaves Order: Charadriiformes Charadriiformes incertae sedis † Charadriisimilis † Eupterornis ?

† Fluviatitavis ?

† Jiliniornis † " Morsoravis " † Nahmavis † Palintropus ?

† Sarjeantopodus † Scandiavis † Volgavis ?

† Laornithidae ?

Laornis † Graculavidae ?

Dakotornis Graculavus Palaeotringa Telmatornis ?

Charadrii See below ↓ Scolopaci See below ↓ Lari See below ↓ Charadrii incertae sedis † Cherevychnavis Burhinidae Burhinus Esacus † Genucrassum Pluvianellidae Pluvianellus Chionidae Chionis † Chionoides † Neilus Pluvianidae Pluvianus Pluvianidae Vanellinae † Dolicopterus ?

Erythrogonys Hoploxypterus Vanellus † Viator Charadriinae Anarhynchus Charadrius † Dorypaltus Elseyornis † Jilniornis Oreopholus Peltohyas Phegornis Pluvialis Thinornis Recurvirostridae Cladorhynchus Himantopus † Kashinia Recurvirostra Ibidorhynchidae Ibidorhyncha Haematopodidae Haematopus Scolopaci incertae sedis † Hakawai † Scolopacimilis Jacanidae Actophilornis Hydrophasianus Irediparra Jacana † Janipes Metopidius Microparra † Nupharanassa Pedionomidae † Oligonomus Pedionomus Rostratulidae Nycticryphes Rostratula Scolopacidae Actitis Arenaria Bartramia Calidris Coenocorypha † Elorius Gallinago Limnocryptes Limnodromus Limosa † Mirolia Numenius † Nuntius † Paractitis † Parvelorius Phalaropus Prosobonia Scolopax Tringa † Villetus Xenus Thinocoridae Attagis Thinocorus Lari Alcidae † Divisulcus † Hydrotherikornis † Miocepphus † Pseudocepphus Alcinae Alcini Alca Alle † Pinguinus Uria Synthliboramphini Synthliboramphus Cepphini Cepphus Brachyramphini Brachyramphus Fraterculinae Aethiini Aethia Ptychoramphus Fraterculini Cerorhinca Fratercula † Mancallinae Alcodes Mancalla Miomancalla Praemancalla Dromadidae Dromas Glareolidae † Becassius † Boutersemia † Mioglareola † Paractiornis † " Precursor "?

Glareolinae Glareola Stiltia Glareolinae Cursorius Rhinoptilus Laridae Anous Chlidonias Chroicocephalus Creagrus † Feducciavis † Gaviota Gelochelidon Gygis Hydrocoloeus Hydroprogne Ichthyaetus † Laricola Larosterna Larus Leucophaeus † Limicolavis ?

† Limosavis Onychoprion Pagophila Phaetusa † Pseudosterna Rhodostethia Rynchops Rissa Sterna † Sternalara Sternula Thalasseus Xema Stercorariidae Stercorarius Turnicidae † Cerestenia † Eocliffia ?

Ortyxelos † Turnipax Turnix Taxon identifiers Uria Wikidata : Q838599 Wikispecies : Uria ADW : Uria BOLD : 4525 CoL : 855Y EPPO : 1URIAG EURING : 6359 Fauna Europaea : 96971 Fauna Europaea (new) : 126c0ee5-e41b-4390-9c5a-e48b822ea0cf GBIF : 2481338 iNaturalist : 4515 ITIS : 176973 NBN : NBNSYS0000188730 NCBI : 13745 Open Tree of Life : 820019 Paleobiology Database : 83399 WoRMS : 137041 Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Uria&oldid=1297701242 " Categories : Uria Bird genera Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 23:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Uria 36 languages Add topic

