Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 First commemoratives 2 Backlash 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Commemorative stamp 17 languages العربية Беларуская Brezhoneg Dansk Deutsch Français Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский தமிழ் Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Postage stamp created to honor or commemorate a place, event, person, or object Alexander Graham Bell commemorative issue of 1947 A commemorative stamp is a postage stamp , often issued on a significant date such as an anniversary , to honor or commemorate a place, event, person, or object. The subject of the commemorative stamp is usually spelled out in print, unlike definitive stamps which normally depict the subject along with the denomination and country name only. Many postal services issue several commemorative stamps each year, sometimes holding first day of issue ceremonies at locations connected with the subjects. Commemorative stamps can be used alongside ordinary stamps. Unlike definitive stamps that are often reprinted and sold over a prolonged period of time for general usage, commemorative stamps are usually printed in limited quantities and sold for a much shorter period of time, usually, until supplies run out.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] First commemoratives [ edit ] First Peru commemorative stamp issue, 1870 The $1 stamp included in the US issue of commemoratives, introduced on January 2, 1893 New South Wales first commemorative stamp, 1888 There are several candidates for the title of the first commemorative.  A 17-cent stamp issued in 1860 by New Brunswick, showing the Prince of Wales in anticipation of his visit is one possibility.

[ 3 ] Often cited as the world's first commemoratives are the sixteen stamps of the United States Columbian Issue , produced to celebrate the World Columbian Exposition in Chicago honoring the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's arrival in the New World in 1492.  (Illustrated here is the $1 stamp from the series: "Isabella pledging her jewels.") [ 1 ] [ 4 ] Abraham Lincoln Issue of 1866 The United States 15-cent black stamp of 1866 depicts Abraham Lincoln and was the first stamp issued after his assassination in 1865, but it was not officially declared as a memorial to him.

[ 5 ] The U.S. also issued a 5-cent stamp in 1882 showing the recently assassinated President James A. Garfield . In addition, the United States issued stamped envelopes for the Centennial Exposition in 1876, although technically these are postal stationery and not stamps. The British Jubilee Issue of 1887 may be thought of as commemorative of the 50 years' reign of Queen Victoria, although there are no special inscriptions on the stamps, and they were intended as regular stamps. In 1870 Peru issued a 5¢ scarlet Locomotive and Arms stamp and is regarded as the first commemorative postage stamp, issued to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the first railway in South America.

[ 1 ] First UK commemorative stamps Issue of 1924 Though the United Kingdom often set the precedent for postage stamps and their designs, they were the late runners with the issue of their first commemorative stamp, not issuing one until 1924 when it printed and released the British Empire Exhibition issue of 1924.

[ 6 ] Other premier commemorative stamps were issued by New South Wales in 1888 to mark its 100th anniversary; the six types all include the inscription " ONE HUNDRED YEARS ". Commemoratives followed in 1891 for Hong Kong and Romania. In 1892 and 1893 a half-dozen nations of America and Spain issued commemorative stamps for the 400th anniversary of the West's discovery of America by Christopher Columbus.

Backlash [ edit ] The appearance of commemorative postage stamps caused a backlash among some stamp collectors in the early years of stamp collecting, who balked at the prospect of laying out ever-larger sums to acquire the stamps of the world. This led to the formation of the Society for the Suppression of Speculative Stamps in 1895. The organization broke up after unsuccessful attempts at getting collectors at large to comply with their wishes. Today early commemoratives are still prized by collectors.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Airmail stamp Commemoration of the American Civil War on postage stamps Stamp collecting Territories of the United States on stamps Template:US stamp locator References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Lines of stamp classifications have blurred, By Rick Miller" . Linn's Stamp News. 2010. Archived from the original on 4 May 2015 . Retrieved 1 October 2010 .

^ "U.S. Commemorative Stamps" . Alphabetilately. 2010 . Retrieved 1 October 2010 .

^ Charles Connell ^ Scott United States Stamp catalogue ^ A Sharp Eye on collecting US Classics (Sharp Photography Publications, 2021) ASIN B091MBTGJ7 (read online) ^ "1924 British Empire Exhibition issue" .

The British Postal Museum and Archive . Archived from the original on 24 November 2010 . Retrieved 7 November 2010 .

^ "STAMPS, By Barth Healey, August 27, 1989" .

New York Times . 2010 . Retrieved 1 October 2010 .

Authority control databases National Germany Other NARA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commemorative_stamp&oldid=1300642596 " Categories : Cultural heritage Commemorative stamps Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 15:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Commemorative stamp 17 languages Add topic

