Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Culture 3 Structure and features 4 Rhetoric 5 In different media 6 Evolution of terminology 7 Popular op-eds 8 Possible conflicts of interest 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Op-ed 17 languages Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of opinion-expressing written pieces Journalism News Article ( Headline · Byline · Dateline · Report · Special report · Exclusive · Interview · Column · Opinion piece · Editorial · Op-ed ) Writing style ( Five Ws · Inverted pyramid ) Index of journalism articles Beats Arts Business Data Entertainment Environment Fashion Local Medicine Music Politics Science Sports Technology Traffic Video games War Weather World Genres Adversarial Advocacy ( Interventionism ) Analytic Blogging Citizen Civic Collaborative Comics-based Community Database Enterprise Explanatory Feature story Gonzo Human-interest Immersion Infotainment / Soft media Interpretive Investigative Long-form Narrative New Journalism Non-profit Opinion Peace Photojournalism Public service Sensor Underground Video Visual Watchdog Ethics and standards Chequebook Churnalism Codes of ethics Culture Editing ( Copy editing · Fact-checking ) Fake news Horse race Journalese Media bias ( False balance ) News values ( Above the fold · Man bites dog ) Objectivity Pink-slime Scandals Sensationalism Sources Spiking Tabloid ( Television ) Yellow Social impact Decline of newspapers ( News desert ) Fourth Estate Fifth Estate Editorial independence Freedom of information Freedom of the press ( Defamation · Safety ) Journalism school Media manipulation News propaganda ( Model ) Public relations ( Media relations · News embargo · Press conference · Press release ) Source protection News media Newspapers ( Newspaper of record · Middle-market · Newspaper formats · Broadsheet · Tabloid · Online ) Magazines Broadcast journalism ( TV and radio ) Digital journalism Multimedia Documentary film News agencies Alternative media Newsroom Journalist ( Staff writer · Correspondent · News presenter ) Columnist Editors ( Editor-in-chief · Managing editor · Political editor · Editorial board · Assignment editor · Duty editor · Public editor · Editor-at-large · Contributing editor ) Weather presenter News bureau News director Pundit Stringer Journalism portal Category: Journalism v t e An op-ed , short for "opposite the editorial page," is a type of written prose commonly found in newspapers, magazines, and online publications.

[ 1 ] They usually represent a writer's strong and focused opinion on an issue of relevance to a targeted audience. Typically ranging from 500 to 700 words, op-eds are distinct from articles written by the publication's editorial board and often feature the opinions of outside contributors.

[ 2 ] Op-eds allow authors, not part of the publication's editorial team, to express opinions, perspectives, and arguments on various issues of public interest. Unlike traditional editorials, which reflect the opinion of the publication itself, op-eds offer independent voices a foundation to influence public discourse.

The New York Times is widely credited with popularizing the modern op-ed format.

[ 3 ] Origin [ edit ] The "Page Op.", created in 1921 by Herbert Bayard Swope of The New York Evening World , is a possible precursor to the modern op-ed.

[ 4 ] When Swope took over as main editor in 1920, he opted to designate a page from editorial staff as "a catchall for book reviews, society boilerplate, and obituaries".

[ 5 ] Swope explained: "It occurred to me that nothing is more interesting than opinion when opinion is interesting, so I devised a method of cleaning off the page opposite the editorial, which became the most important in America ... and thereon I decided to print opinions, ignoring facts." [ 6 ] The modern op-ed page was formally developed in 1970 under the direction of The New York Times editor John B. Oakes . Media scholar Michael J. Socolow writes of Oakes' innovation: "The Times' effort synthesized various antecedents and editorial visions. Journalistic innovation is usually complex and typically involves multiple external factors. The Times op-ed page appeared in an era of democratizing cultural and political discourse and economic distress for the company itself." [ 4 ] The newspaper's executives developed a place for outside contributors, with space reserved for sale at a premium rate for additional commentaries and other purposes.

The Washington Post too published its own version of the op-ed right before the New York Times debuted in September 1970. Significant differences between The Post's op-ed page and The Times’s op-ed page include The Washington Post having no ads and no artistic component. In the 1930s, The Washington Post began referring to its commentary section as the "op-ed page," situated opposite its editorial page.  The Los Angeles Times followed suit with a similar designation in the 1950s and 1960s, while The Chicago Tribune had tried a variation of this format as early as 1912.

[ 4 ] That is to say that while we credit Oakes as the creator of the op-ed, the true origins of the op-ed are highly debated in the journalistic sphere.

[ 3 ] Culture [ edit ] With the development and availability of radio and television broadcasting as major information outlets, stakeholders and print journalism workers sought to increase or maintain their audience and relevance.

[ 3 ] Major newspapers such as The New York Times and The Washington Post began including more opinionated journalism, adding more columns, and increasing the extent of their opinion pages to drive public participation and readership.

[ 7 ] This was exacerbated by the period, as world events like WWI , WWII , the Vietnam War , the Korean War , and major cultural changes began to make the public restless. Editors wanted to keep up readership as newspapers began to go out of business; they also needed to find new ways to compete with the versatility of TV and radio , which started to become commonplace in people’s homes.

[ 8 ] On the other hand, the general public wanted to have multiple points of view, as this time was also marked by a wave of liberalism , including the fight for gender equality and the civil rights movement .

Structure and features [ edit ] Op-eds feature a concise structure, with an average of under 700 words, and typically begin with an introduction.

[ 9 ] They begin with a hook to engage readers, usually something outlandish or exaggerated for the shock factor. Then the author usually ties the intro together with a story related to them or an experience they had. Following this is the body, which has a tone that is usually persuasive and conversational, often divided into three or four sections, each presenting evidence or arguments supporting the thesis. They then tie the op-ed together with a conclusion or closing statement where a call to action is made.

Op-eds are written by a wide range of authors, including journalists , academics, politicians , and activists . Publications invite guest contributors to present various viewpoints, despite the viewpoints often being contradictory to the editorial's position on certain topics.

[ 10 ] Today, op-eds are widely read across both traditional and digital platforms, and writers range from academics and activists to politicians and celebrities.

The op-ed is known for the diverse opinions of its columnists and can include media in a variety of forms including: Seminar Essays Poetry Political cartoon Advertisements Speeches Blog post Rhetoric [ edit ] Op-eds are written to persuade, inform, or incite public debate, with rhetoric playing a vital role in achieving these goals. Contributors invited to write an op-ed for an editorial commonly use appeals to ethos (credibility), pathos (emotion), and logos (logic) to structure their arguments and connect with readers.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Ethos : Contributors often establish their credentials early to build credibility. For instance, a climate scientist’s op-ed on climate change would typically begin with a brief mention of the author's background to emphasize their authority on the subject.

Pathos : An emotional appeal is also a common tactic, with authors evoking sympathy, anger, or hope in order to drive people to action.

Logos : Logical appeals are also achieved through well-reasoned arguments and evidence. Authors often use statistics, historical examples, and real-world scenarios to make their case compelling and hard to ignore.

In different media [ edit ] With the rise of digital platforms, op-eds have expanded beyond traditional print media. Online publications and blogs have become popular, and social media plays a significant role in disseminating and engaging with op-ed content. Additionally, op-eds are increasingly presented in audio and video formats, reaching audiences through podcasts and video essays . The internet and social media have further evolved the op-ed format. Platforms like HuffPost , Medium , and Substack allow virtually anyone to publish opinion pieces, which have been conflated with the op-ed to the point where the terms have become interchangeable. While they have always had a significant impact on public opinion, the digital age has allowed op-eds to influence the public more broadly and almost instantaneously.

Evolution of terminology [ edit ] In April 2021, New York Times opinion editor Kathleen Kingsbury announced the retirement of the term "op-ed" in favor of the more precise term "guest essay".

[ 13 ] The main reason was that in the modern digital world in which millions of readers only read the Times online, it no longer made sense to speak of an article running "opposite the editorial page".

[ 13 ] In Kingsbury's words: "It is a relic of an older age and an older print newspaper design".

[ 13 ] Popular op-eds [ edit ] " I Am Part of the Resistance Inside the Trump Administration " (2018) - The New York Times: Written by an anonymous senior official in the first Trump administration , this op-ed created a significant public response by claiming that some within the administration were actively working to subvert certain presidential directives.

"Can America Prevent Russia from Using Low-Yield Nukes" (2018) - The Buzz: Written by author Mark B. Schneider, a senior analyst with the National Institute for PublicPolicy. This op-ed advises the U.S.

to deploy low-yield nuclear warheads on submarines to counter Russia 's strategy of using limited nuclear strikes for coercive advantage in conventional conflicts.

[ 14 ] "How Will the Mideast Bloodshed End? Not With a Bullet" (2024) - The Los Angeles Times : Written by LZ Granderson this article discusses the limitations of military solutions in the Middle East , emphasizing the need for humanitarian aid and diplomatic efforts to address the root causes of conflict and instability in Gaza and Lebanon .

[ 15 ] Possible conflicts of interest [ edit ] The relationship between op-eds, editors, and funding from interest groups has been a concern. In 2011, in an open letter to  The New York Times, a group of U.S. journalists and academics called for conflict-of-interest transparency in op-eds.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Critics of op-ed journalism argue that it can oversimplify complex issues and may introduce bias , especially when written by people affiliated with powerful interest groups , corporations, or political entities.  They argue that op-eds can become tools for misinformation , especially in today’s highly polarized media environment, due to the lack of rigorous editorial oversight.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Opinion piece Feuilleton Pundit References [ edit ] ^ Simon, Stephen D (February 23, 2006), "What Do All These Numbers Mean?" , Statistical Evidence in Medical Trials , Oxford University PressOxford, pp.

137– 166, doi : 10.1093/oso/9780198567608.003.0006 , ISBN 978-0-19-856760-8 , retrieved November 10, 2024 ^ "1978" , Charlotte Delbo , University of Massachusetts Press, pp.

392– 406, May 28, 2021, doi : 10.2307/j.ctv1prsr7t.24 , retrieved November 10, 2024 ^ a b c "archives.nypl.org -- New York Times Company records. John B. Oakes papers" .

archives.nypl.org . Retrieved November 10, 2024 .

^ a b c Socolow, Michael J. (2010).

"A Profitable Public Sphere: The Creation of the New York Times Op-Ed Page" .

Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly . University of Maine.

^ Meyer, K. (1990).

Pundits, poets, and wits . New York: Oxford University Press.

^ Swope, H. B. as quoted in Meyer, K. (1990).

Pundits, poets, and wits . New York: Oxford University Press , p. xxxvii.

^ "Not just "elected officials and policy experts": Top editors are trying to refocus the opinion pages on regular people" .

Nieman Lab . Retrieved November 10, 2024 .

^ Lang, Kurt; Lang, Gladys Engel (April 24, 2018), "Ordeal Before Television The Kennedy-Nixon Debates" , Television and Politics , Routledge, pp.

97– 122, doi : 10.4324/9781351306089-4 , ISBN 978-1-351-30608-9 , retrieved November 10, 2024 ^ "Writing Effective Op-Eds" .

Communicator Toolkit . Retrieved November 10, 2024 .

^ Seguín, Bécquer (2024).

The Op-Ed Novel: A Literary History of Post-Franco Spain . Harvard University Press.

doi : 10.2307/jj.9128010 .

ISBN 978-0-674-26010-8 .

^ Knight, Kathleen (July 30, 2008).

"The Politics of Attention: How Government Prioritizes Problems, by Bryan D. Jones and Frank R. Baumgartner: University of Chicago Press, 2005. 316 pp. $70.00 cloth, $25.00 paper" .

Political Communication .

25 (3): 330– 331.

doi : 10.1080/10584600802197624 .

ISSN 1058-4609 .

^ Sommer, Bob; Maycroft, John R. (August 2008).

"Influencing Public Policy: An Analysis of Published Op-Eds by Academics" .

Politics & Policy .

36 (4): 586– 613.

doi : 10.1111/j.1747-1346.2008.00122.x .

ISSN 1555-5623 .

^ a b c Kingsbury, Kathleen (April 26, 2021).

"Why The New York Times Is Retiring the Term 'Op-Ed' " .

The New York Times .

^ Taylor, Jeffrey (January 24, 2022).

"Deterring Russian Nuclear Threats with Low-Yield Nukes May Encourage Limited Nuclear War" .

Journal of Advanced Military Studies .

2022 (special): 207– 230.

doi : 10.21140/mcuj.2022sistratcul012 .

ISSN 2770-2596 .

^ "Op-Ed" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved November 10, 2024 .

^ "US journalists launch campaign for 'op-ed transparency' " .

The Guardian . October 11, 2011 . Retrieved August 9, 2012 .

^ "Journos call for more transparency at New York Times op-ed page" .

Columbia Journalism Review . October 6, 2011 . Retrieved August 9, 2012 .

^ Meyerowitz, Joanne (September 1, 2020).

"180 Op–Eds: Or How to Make the Present Historical" .

Journal of American History .

107 (2): 323– 335.

doi : 10.1093/jahist/jaaa335 .

ISSN 0021-8723 .

External links [ edit ] Look up op-ed in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"What we talk about when we talk about editing" .

The New York Times . July 31, 2005 . Retrieved December 29, 2023 .

A robot wrote this entire article. Are you scared yet, human?

- the first op-ed completely written by an artificial intelligence (AI), published in September 2020 by The Guardian How to Write an Op-ed or Column - Harvard communications program Classic Op-Ed Structure - Harvard communications program Authority control databases International FAST National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Op-ed&oldid=1305215180 " Categories : Opinion journalism Newspaper content Essays Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2023 This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 18:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Op-ed 17 languages Add topic

