Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Career 3 Honors and awards 4 Selected publications 5 References Toggle the table of contents Larry Squire 6 languages العربية Deutsch Français 한국어 Magyar Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American psychologist Larry Squire Larry R. Squire in 2008 Born Larry Ryan Squire ( 1941-05-04 ) May 4, 1941 (age 84) Alma mater Oberlin College ( BA ) Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( PhD ) Scientific career Institutions University of California, San Diego Doctoral advisor Hans-Lukas Teuber Doctoral students Wendy Suzuki Website whoville .ucsd .edu /about .html Larry Ryan Squire (born May 4, 1941) is an American neuroscientist. He is a professor of psychiatry , neurosciences , and psychology at the University of California, San Diego , and a Senior Research Career Scientist at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Diego.  He is a leading investigator of the neurological bases of memory , which he studies using animal models and human patients with memory impairment .

Education [ edit ] Squire received a B.A.

from Oberlin College , where he studied with Celeste McCollough , and a Ph.D.

from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , where he studied under the mentorship of Peter Schiller and Hans-Lukas Teuber .

[ 1 ] He subsequently completed a postdoctoral fellowship at Albert Einstein College of Medicine .

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] Next Squire accepted a position as a faculty member at the University of California San Diego , where he has remained since. His publications include more than 480 research articles and two books: Memory and Brain (Oxford Press, 1987) and Memory: From Mind to Molecules with Eric Kandel (Roberts & Co., 2nd Ed, 2009). He is also senior editor of the textbook, Fundamental Neuroscience , now in its 4th Edition and editor-in-chief of The History of Neuroscience in Autobiography (now in eight volumes).

[ 1 ] Larry Squire illuminated the anatomy and phenotype of human memory impairment, identified the anatomical components of the medial temporal lobe memory system (with Stuart Zola), pioneered the biological distinction between declarative and nondeclarative memory, explored the conscious and unconscious memory systems of the mammalian brain, and helped establish the standard account of memory consolidation.

[ 1 ] Honors and awards [ edit ] In 1993–1994, Squire served as president of the Society for Neuroscience .

[ 3 ] He is an elected member of the National Academy of Sciences as of 1993, [ 4 ] and served on the governing Council from 2009 to 2012.  He has also been elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , [ 1 ] American Philosophical Society as of 1996, [ 5 ] and National Academy of Medicine (formerly The Institute of Medicine) as of 2000.

[ 6 ] He received the Charles A. Dana Award for Pioneering Achievements in Health in 1993, [ 7 ] the Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award from the American Psychological Association in 1993, [ 8 ] the William James Fellow of the Association for Psychological Science in 1994, [ 9 ] the William Middleton Award from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs in 1994, [ 10 ] the Metlife Foundation Award for Medical Research in Alzheimer's Disease in 1999, [ 11 ] the Karl Spencer Lashley Award from the American Philosophical Society in 1995, "for his seminal contribution to the delineation of implicit and explicit memory systems in the brain", [ 12 ] the McGovern Award from the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 2004, [ 13 ] the Herbert Crosby Warren Medal from the Society of Experimental Psychologists in 2007, [ 14 ] the Award for Scientific Reviewing from the National Academy of Sciences in 2012, [ 15 ] and the Goldman-Rakic Prize from the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation in 2012.

[ 16 ] He received an honorary degree from the University of Basel .

[ 17 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Memory and Brain New York; Oxford : Oxford University Press, 1987. XII, 315 p.

ISBN 0-19-504208-5 Memory: from Mind to Molecules, 2nd Edition , with Eric Kandel. Greenwood Village: Roberts & Co.

ISBN 0981519415 Fundamental Neuroscience . 4th ed. San Diego, CA : Academic Press, 2012. (Issued in 1998, 2003 and 2008.) 1426 p. avec CD ISBN 9780123858702 Squire, L. R. (2009).  "Memory and Brain Systems: 1969-2009." The Journal of Neuroscience , 29, 12711–12716.

Wixted, J. T. & Squire, L. R.  (2011). "The Medial Temporal Lobe and the Attributes of Memory." Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 15, 210–217.

Squire, L. R. & Wixted, J. (2011). "The Cognitive Neuroscience of Human Memory since H.M.", Annual Review of Neuroscience , 34, 259–288.

Insausti, R., Annese, J. Amaral, D. G., Squire, L. R. (2013).  "Human Amnesia and the Medial Temporal Lobe Illuminated by Neuropsychological and  Neurohistological Findings for Patient E.P.", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , US, 110, E1953-E1962.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Craighead, W. Edward; Nemeroff, Charles B. (2002).

"Squire, Larry R." .

The Corsini encyclopedia of psychology and behavioral science . Vol. 4. New York: Wiley. p. 1611.

ISBN 9780471240990 .

^ "About Larry" .

Memory Research Laboratory . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "SfN Presidents" .

Society for Neuroscience . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "Larry R. Squire" .

National Academy of Sciences . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "UCSD Faculty Members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences" .

University of California, San Diego . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE ELECTS THREE NEW SAN DIEGO MEMBERS" .

UCSD Health Sciences . October 16, 2000.

^ Sankaran, Neeraja (December 13, 1993).

"Dana Awards Honor Scientific Innovators" .

The Scientist . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "APA Award for Distinguished Scientific Contributions" .

American Psychological Association . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "1994 William James Fellow Award" .

Association for Psychological Science . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "VA BLR&D Research Awards" .

United States Department of Veterans Affairs . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "This year, MetLife Foundation Awards for Medical Research honored the two extraordinary researchers" .

American Federation for Aging Research . Archived from the original on 23 January 2012 . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "Karl Spencer Lashley Award" .

American Philosophical Society . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "John McGovern Lecture" .

AAAS . Archived from the original on 2 June 2016 . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "HOWARD CROSBY WARREN MEDAL" .

The Society of Experimental Psychologists . Archived from the original on 14 June 2013 . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "NAS Award for Scientific Reviewing" .

National Academy of Sciences . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "Dr. Larry Squire Honored for Outstanding Work in Cognitive Neuroscience" .

Brain and Behavior . September 20, 2012. Archived from the original on 31 May 2016 . Retrieved 28 April 2016 .

^ "Honorary Awards Faculty of Psychology" .

University of Basel . Retrieved 2 November 2020 .

v t e Human memory Basic concepts Encoding Storage Recall Attention Consolidation Neuroanatomy Types Sensory Echoic Eidetic Eyewitness Haptic Iconic Motor learning Visual Short-term " The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two " Working memory Long-term Active recall Autobiographical Explicit Declarative Episodic Semantic Flashbulb Hyperthymesia Implicit Meaningful learning Personal-event Procedural Rote learning Selective retention Tip of the tongue Forgetting Amnesia anterograde childhood post-hypnotic post-traumatic dissociative (psychogenic) retrograde selective transient global Decay theory Forgetting curve Interference theory Memory erasure Memory inhibition Motivated forgetting avoidance repression suppression Repressed memory Retrieval-induced forgetting Weapon focus Memory errors Confabulation Cryptomnesia Hindsight bias Imagination inflation Memory biases Memory conformity Misattribution of memory Misinformation effect Source-monitoring error False memory Deese–Roediger–McDermott paradigm False memory syndrome Memory implantation Lost in the mall technique Recovered-memory therapy Research methods Exceptional memory Indirect tests of memory Memory disorder In groups Collective memory Politics of memory Cultural memory Memory and social interactions Memory conformity Transactive memory Other topics Aging Art of memory chunking encoding memorization mnemonic rehearsal repetition Effects of alcohol Effects of exercise Effects of stress Emotion Memory improvement Nutrition Sleep Trauma In society Memory sport World Memory Championships Shas Pollak Related Absent-mindedness Atkinson–Shiffrin memory model Context-dependent and state-dependent memory Childhood memory Exosomatic memory Free recall Intermediate-term memory Involuntary memory flashbacks Levels of Processing model Metamemory Muscle memory Priming intertrial Prospective and retrospective memory The Seven Sins of Memory People Researchers Richard C. Atkinson Robert A. Bjork Stephen J. Ceci Susan Clancy Hermann Ebbinghaus Sigmund Freud Patricia Goldman-Rakic Ivan Izquierdo Marcia K. Johnson Eric Kandel Elizabeth Loftus Geoffrey Loftus James McGaugh Eleanor Maguire George Armitage Miller Brenda Milner Lynn Nadel Henry L. Roediger III Daniel Schacter Richard Shiffrin Arthur P. Shimamura Larry Squire Susumu Tonegawa Anne Treisman Endel Tulving Robert Stickgold Patients HM KC NA Clive Wearing Other Jonathan Hancock Paul R. McHugh Dominic O'Brien Ben Pridmore Cosmos Rossellius Andriy Slyusarchuk Category Psychology portal Philosophy portal v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Larry_Squire&oldid=1303711357 " Categories : Living people 20th-century American psychologists American cognitive neuroscientists Memory researchers 21st-century American psychologists Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science Fellows of the Society of Experimental Psychologists Oberlin College alumni Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni Albert Einstein College of Medicine alumni University of California, San Diego faculty American neuropsychologists Scientists from California Members of the American Philosophical Society 1941 births Members of the National Academy of Medicine Presidents of the Society for Neuroscience Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 16:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Larry Squire 6 languages Add topic

