Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Varieties of consensus Toggle Varieties of consensus subsection 1.1 Consensus gentium 1.2 Consensus as a regulative ideal 2 Critiques 3 See also Toggle See also subsection 3.1 Related topics 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Consensus theory of truth 5 languages Deutsch Español Italiano Polski 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Consensus theory of truth" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Concept in epistemology A consensus theory of truth is the process of taking statements to be true simply because people generally agree upon them.

[ 1 ] : 134 Varieties of consensus [ edit ] Consensus gentium [ edit ] An ancient criterion of truth, the consensus gentium ( Latin for agreement of the people ), states "that which is universal among men carries the weight of truth" (Ferm, 64).  A number of consensus theories of truth are based on variations of this principle.  In some criteria the notion of universal consent is taken strictly, while others qualify the terms of consensus in various ways.  There are versions of consensus theory in which the specific population weighing in on a given question, the proportion of the population required for consent, and the period of time needed to declare consensus vary from the classical norm.

Consensus as a regulative ideal [ edit ] A descriptive theory is one that tells how things are, while a normative theory tells how things ought to be.  Expressed in practical terms, a normative theory, more properly called a policy , tells agents how they ought to act.  A policy can be an absolute imperative, telling agents how they ought to act in any case, or it can be a contingent directive, telling agents how they ought to act if they want to achieve a particular goal.  A policy is frequently stated in the form of a piece of advice called a heuristic , a maxim , a norm , a rule , a slogan , and so on.  Other names for a policy are a recommendation and a regulative principle .

A regulative ideal can be expressed in the form of a description, but what it describes is an ideal state of affairs, a condition of being that constitutes its aim, end, goal, intention, or objective.  It is not the usual case for the actual case to be the ideal case, or else there would hardly be much call for a policy aimed at achieving an ideal.

Corresponding to the distinction between actual conditions and ideal conditions there is a distinction between actual consensus and ideal consensus.  A theory of truth founded on a notion of actual consensus is a very different thing from a theory of truth founded on a notion of ideal consensus.  Moreover, an ideal consensus may be ideal in several different ways.  The state of consensus may be ideal in its own nature, conceived in the matrix of actual experience by way of intellectual operations like abstraction, extrapolation, and limit formation.  Or the conditions under which the consensus is conceived to be possible may be formulated as idealizations of actual conditions.  A very common type of ideal consensus theory refers to a community that is an idealization of actual communities in one or more respects.

Critiques [ edit ] It is very difficult to find any philosopher of note who asserts a bare , naive , or pure consensus theory of truth, in other words, a treatment of truth that is based on actual consensus in an actual community without further qualification.  One obvious critique is that not everyone agrees to consensus theory, implying that it may not be true by its own criteria.  Another problem is defining how we know that consensus is achieved without falling prey to an infinite regress. Even if everyone agrees to a particular proposition, we may not know that it is true until everyone agrees that everyone agrees to it. Bare consensus theories are frequent topics of discussion, however, evidently because they serve the function of reference points for the discussion of alternative theories.

If consensus equals truth, then truth can be made by forcing or organizing a consensus, rather than being discovered through experiment or observation, or existing separately from consensus. The principles of mathematics also do not hold under consensus truth because mathematical propositions build on each other. If the consensus declared 2+2=5 it would render the practice of mathematics where 2+2=4 impossible.

Imre Lakatos characterizes it as a "watered down" form of provable truth propounded by some sociologists of knowledge , particularly Thomas Kuhn and Michael Polanyi .

[ 2 ] Philosopher Nigel Warburton argues that the truth by consensus process is not reliable, general agreement upon something does not make it true. Warburton says that one reason for the unreliability of the consensus theory of truth, is that people are gullible, easily misled, and prone to wishful thinking—they believe an assertion and espouse it as truth in the face of overwhelming evidence and facts to the contrary, simply because they wish that things were so.

[ 1 ] : 135 See also [ edit ] Society portal Argumentum ad populum – Fallacy of claiming the majority is always correct Coherentism – Theory in philosophical epistemology Common knowledge – Statement widely known to be true Confirmation holism – Idea in the philosophy of science Consensus reality – Notion of reality based on consensus view Conventional wisdom – Ideas generally accepted by experts or the public Jury trial – Type of legal trial Philosophy of history § History as propaganda: Is history always written by the victors?

Philosophy of history – Philosophical study of history and its discipline Truthiness – Quality of preferring concepts or facts one wishes to be true, rather than actual truth Wikiality – Neologism combining Wiki and reality Related topics [ edit ] Belief – Subjective attitude that something is true Conventionalism – Philosophical belief that principles depend on societal agreements, not external reality Epistemology – Philosophical study of knowledge Information – Facts provided or learned about something or someone Inquiry – Any process that has the aim of augmenting knowledge, resolving doubt, or solving a problem Knowledge – Awareness of facts or being competent Pragmatism – Philosophical tradition Pragmaticism – Branch of pragmatic philosophy Pragmatic maxim – Maxim of logic formulated by Charles Sanders Peirce Reproducibility – Aspect of scientific research Scientific method – Interplay between observation, experiment, and theory in science Testability – Extent to which truthness or falseness of a hypothesis/declaration can be tested Verifiability theory of meaning – Philosophical doctrine References [ edit ] ^ a b Nigel Warburton (2000).

"truth by consensus" .

Thinking from A to Z . Routledge. pp.

134–135 .

ISBN 0-415-22281-8 .

^ Imre Lakatos (1978).

"Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes" (PDF) .

Philosophical Papers . Cambridge University Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-521-28031-0 . Retrieved 1 October 2016 .

Sources [ edit ] Ferm, Vergilius (1962), "Consensus Gentium", p. 64 in Runes (1962).

Haack, Susan (1993), Evidence and Inquiry:  Towards Reconstruction in Epistemology , Blackwell Publishers, Oxford, UK.

Habermas, Jürgen (1976), "What Is  Universal Pragmatics?", 1st published, "Was heißt Universalpragmatik?", Sprachpragmatik und Philosophie , Karl-Otto Apel (ed.), Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt am Main.  Reprinted, pp. 1–68 in Jürgen Habermas, Communication and the Evolution of Society , Thomas McCarthy (trans.), Beacon Press, Boston, Massachusetts, 1979.

Habermas, Jürgen (1979), Communication and the Evolution of Society , Thomas McCarthy (trans.), Beacon Press, Boston, Massachusetts.

Habermas, Jürgen (1990), Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action , Christian Lenhardt and Shierry Weber Nicholsen (trans.), Thomas McCarthy (intro.), MIT Press , Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Habermas, Jürgen (2003), Truth and Justification , Barbara Fultner (trans.), MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

James, William (1907), Pragmatism, A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking, Popular Lectures on Philosophy , Longmans, Green, and Company, New York, New York.

James, William (1909), The Meaning of Truth, A Sequel to 'Pragmatism' , Longmans, Green, and Company, New York, New York.

Kant, Immanuel (1800), Introduction to Logic .  Reprinted, Thomas Kingsmill Abbott (trans.), Dennis Sweet (intro.), Barnes and Noble, New York, New York, 2005.

Kirkham, Richard L.

(1992), Theories of Truth:  A Critical Introduction , MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Rescher, Nicholas (1995), Pluralism:  Against the Demand for Consensus , Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

Runes, Dagobert D.

(ed., 1962), Dictionary of Philosophy , Littlefield, Adams, and Company, Totowa, New Jersey.

v t e Truth General Statement Propositions Truth-bearer Truth-maker Theories Coherence Consensus Constructivist Correspondence Deflationary Epistemic Pluralist Pragmatic Redundancy Semantic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Consensus_theory_of_truth&oldid=1277445438 " Categories : Concepts in epistemology Consensus Consensus reality Philosophy of science Theories of truth Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 February 2025, at 18:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Consensus theory of truth 5 languages Add topic

