Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Linguistics 2 Ethnology 3 Psychoanalysis 4 Cultural examples 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Unsaid 3 languages Français Italiano 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term referring to a social behaviour For the film The Unsaid , see The Unsaid (2001 film) .

The term " unsaid " refers what is not explicitly stated, what is hidden and/or implied in the speech of an individual or a group of people.

The unsaid may be the product of intimidation; of a mulling over of thought; or of bafflement in the face of the inexpressible.

[ 1 ] Linguistics [ edit ] Sociolinguistics points out that in normal communication what is left unsaid is as important as what is actually said [ 2 ] —that we expect our auditors regularly to fill in the social context / norms of our conversations as we proceed.

[ 3 ] Basil Bernstein saw one difference between the restricted code and the elaborated code of speech is that more would be left implicit in the former than the latter.

[ 4 ] Ethnology [ edit ] In ethnology , ethnomethodology established a strong link between unsaid and axiomatic .

Harold Garfinkel , following Durkheim , stressed that in any given situation, even a legally binding contract, the terms of agreement rest upon the 90% of unspoken assumptions that underlie the visible (spoken) tip of the interactive iceberg.

[ 5 ] Edward T. Hall argued that much cross-cultural miscommunication stemmed from neglect of the silent, unspoken, but differing cultural patterns that each participant unconsciously took for granted.

[ 6 ] Psychoanalysis [ edit ] Luce Irigaray has emphasised the importance of listening to the unsaid dimension of discourse in psychoanalytic practice [ 7 ] —something which may shed light on the unconscious phantasies of the person being analysed.

[ 8 ] Other psychotherapies have also emphasised the importance of the non-verbal component of the patient's communication, [ 9 ] sometimes privileging this over the verbal content.

[ 10 ] Behind all such thinking stands Freud 's dictum: "no mortal can keep a secret. If his lips are silent, he chatters with his fingertips...at every pore".

[ 11 ] Cultural examples [ edit ] Sherlock Holmes is said to have owed his success to his attention to the unsaid in his client's communications.

[ 12 ] In Small World , the heroine cheekily excuses her lack of note-taking to a Sorbonne professor by saying: "it is not what you say that impresses me most, it is what you are silent about: ideas, morality, love, death, things...

Vos silences profonds ".

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Don't ask, don't tell Elephant in the room Innuendo Negative capability Praeteritio Proxemics Spiral of silence Subtext Tacit knowledge Unconscious communication References [ edit ] ^ Robyn Brandenberg, Powerful Pedagogy (2008) p. 104 ^ R. Wardhaugh, An Introduction to Sociolinguistics (2011) p. 310 ^ J. P. Gee/M. Handforthed., The Routledge Handbook of Discourse Analysis (2013) Ch 10 ^ R. Mesthrie, Introducing Sociolinguistics (2009) p. 353 ^ A. Giddens, Positivism and Sociology (1974) p. 72 ^ Edward T. Hall, The Silent Language (1990) p. vii-viii ^ S. Todd ed., Learning Desire (2013) p. 249 ^ M. Edelson, Language and Interpretation in Psychoanalysis (1984) p. 2 ^ Eric Berne, What Do You Say After You Say Hello?

(1974)  p. 314-7 ^ Fritz Perls, Gestalt Therapy Verbatim (1970) p. 57-8 ^ Quoted in M. Argyle ed., Social Encounters (1973) p. 133 ^ Edward T. Hall, The Silent Language (1990) p. 33 ^ David Lodge , Small World (1985) p. 265 Further reading [ edit ] S. L. Olnick (1982). "Meanings beyond Words".

International Review of Psycho-Analysis .

9 (4): 461– 72.

External links [ edit ] Look up unsaid in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Laboratory of Languages and Cultures in oral tradition" (in French). Archived from the original on 2022-03-23 . Retrieved 2008-03-02 .

v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unsaid&oldid=1305811171 " Categories : Human communication Nonverbal communication Sociolinguistics Ethnology Psychotherapy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 06:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Unsaid 3 languages Add topic

