Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Foundation 2 Impressionism 3 Members 4 References Toggle the table of contents Ten American Painters 14 languages Deutsch Español Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Shqip Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of artists formed in 1898 This article is about the American Impressionist artists of the late 19th-early 20th centuries.  For the 1930s Expressionist group of the same name, see the The Ten (Expressionists) .

The Ten in 1908 The Ten American Painters (also known as The Ten ) was an artists' group formed in 1898 to exhibit their work as a unified group.

John Henry Twachtman , J. Alden Weir , and Childe Hassam were the driving forces behind the organization. Dissatisfied with the conservatism of the American art establishment, the three artists recruited seven others from Boston, New York City, and elsewhere on the East Coast of the United States , with the intention of creating an exhibition society that valued their view of originality, imagination, and exhibition quality. The Ten achieved popular and critical success, [ 1 ] and lasted two decades before dissolving.

Foundation [ edit ] In America, popular painting styles usually originated on the east coast in cities like New York and Boston. The Ten continued a tradition of artists forming new groups  in reaction to a lack of support from existing artists' groups. Thus, the National Academy of Design (founded in 1825 by students dissatisfied by the conservatism of the older American Academy of the Fine Arts ) eventually became too conservative to suit the artists who in 1877 initiated the Society of American Artists so they could meet and exhibit their work as a collective. The Ten American Painters was born from this group in 1898, when Twachtman, Weir, and Hassam found the Society hostile to the Impressionist style they had adopted. Leaving the group was considered a bold move by the general public, but the Society of American Artists felt that it was easier to let the members that were leaving go than appease them.

Impressionism [ edit ] Impressionism was a French art movement that emerged in the 1870s, and was picked up by American painters towards the end of the 19th century. Painters like Edgar Degas , Claude Monet and Auguste Renoir are generally considered the masters of the impressionist movement. An Impressionist painting will often use small dabs of color in order to make the painting distinguishable from afar, but indistinguishable from up close.

[ 2 ] Members [ edit ] The founding members of The Ten were Frank W. Benson , Joseph Rodefer DeCamp , Thomas Wilmer Dewing , Childe Hassam , Willard Leroy Metcalf , Robert Reid , Edward Simmons , Edmund C. Tarbell , John Henry Twachtman , and J. Alden Weir . All were former members of the Society of American Artists.

Winslow Homer declined an invitation to join the group; Abbott Handerson Thayer accepted membership but withdrew before the group's first exhibition. After J. H. Twachtman died in 1902, William Merritt Chase joined in his place. Unanimous approval was required to admit a new member to the society.

[ 3 ] It was also decided that there would never be less than ten members active for the group to remain as one.

For twenty years The Ten exhibited in New York, Boston, Philadelphia, and other American cities. After this it dissolved due to death in its ranks and lack of public interest.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ “Ten American Painters: The First Exhibition, Catalogue of the Pictures, from the Thomas Wilmer Dewing and Dewing Family Papers - Image and Media Gallery | Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution.” Accessed September 16, 2015.

http://www.aaa.si.edu/collections/items/detail/ten-american-painters-first-exhibition-catalogue-pictures-14281 .

^ “Impressionism.” Accessed September 21, 2015.

http://www.artmovements.co.uk/impressionism.htm .

^ a b Brockett, Erik.

"The Ten American Painters" . Antiques & Fine Art Magazine . Retrieved 10 September 2015 .

v t e Childe Hassam Paintings Spring Morning in the Heart of the City (1890) Winter in Union Square (1890) Coast Scene, Isles of Shoals (1901) Broadway and 42nd Street (1902) Cliff Rock--Appledore (1903) Spring on West 78th Street (1905) The Water Garden (1909) July Fourteenth, Rue Daunou, 1910 (1910) Surf, Isles of Shoals (1913) The Silver Veil and the Golden Gate (1914) The Avenue in the Rain (1917) Series California series Related American Impressionism The Ten Old Lyme art colony v t e Impressionism Originators Frédéric Bazille Eugène Boudin Gustave Caillebotte Mary Cassatt Paul Cézanne Edgar Degas Armand Guillaumin Johan Jongkind Édouard Manet Claude Monet Berthe Morisot Camille Pissarro Pierre-Auguste Renoir Alfred Sisley Patrons Gustave Caillebotte Victor Chocquet Henry O. Havemeyer Ernest Hoschedé Dealers Paul Durand-Ruel Georges Petit Ambroise Vollard Exhibitions First Impressionist Exhibition American artists William Merritt Chase Frederick Carl Frieseke Childe Hassam Alphonse Maureau Willard Metcalf Lilla Cabot Perry Theodore Robinson Walter Elmer Schofield John Henry Twachtman Robert Vonnoh J. Alden Weir Australian artists Charles Conder E. Phillips Fox Elioth Gruner Frederick McCubbin Tom Roberts John Russell Arthur Streeton Walter Withers Canadian artists Henri Beau William Blair Bruce William Brymner Marc-Aurèle de Foy Suzor-Coté Maurice Cullen Helen Galloway McNicoll James Wilson Morrice Laura Muntz Lyall Robert Wakeham Pilot Other artists Eugène Baudouin Olga Boznańska Marie Bracquemond Giovanni Battista Ciolina Lovis Corinth Eva Gonzalès Antoine Guillemet Nazmi Ziya Güran Dominique Lang Max Liebermann Konstantin Korovin Martín Malharro Henry Moret Francisco Oller Nadežda Petrović Władysław Podkowiński Valentin Serov Max Slevogt Joaquín Sorolla Philip Wilson Steer Eliseu Visconti Other media Music Literature French impressionist cinema See also Amsterdam Impressionism Boston School California Impressionism Decorative Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Pennsylvania Impressionism Post-Impressionism Synthetic impressionism The Ten Related Wilfrid de Glehn The Impressionists (2006 TV series) Louis Leroy Nadar Pays des Impressionnistes Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ten_American_Painters&oldid=1277901999 " Categories : 10 (number) American artist groups and collectives American Impressionism 19th-century American painters 20th-century American painters American Impressionist painters Cultural history of the United States Arts organizations established in 1898 1898 establishments in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 10:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ten American Painters 14 languages Add topic

