Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History through World War II 2 Post World War II 3 Training and ratings Toggle Training and ratings subsection 3.1 The Schools 3.2 Fleet Training 3.3 Advanced Training 3.4 Specialized Training 4 U.S. navy diver physical fitness test 5 Health impact 6 Ratings and enlisted designators 7 Officer designators 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Navy diver (United States Navy) 1 language 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US Navy personnel qualified in underwater diving and salvage Navy Diver U.S. Navy enlisted rating insignia Issued by United States Navy Type Enlisted rating Abbreviation ND Specialty Diving Harbor clearance Experimental diving Ship husbandry Submarine rescue Special Operations support Underwater Construction Teams Mark V dive suit in the Naval History and Heritage Command at the Washington Navy Yard , Washington D.C.

Seabee divers at Gavutu , Solomon Islands , Nov. 8, 1943 installing a marine railway .

A Japanese two-man sub salvaged by 6th CB divers off Tassafaronga Point .  They attached hawsers for bulldozers to pull the sub ashore after placing dynamite to break the mud suction force holding it.

A United States Navy diver may be a restricted fleet line (Engineering Duty) officer, Civil Engineer Corps (CEC) officer, Medical Corps officer,  an Unrestricted Line Officer who is qualified in Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) Warfare  ( 1140 ) or an enlisted (ND or HM rating) who is qualified in underwater diving and salvage.  Navy divers serve with fleet diving detachments and in research and development.  Some of the mission areas of the Navy diver include: marine salvage , harbor clearance, underwater ship husbandry and repair, submarine rescue, saturation diving, experimental diving, underwater construction and welding, as well as serving as technical experts to the Navy SEALs , Marine Corps , and Navy EOD diving commands.

The U.S. Navy is the lead agency in military diving technology and training within the U.S. Department of Defense . The foundation of the Navy diving program consists of the Navy Diver (ND) rating for enlisted personnel who perform diving as their occupational specialty in the Navy.

[ 1 ] History through World War II [ edit ] The US Navy began employing divers in the middle of the 19th century; these were primarily swimmers and skin divers using techniques that had not been altered for hundreds of years. Duties included the salvage and repair of ships, construction work and military operations, and the Battle of Mobile Bay during the American Civil War. Preparations for the battle included the sending of swimmers to clear mines from the path of Admiral Farragut 's ships, that had been planted by Confederate States forces to prevent entrance to the bay.

[ 2 ] In 1898, Navy divers were briefly involved in an international crisis when the second-class armored battleship USS Maine was sunk by a mysterious explosion while anchored in the harbor at Havana, Cuba . Navy divers were sent from Key West to study and report on the wreck. Although a Court of Inquiry was convened, the reason for the sinking was not found.

As American technology expanded in the early 1900s the US Navy developed an interest in submarine warfare. However, throughout the period of 1912–1939, the development of the Navy's F-class , H-class and S-class submarines was marred by a series of accidents, collisions, and sinkings. As a result of these submarine disasters a corresponding growth in the Navy's diving capability was developed.

Until 1912, US Navy divers rarely went below 60 FSW (feet of seawater). There is little documentation that the Navy had a diving program prior to 1912.

[ 3 ] In that year, Chief Gunner George D. Stillson set up a program to test Haldane 's diving tables and methods of stage decompression . A companion goal of the program was to develop improvements in Navy diving equipment. Throughout a three-year period, first diving in tanks ashore and then in open water in Long Island Sound from USS Walke , [ 3 ] Navy divers went progressively deeper.

The publication of the first US Navy Diving Manual [ 4 ] in 1916 and the establishment of a Navy Diving School at Newport, Rhode Island were the direct outgrowth of experience gained in the test program and the USS F-4 salvage. When the United States entered World War I, the staff and graduates of the school were sent to Europe, where they conducted a number of salvage operations along the French coast.

[ 5 ] On 24 May 1939 four divers would earn the Medal of Honor rescuing 33 men off the sunken USS Squalus .  When the Squalus went down twelve divers from the Experimental Diving Unit were part of the rescue.  Those directly involved in the most dangerous aspects of the rescue received the medals.

WWII brought with it an expanded need for divers that began immediately after the December 7, 1941 Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . By afternoon on the 7th nine divers from Destroyer Repair Unit 1 at San Diego were on a PBY being flown to Hawaii.

[ 6 ] Their first priority was to save lives, despite considerable effort they only found dead. They were attached to the Naval 
Salvage and Repair Unit created at Pearl Harbor where divers logged over 16,000 hours under diving officer Commander Haynes.

[ 7 ] Because of the shallow working depth the divers had no diving time limitation leading to fourteen hour days seven days a week. The Salvage Unit list of work included USS California , USS Nevada , USS Utah , USS Arizona , USS West Virginia , USS Oklahoma and USS Oglala .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] They were assisted by the divers off USS Widgeon and USS Ortolan .

[ 10 ] Soon after the 16th Naval Construction Battalion arrived in Pearl Harbor her divers were tasked to the recovery of USS Oklahoma as well.

[ 11 ] Two steelworkers from CB 3 had previously been certified to dive with the Salvage and Repair Unit on USS West Virginia , however they were recalled because their commanding officer objected to the pay they received.

[ 12 ] This led to no more volunteers from outside the Salvage Unit being trained to dive with the Salvage Unit.

[ 12 ] At Pearl Harbor the diving assignments were split civilian/military with the civilians outside the vessels and USN inside.  The divers from Destroyer Repair Unit 1 are credited with creating the arc-oxygen underwater cutting torch.

[ 13 ] A diving task at Pearl Harbor was the recovery of bodies.

[ 14 ] It was a gruesome task that was eventually stopped as bodies would simply come apart when disturbed, from being submerged too long.

[ 15 ] The creation of Naval Construction Battalions to build advance bases in the Pacific Theater put more diving assignments in front of the Navy, enough that the Seabees had a school of their own to qualify 2nd class divers. CBs would put men in the water from the tropics to the Arctic Circle.   In the Aleutian Islands Naval Construction Battalion 4 had divers doing salvage on the Russian freighter SS Turksib in 42 °F (6 °C) water.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] In the tropics Seabee divers would be sent close to an enemy airfield to retrieve a downed Japanese aircraft. At Halavo on Florida Island , divers from the 27th CB recovered a Disburser's safe full of money plus changed 160 props on vessels of all sizes.

[ 18 ] The 27th Naval Construction Battalion logged 2,550 diving hours, with 1,345 classified as "extra hazardous".

[ 18 ] Seabees would also blur the definition of diver with the development of the Underwater Demolition Teams . Another historic note to the Seabees is that they had African American divers in the 34th CB. Those men fabricated their diving gear in the field as instructed at diving school. For depths less than 60 ft (18 m) a modified USN Mk III or MK IV gas mask was considered acceptable and preferred by the men of the 27th CB.

[ 3 ] [ 18 ] Twice, while at Milne Bay , the 105th CB sent special diving details on undisclosed missions.   Divers in the 301st CB placed as much as 50 tons of explosives a day to keep their dredges productive.

[ 19 ] However, the divers of CB 96 used 1,727,250 lbs of dynamite to blast 423,300 cubic yards (323,600 m 3 ) of coral for the ship repair facility on Manicani Island , as an element of the Naval Operating Base Leyte-Samar.

[ 20 ] Their primary diving gear was modified Navy Mk III and Navy Mk IV gas masks.

[ 20 ] The war itself produced an unending demand for underwater ship repair and salvage. In New York , USS Lafayette capsized at the dock leading to the Navy creating a Salvage school right there to deal with the issue.

[ 3 ] For the next year the Navy had 75 divers working on her salvage.   Each of the fleet's repair ships had divers. Six of them from USS Vestal were put to the test using the new technology of underwater cutting and welding. The stern was nearly completely blown off USS Pensacola . They removed three propellers and stabilized ship structure enough so that she could be towed to a drydock .  Divers from USS Navajo were there too with their underwater cutters working on USS New Orleans .  Their salvage work in combat zones got a fleet tug a Battle Star.  Two divers plus their support teams were put aboard USS Seminole in response to a secret dispatch from Commander South Service Force Pacific.  Each of the submarine rescue ships had divers assigned too.

USS Florikan was sent to Kiska Harbor after divers off USS Ute confirmed the Japanese submarine I-7 was lying on the bottom in ten fathoms (18 m) of water.  Seven divers off the Florikan salvaged intelligence materials from the sub.

[ 21 ] Earlier in the year, at Kamimbo Bay, USS Ortolan divers recovered a pile of documents off the partially sunk Japanese submarine I-1 that was turned over to intelligence.  The clearance of Manila harbor was a huge project where divers led by master diver Joseph S. Karneke from USS Chanticleer repeated the action.  There they salvaged code books, maps of Japanese fortifications on Luzon plus 500,000 yen; it was a major intelligence coup .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] When Chanticleer first left the States part of its mission was to provide diver training to the fleet based out of Freemantle , Australia .  The US Navy out of Australia sent divers down to recover intelligence off the Japanese submarine I-124 in just four fathoms (7.3 m) of water.

When the Japanese took the Philippines a couple of the prisoners were USN divers, one was Robert Sheats .

[ 24 ] The Japanese quickly learned of what the Philippine Treasury had done with the silver that had been in the vault on Corregidor .

[ 24 ] Millions of dollars in silver coinage had been dumped in Caballo Bay, an inlet on greater Manila Bay , to keep it from falling into Japanese hands.  The Japanese forced USN pow divers to retrieve the coinage.  They did recover some of the treasure.  However, the U.S. Army and Navy put together a hard hat diving unit in August 1945 that recovered millions of Pesos off USS Teak .

[ 24 ] During WWII, "diver" was a qualification not a rate. First class divers could work 300 ft (91 m) depths while salvage and second class divers were qualified down to 150 ft (46 m).

[ 3 ] Diving was considered "hazardous" by the Navy and the Navy adjusted pay for both the qualification as well as time and depth under water: $5 an hour or fraction of an hour for hazardous salvage work.

Adjusted for inflation that converts to $72/hr in 2020. The qualification diver 2nd class paid $10 per month, salvage diver paid $12 per month, 1st class paid $15 per month. First class divers also drew "footage" of $15 plus $.05/ft at 120 ft (37 m). Master divers drew $20 plus up to $10 "footage".

[ 3 ] A few months after Pearl Harbor Congress authorized a change so that divers were paid $5.00/hr for any dive certified "extremely hazardous".

[ 12 ] All dives to salvage ships at Pearl Harbor were given that designation.

[ 12 ] Post World War II [ edit ] 130413-N-GG400-043 Diver 3rd Class Jacob Laman of MDSU 2, wearing the Kirby Morgan 37 dive helmet used today for deep diving Divers off USS Preserver preparing to do a visual survey of USS Saratoga at Bikini atoll in 1947 At Operation Crossroads the Navy had qualified divers on multiple ships assigned to Task Unit TU 1.2.7 (salvage unit) of the Joint Task Force 1: USS Clamp , [ 25 ] USS Conserver , [ 25 ] : 308–9 USS Coucal , [ 25 ] : 311–12 USS Current , [ 25 ] : 314–17 USS Etlah , [ 25 ] : 323–5 USS Gypsy , [ 25 ] : 333–6 USS Preserver , [ 25 ] : 389–92 and USS Widgeon .

[ 25 ] : 438–40 After the nuclear tests diving officers were tasked to take their teams to inspect wrecks, document the damage, recover scientific data from test stations, recover scientific instruments and do salvage as required.

[ 26 ] The Diving officers did written reports of all observations, C.2.9 identifies what was found on USS Arkansas on 21 August 1947 with everything underwater photographed.

[ 27 ] USS Skipjack was the only ship to be raised and recovered [ 28 ] from the operation.

[ 25 ] : 420–1 The divers off the Widgeon and the Gypsy brought her up.

[ 25 ] : 340–40 Salvage of USS Pilotfish was attempted, but the sub was damaged beyond saving and stricken from the roles.  Salvage of USS Apogon was started, but she was declared a loss.

[ 25 ] : 271–2 Divers carried a watertight Geiger tube that was monitored by their support crews so that they could be warned and retracted from radioactive hot spots.

[ 26 ] The Korean War brought development to USN diving.  In October 1950 USS Pledge struck a mine in Wosan harbor and sank.  A UDT diver using an Aqualung located and marked the ships location for surface supported hard hat divers to return and destroy the classified materials on board.  That was the first tactical use of scuba gear by the U.S. Navy.  For the UDTs it marked a transitional change in their mission model and for the Navy it changed thinking of diving as a solely non-combat task.

The United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit is located at Panama City, Florida .  There unit is composed of 120 service personnel drawn from numerous components of the Navy.  It is their job to execute the U.S. military's special diving tasks like saturation diving .

Tektite I assembled by Amphibious Construction Battalion 2 (ACB 2) SEALAB III, artist's drawing During the 1960s the Navy had divers involved in two submersed projects, Tektite and SEALAB I, II, and III. On 28 January 1969 a detachment of 50 men [ 29 ] from Amphibious Construction Battalion 2 plus 17 Seabee divers began installation of the Tektite habitat in Great Lameshur Bay at Lameshur, U.S. Virgin Islands .

[ 30 ] The Tektite program was funded by NASA and was the first scientists-in-the-sea program sponsored by the US government.

[ 31 ] The Tektite project was a product of the Cold War . It caused the US Navy to realize the need for a permanent Underwater Construction capability that led to the formation the Seabee Underwater Construction Teams .

[ 32 ] SEALAB was led by Captain George F. Bond with divers from the fleet. SEALAB I, II, and III were experimental underwater habitats developed by the United States Navy in the 1960s to prove the viability of saturation diving and humans living in isolation for extended periods of time. The knowledge gained from the SEALAB expeditions helped advance the science of deep sea diving and rescue, and contributed to the understanding of the psychological and physiological strains humans can endure.  USN Aquanauts of note include Robert Sheats , Robin Cook , Alan Shepard , Scott Carpenter and Robert Barth .

In 1966 a B-52 crashed off Palomares , Spain with four hydrogen bombs .

USS Hoist , USS Petrel and USS Tringa brought 150 divers who searched down to 350 ft (110 m) without locating the weapons.

[ 33 ] DSV Alvin located them at a depth of 2,550 feet (780 m).

[ 33 ] Still in service, USS Chanticleer was involved with RVN diving operations at Nha Trang during the Vietnam War .  Her divers were tasked with a number of salvage assignments.  At Chu Lai Combat Base in 1967 Mobile Construction Battalion 71 had an Underwater Construction Team search the Tra Bong River for a missing Squad of Marines that the Marines wanted back no matter what.

[ 34 ] Their efforts made the Stars and Stripes Pacific edition.

In the 1970s Navy divers took part in Operation Ivy Bells . It was a joint Navy CIA operation. Since the divers did not have the security clearances needed they were given a story for the mission.

In 1975 the first female hard hat diver to be qualified was Donna Tobias. Ten years later Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper became a salvage officer and would become another USN astronaut/diver.  Also that year, Seabee diver Robert Dean Stethem was killed by hijackers on TWA Flight 847 at Beirut . The Navy named USS Stethem DDG-63 in his honor.

In the 1980s Mobile Diving Salvage Unit 1 and 2 were created.  MDSU 2 has been involved in the salvage of USS Monitor , CSS Georgia , TWA Flight 800 , Swiss Air Flight 111 and the Space Shuttles Challenger and Columbia .

Post Vietnam the DOD has made an effort to recover the missing remains of US service personnel.  In 2010 MDSU divers searched at Quynh Phuong, Vietnam for the Joint POW/MIA Accounting Command or JPAC. They dove the Mediterranean for WWII remains in 2012.

[ 35 ] In 2018 MDSU divers were again requested by the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency or DPAA, which had absorbed JPAC.  The divers were sent to the Palau group where WWII aircraft were known to have gone down.

The I 35 bridge collapse in Minneapolis had MDSU divers working with the Army Corps of Engineers .

In 2003 Divers from MDSU 1 and SUPSALV were given the task to remove 2,000,000 US gallons (7,600,000 L) of bunker fuel from the wreck of USS Mississinewa .

[ 36 ] Hurricane Katrina in 2005 followed by Rita brought disaster recovery to Navy divers.

[ 37 ] In 2006, the US Navy changed Diving from a "qualification" to a rating of the fleet: Navy Diver (ND).  In 2007 divers from the Naval Experimental Diving Unit ,  Mobile Diving Salvage Unit 2 and US Army worked on the salvage of the Soviet submarine K-77 .  That same year MDSU divers were sent to Minnesota when the Interstate 35 bridge collapsed into the Mississippi River . In 2011 the divers of Mobile Diving Salvage Unit 1 along with USCG and SUPSALV divers were tasked with the clearance of 72,500 US gallons (274,000 L) of bunker fuel from the wreck of USS Chehalis in Pago Pago Harbor.  MDSU 1 was called in 2018 to repeat the action on 250,000 US gallons (950,000 L) on the WWII German cruiser Prinz Eugen .  The ship had been sink in the atomic tests of Operation Crossroads.

[ 38 ] Distinguished Diver list: William Badders Chief Machinist mate Carl Brashear Master Chief Boatswains Mate Orson Leon Crandall Chief Boatswains Mate Owen Francis Patrick Hammerberg Boatswains mate 2nd Class James Harper McDonald Chief Metalsmith John Mihalowski Chief Torpedoman Chief Machinist mate Edward Raymer [ 39 ] (was the senior NCO of the first divers sent to Pearl Harbor after the attack, retired with the rank of Commander) 29 Divers received the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for having over 100 hours in dive time at Pearl Harbor.

[ 40 ] 2 Divers received the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for diving during gale-force winds, in sub-freezing temps, snow, and possible air attack (including a nine-hour dive in 36 °F (2 °C) water).

[ 41 ] Training and ratings [ edit ] The Schools [ edit ] After completion of recruit training or acceptance in the Navy diver program from the Fleet, individuals will go to Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, for Diver Preparation Course (32 training days, including 20 days of basic electrical and engineering courses). Upon completion of the training, candidates will go to Naval Diving and Salvage Training Center (NDSTC) in Panama City, Florida , for Second Class Dive School, which is 70 training days long.

[ 42 ] The center has 22 different courses of instruction for roughly 1300 students annually.  On average, there are 300 students in training at any given time. The training center conducts approximately ten thousand dives each year.

[ 42 ] The NDSTC is divided into Fleet and specialized sections. Regardless of their section, all candidates receive instruction in: Basic gas laws as they relate to diving.

Diving medicine Decompression chamber operations Scuba gas planning Diving physics Salvage operations Surface-supplied diving systems Use of all diving apparatus: Open- and closed-circuit rigs Underwater mechanics and tools, and underwater cutting and welding [ 42 ] Fleet Training [ edit ] Upon completion of Second Class Dive School service personnel are assigned to one of the Navy Diver Units to develop their diving and salvage skills.  Underwater ship repair, salvage, or construction can be done using either SCUBA equipment or a surface-supplied diving system. Training for Diving Medical Officers and diving medical technicians is also part of Fleet training.

Advanced Training [ edit ] Many experienced divers return to NDSTC for further course work so they can qualify as First Class divers or as Master divers. The first-class dive school is approximately 12 weeks in length. During training, students are subjected to numerous drills and tests. Some of the subjects include: Hyperbaric Chamber , SCUBA , MK-16 Rebreather , Surface Supplied Air, and Mixed Gas Supervisor. Students are taught how to diagnose diving-related illnesses as well as handling system emergencies. While attending First Class Dive School students are put through Master Diver Evaluations. The evaluations consist of a number of challenging scenarios. Only a select few will qualify.  Master diver is a qualification that is difficult to achieve.

Specialized Training [ edit ] A Navy diver gets specialized training in demolition and mixed-gas diving.

[ 42 ] Navy divers work in extreme conditions, performing various underwater tasks ranging from underwater ship repair, underwater salvage and special operations/special warfare type diving.  Because their area of operations are so varied, they can be required to utilize any type of diving equipment for use in any depth or temperature in any part of the world.  Certain diving qualification allows NDs to live and work at extreme depths for days or weeks at a time, a discipline known as saturation diving .

Navy enlisted personnel that graduate from second class or first class dive school; and ultimately master diver comprise the Navy Diver rating.  NDs are the in-water operators and supervisors for the various mission areas mentioned previously as their primary day to day mission is that of in-water operator and/or supervisor.  There are three enlisted diving badges/qualifications in the ND rating: Second class diver - E-4 to E-5 personnel.  This is the basic diving qualification in the ND rating, awarded upon completion of ND 'A' School (pin awarded upon warfare qualification).  Primary duties are to serve as in-water operators during various missions.

First class diver - E-6 to E-8 personnel.  Advanced diving qualification awarded upon completion of ND 'C' School.  In addition to duties as a second class diver, first class divers serve as diving and chamber treatment supervisors.

Master diver - The highest enlisted diving position in the Navy.  Awarded upon successful completion of the master diver course which includes exceptionally demanding diving operational problems and acceptance by a master diver board.  Oversees diving operations and train/qualify diving supervisors.

Personnel in the CEC Seabee ratings can qualify as underwater construction technician (UCT).  Like other Navy divers, UCTs are primary in-water operators that conduct underwater construction and demolitions. The three qualification that the various rate can obtain with are as follows: 
Basic Underwater Construction Technician/ NEC 5932 (2nd Class Diver), Advanced Underwater Construction Technician/ NEC 5931 (1st Class Diver), and Master Underwater Construction Technician/ NEC 5933 (Master diver).

[ 43 ] Navy hospital corpsmen can qualify as a diving medical technician (DMT), where they are given training in medical aspects of diving.  Primary responsibilities are to provide medical advice and treatment to diving personnel.  They also instruct members of the diving team in first aid procedures when the presence of diving medical personnel is indicated.

Additionally, there is a scuba diver qualification primarily for those stationed on submarines to serve as sub divers in a limited capacity.  Navy scuba divers are also trained at NDSTC at a 5-week course.  Their duties consist primarily of conducting occasional inspections on the submarine they are stationed on.  Scuba divers maintain their traditional Navy rating such as ET or MM; their diving Navy Enlisted Classification (NEC)  is a collateral duty, not their primary one.

U.S. navy diver physical fitness test [ edit ] Diving medical personnel evaluate the fitness of divers before operations begin and are prepared to handle any emergencies which might arise. They also observe the condition of other support personnel and are alert for signs of fatigue, overexposure, and heat exhaustion. The physical fitness test has been shown to be a poor predictor of job task performance.

[ 44 ] The test consists of the following carried out in the order given: [ 45 ] Swim 500 yards (or 450 m) utilizing only combat side stroke or breast stroke within 12 minutes 30 seconds (candidates are allowed to push off the sides when turning. However, if the candidate uses the bottom to stand or rest, they will fail the test).

10-minute rest period.

Perform 50 push-ups within 2 minutes (Upper arms must parallel deck at dip and arms locked out at the top of the rep).

2-minute rest period.

Perform 50 sit-ups within 2 minutes (Bent knees. Candidates hands must stay on the collarbone and the elbows must touch the knees).

2-minute rest period.

Perform 6 pull-ups within 2 minutes (no kipping or swinging is allowed and the chin must clear the top of the bar on each repetition).

10-minute rest period.

Run 1.5 miles (2.414 km) within 12 minutes 30 seconds.

Note: The times and quantities listed are for passing the screening test only.  Each candidate's scores are submitted and the candidates with the top scores along with ASVAB exam scores will be selected and given a navy diver contract. Passing the physical fitness test is necessary but by no means guarantees the candidate a contract.

Health impact [ edit ] A study published in 2011 by the Navy Experimental Diving Unit reviewed the long-term health impact on the U.S. Navy diving population.

[ 46 ] The divers surveyed participated as divers for an average of 18 years out of their average 24 active duty years.

[ 46 ] Sixty percent of the divers surveyed were receiving disability compensation.

[ 46 ] One in seven of the divers had experienced neurologic symptoms of decompression sickness , with 41% of the divers experiencing one or more of the nine diving injuries surveyed.

[ 46 ] Seven percent of the surveyed divers had undergone a joint replacement .

[ 46 ] Eighty-six percent of the divers rated their health as "Excellent, Very Good, or Good".

[ 46 ] When compared to the general population, the divers showed better mental health but poorer physical health.

[ 46 ] Ratings and enlisted designators [ edit ] The navy diver rating was announced in Naval Administration Message 003/06 and consists of sailors with the following NECs: NEC 5341 – master diver [ 47 ] NEC 5342 – first class diver [ 47 ] NEC 5343 – second class diver [ 47 ] The effective date of the ND rating was June 1, 2006 for E6-E9 (senior non-commissioned officers ), and October 1, 2006, for E1-E5 junior enlisted.

E4 (ND3) – Navy diver third class E5 (ND2) – Navy diver second class E6 (ND1) – Navy diver first class E7 (NDC) – Chief Navy diver E8 (NDCS) – Senior Chief Navy diver E9 (NDCM) – Master Chief Navy diver Officer designators [ edit ] Designation as a Diving Officer for selected:MILPERSMAN 1210-140 [ 48 ] Unrestricted Line (117X, 112X) [ 48 ] Restricted Line/Staff Corps (146X, 144X, 210X, 510X) [ 48 ] Limited Duty (61XX, 648X, 653X) [ 48 ] Warrant (71XX, 72XX, 748X, 753X) [ 48 ] 1440 – Engineering Duty (restricted line) Officer [ 48 ] 510x – Civil Engineer Corps (staff) Officer [ 48 ] 720x – Diving (warrant) Officer [ 48 ] Underwater welding SEAL operations Salvage Operations Atmospheric diving suit Harbor clearance EOD Cast and recovery exercise SCUBA Closed circuit Saturation diving Explosive ordnance disposal Disaster recovery See also [ edit ] Robert Croft ( free dive pioneer) Clearance diver Diving gear Diving hand signals Royal Navy ships diver Underwater Construction Teams UDT Uniformed services diver insignia (United States) – Qualification badges of the uniformed services of the USA Military diving – Underwater diving in a military context by members of an armed force United States military divers – Underwater divers employed by the US armed forces References [ edit ] ^ "Navy Expeditionary Combat Command – Diving" .

www.public.navy.mil . Archived from the original on January 17, 2016 . Retrieved 2016-09-25 .

^ Salty Dog Old School (February 7, 2020).

"Navy Diver: A Tradition of Honor!" .

Crows Nest website .

^ a b c d e f Navy Divers, Bureau of Naval Personnel Information Bulletin, All Hands, September 1944, pp. 26–30, 	
Evansville Vanderburgh Public Library, Indiana [1] ^ US Navy diving manual Revision 7 , SS521-AG-PRO-010
0910-LP-115-1921, COMMANDER, NAVAL SEA SYSTEMS COMMAND, U.S. GPO, Washington DC [2] ^ "Navy Expeditionary Combat Command – Diver History" .

www.public.navy.mil . Archived from the original on January 17, 2016 . Retrieved 2016-09-25 .

^ I San Diego, Descent into Darkness, Cdr. Edward C. Raymer, Naval Institute Press , 291 Wood Rd, Annapolis, MD, 1996, p. 12 ^ Navy and Marine Corps Medal: Howard E. Haynes, Hall of Valor: The Military Medals Database website, 2021 [3] ^ Diving Seabees, IV USS West Virginia,  Decent into Darkness, Cdr. Edward C. Raymer, Naval Institute Press, 291 Wood Rd, Annapolis, MD, 1996, p. contents ^ Salvage Diary from I March-1942-15 November 1943 pdf, Industrial Department War Daiary Collection, National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) in San Bruno, California ^ Salvage Begins: II USS Nevada,  Decent into Darkness, Cdr. Edward C. Raymer, Naval Institute Press, 291 Wood Rd, Annapolis, MD, 1996, p.29 ^ 16th Naval Construction Battalion, Seabee Museum Archives, Port Hueneme, CA., p. 7 [4] ^ a b c d Diving Seabees, IV USS West Virginia,  Decent into Darkness, Cdr. Edward C. Raymer, Naval Institute Press, 291 Wood Rd, Annapolis, MD, 1996, p.126-7 ^ Diver's Ingenuity: II USS Nevada,  Decent into Darkness, Cdr. Edward C. Raymer, Naval Institute Press, 291 Wood Rd, Annapolis, MD, 1996, p.32 ^ Pearl Harbor Navy salvage diver Ken Hartle dies at 103, Navy Times, January 28, 2017 [5] ^ Recovery of Bodies: USS Arizona,  Decent into Darkness, Cdr. Edward C. Raymer, Naval Institute Press, 291 Wood Rd, Annapolis, MD, 1996, p. 82-5 ^ Naval Construction Battalion 4 records, Navy Seabee Museum Archives, Port Hueneme CA, p. 6 [6] ^ "Water Temperature Table of the Alaska Coast, National Centers for Environmental Information, last updated: Sat Jun 06, 23:02:52 UTC 2020" . Archived from the original on 2020-06-06 . Retrieved 2020-06-06 .

^ a b c "Naval Construction Battalions" .

^ 301st Naval Construction Battalion cruisebook, U.S. Navy Seabee Museum Archives, Port Hueneme,CA,  2020-01-22, p. 60, 61 [7] ^ a b CEC Bulletin, Vol. 2 February 1948 No. 15, Lt jg. Cushing Phillips, p. 45 [8] ^ Hackett, Bob; Kingsepp, Sander (2017).

"IJN Submarine I-7: Tabular Record of Movement" .

combinedfleet.com . Retrieved 13 August 2020 .

^ Combined Fleet Decoded: The Secret History of American Intelligence and the Japanese Navy in World War II , John Prados, Naval Institute Press, 2001 ^ Navy Diver , Joseph S. Karneke, Ace Publishing, January 1, 1962 ^ a b c Corregidor Treasures, Philippine Sailor,  Karl-Wilhelm Welteke, July 2018 [9] Archived 2021-06-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Appendix A: Activities of Participating Navy Vessels During Operation Crossroads , DNA 6032F Operation Crossroads 1946, United States Atmospheric Nuclear Weapons Tests Nuclear Test Personnel Review, L. Berkhouse, J.H. Hallowell, F.W. McMullan, S.E. Davis, C.B. Jones, M.J. Osborne, F.R. Gladeck,  E.J. Martin,  Defense Nuclear Agency, Washington D.C., 1984, p.305-7 [10] ^ a b DNA 6032F Operation Crossroads 1946, United States Atmospheric Nuclear Weapons Tests Nuclear Test Personnel Review, L. Berkhouse, J.H. Hallowell, F.W. McMullan, S.E. Davis, C.B. Jones, M.J. Osborne, F.R. Gladeck,  E.J. Martin,  Defense Nuclear Agency, Washington D.C., 1984, p. 189 [11] ^ References: Section C:Target ships, DNA 6032F Operation Crossroads 1946, United States Atmospheric Nuclear Weapons Tests Nuclear Test Personnel Review, L. Berkhouse, J.H. Hallowell, F.W. McMullan, S.E. Davis, C.B. Jones, M.J. Osborne, F.R. Gladeck,  E.J. Martin,  Defense Nuclear Agency, Washington D.C., 1984, p.249 [12] ^ The raising of the Skipjack (SS-184) after the atomic blast sunk it during Shot B of Operation Crossroads at Bikini, NavSource Online: Submarine Photo Archive, photograph courtesy of flickr.com via Don Cochrane [13] ^ All Hands , 8 June 1969, Number 629, Navy Dept. Washington, DC. p. 39 ^ "Seabeemagazine online" . Archived from the original on 2017-07-04 . Retrieved 2020-07-05 .

^ "Project Tektite: The Aquanauts That Lived in the Sea" . August 11, 2016.

^ "US Navy Seabee Museum online magazine, "Project Tektite and the Birth of the Underwater Construction Teams" by Dr. Frank A. Blazich Jr., Historian, US Navy Seabee Museum" . Archived from the original on 2017-07-31 . Retrieved 2020-07-05 .

^ a b Contact 261, Captain Lewis B. Melson USN, United States Naval Institute Proceedings, June 1967, p. 37 [14] ^ Seabee 71 in Chu Lai, David H. Lyman, McFarland & Company, Inc., Jefferson, North Carolina, 2019 ^ US Navy Divers, alongside the Joint POW/MIA Accounting Command, DVIDS, Ensign Martin Carey, 10.18.2012 [15] ^ S0300-B6-RPT-010, 0910-LP-102-8809 U.S. NAVY SALVAGE REPORT USS MISSISSINEWA OIL REMOVAL OPERATIONS, COMMANDER, NAVAL SEA SYSTEMS COMMAND, Captain Jim Wilkins, USN Director of Ocean Engineering, Supervisor of Salvage and Diving,  May 2004 [16] ^ S0800-AC-RPT-010, 0910-LP-105-8672 U.S. NAVY SALVAGE REPORT HURRICANES KATRINA AND RITA, Commander, Naval Sea Systems Command Richard Hooper Captain, USN Director of Ocean Engineering, Supervisor of Salvage and Diving, January 2007 [17] ^ "U.S. Navy Divers Recover Oil from Wrecked WWII Prinz Eugen, Lt. Clyde Shavers, CTF73/Destroyer Squadron 7 Public Affairs, Commander US 7th Fleet web page, Oct. 14, 2018" . Archived from the original on 2020-07-07 . Retrieved 2020-07-06 .

^ Edward C. Raymer: Navy and Marine Corps Medal, Hall of Valor Project, 2021 [18] ^ Navy and Marine Corps Medal, All Hands April 1944, Bureau of Naval Personnel Bulletin, U.S.Navy Washington D.C.,  p.55 [19] ^ Navy and Marine Corps Medal, All Hands December 1943, Bureau of Naval Personnel Bulletin, U.S.Navy Washington D.C.,  p.58 [20] ^ a b c d "Diver Training" .

www.public.navy.mil . Archived from the original on January 17, 2016 . Retrieved 2016-09-25 .

^ "Navy Seabee UCT Diver Challenge Program" .

www.navycs.com .

^ Marcinik, EJ; Hyde, DE; Taylor, WF (1994).

"Development of job-related physical selection criteria for U.S. Navy fleet divers" .

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

21 . Archived from the original on November 21, 2013 . Retrieved 2013-11-21 .

^ Staff (6 Jan 2013).

"SEAL/EOD/SWCC/DIVER/AIRR Physical Screening Testing Standards and Procedures" (PDF) .

MILPERSMAN 1220 - 410 . BUPERS - 324 ). pp.

1– 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 14, 2015 . Retrieved 6 April 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g Chung, J; Brugger, J; Curley, M; Wallick, M; Perkins, R; Regis, D; Latson, G (2011).

"Health survey of U.S. Navy divers from 1960 to 1990: A first look" .

US Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report 2011-11 . Archived from the original on April 15, 2013 . Retrieved 2013-11-21 .

^ a b c NAVPERSCOM (PERS - 401D H ) ND "A" School Coordinator (30 May 2013).

"Navy Diver ( ND ) Rating" (PDF) .

MILPERSMAN 1220 - 100 . BUPERS - 32 4F Enlisted Community Manager. p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 15, 2011 . Retrieved 6 April 2017 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d e f g h DIVING OFFICER, MILSPERMAN 1210-140, CNO, 22 Aug 2002, p.1-6 Sources [ edit ] Supervisor of Diving, Naval Sea Systems Command, 2007.

US Navy Diving Manual .(UK): AquaPress Publishing.

ISBN 1-905492-06-5 .  Revision 5. Hardback.  The complete manual for equipment, procedures and operations established by the Department of Navy.

Supervisor of Diving, Naval Sea Systems Command, 2007.

US Navy Diving Manual .(UK): AquaPress Publishing.

ISBN 1-905492-00-6 .  Revision 5. Looseleaf.  The complete manual for equipment, procedures and operations established by the Department of Navy.

Navy Diving | We Dive The World Over Navy Expeditionary Combat Command (NECC) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Navy divers .

Navy Diving and Salvage Training Center Navy.Com recruiting page NECC Diver recruiter page Naval Undersea Museum v t e United States Navy Leadership Secretary of the Navy Under Secretary of the Navy Chief of Naval Operations Vice Chief of Naval Operations Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy 4-star admirals 3-star admirals 1864–1959 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–present 2-star admirals House Armed Services Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces Senate Subcommittee on Seapower Structure Navy Navy Reserve Fleet Marine Force Expeditionary Combat Command Merchant Marine Units Active ships Future ships Aircraft wings Aircraft squadrons Carrier strike group Installations Naval Observatory Master jet base Operating forces Fleet Forces Command Commander Pacific Fleet Commander Naval Forces Europe and Africa Naval Forces Central Command Naval Forces Southern Command Naval Special Warfare Command Navy Reserve Operational Test and Evaluation Force Naval Network Warfare Command Military Sealift Command Shore Naval Sea Systems Command Naval Air Systems Command Naval Facilities Engineering Systems Command Naval Supply Systems Command Naval Information Warfare Systems Command Fleet Cyber Command Naval Academy Naval Education and Training Command Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command Office of Naval Intelligence Naval Aviation Warfighting Development Center Naval Legal Service Command Naval Observatory Naval Safety Command Bureau of Naval Personnel Chief of Naval Personnel Bureau of Medicine and Surgery Navy Installations Command Navy Working Capital Fund Fleets Second Fleet Third Fleet Fourth Fleet Fifth Fleet Sixth Fleet Seventh Fleet Tenth Fleet Ships A–B C D–F G–H I–K L M N–O P Q–R S T–V W–Z Aircraft carriers Airships Amphibious warfare ships Auxiliaries Battleships Cruisers Destroyers Destroyer escorts Escort carriers Frigates Mine warfare vessels Monitors Patrol vessels Registered civilian vessels Sailing frigates Steam frigates Steam gunboats Ships of the line Sloops of war Submarines Torpedo boats Torpedo retrievers Unclassified miscellaneous vessels Yard and district craft Personnel and training People Officers Insignia Designators Enlisted Rates Ratings Classification Personnel Chaplain Corps Chief Deputy Chief Explosive ordnance disposal Medical Corps Dental Corps Nurse Corps Medical Service Corps Supply Corps Civil Engineer Corps JAG Corps JAG DJAG NCIS Boatswain's mates Hospital corpsman Naval aviator SEALs Seabees Master-at-arms Operations specialist SWCCs Hispanic sailors Training Recruit Officer Candidate School STA-21 NROTC Naval University System ( Naval War College , Naval Postgraduate School , Naval Academy , Naval Community College , Marine Corps University ) BESS BFTT CNATT COMPTUEX NAWCTSD AIM Naval Chaplaincy School Naval Hospital Corps School Naval Justice School United States Armed Forces School of Music Navy Senior Enlisted Academy Navy Supply Corps School Nuclear Power School JMTC TOPGUN USNTPS Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Equipment Uniforms Awards and decorations Badges Current fleet Future fleet Reserve fleet Current aircraft Weapons Naval reactors History and traditions History 600 ship navy " Anchors Aweigh " Blue Angels Continental Navy Ensign Fleet bands Fleet Week Jack Line-crossing ceremony National Museum Navy Band Ceremonial Guard Navy Flag Navy Hymn Navy Memorial Navy service numbers Navy Weeks Revolt of the Admirals Sailor's Creed Ship commissioning Ship decommissioning Ship naming conventions Tingey House USS Constitution WAVES Wetting-down United States battleship retirement debate Category v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Navy_diver_(United_States_Navy)&oldid=1306150037 " Categories : Armed forces diving United States Navy ratings Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 06:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Navy diver (United States Navy) 1 language Add topic

