Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Family 3 Mythology 4 Influence on culture Toggle Influence on culture subsection 4.1 Literature 4.2 Music 4.3 Visual art 5 Footnotes 6 See also 7 References 8 Modern sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Narcissus (mythology) 73 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Bikol Central Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Character in Greek mythology For other uses, see Narcissus .

Narcissus Narcissus , fresco from the House of M. Lucretius Fronto at Pompeii Abode Thespiae Symbol Daffodil Parents Cephissus and Liriope or Endymion and Selene Part of a series on Greek mythology Theseus slays the Minotaur under the gaze of Athena Deities Primordial Titans Olympians Nymphs Water Chthonic Heroes and heroism Heracles Labours Achilles Hector Diomedes Trojan War Odysseus Odyssey Jason Argonauts Golden Fleece Perseus Medusa Gorgon Oedipus Sphinx Orpheus Orphism Theseus Minotaur Bellerophon Pegasus Chimera Daedalus Labyrinth Atalanta Hippomenes Golden apple Cadmus Thebes Aeneas Aeneid Phaethon Triptolemus Eleusinian Mysteries Pelops Ancient Olympic Games Pirithous Centauromachy Amphitryon Teumessian fox Narcissus Meleager Calydonian boar hunt Otrera Amazons Related Satyrs Centaurs Dragons Demogorgon Ancient Greek religion List of Mycenaean deities Ancient Greece portal Myths portal v t e In Greek mythology , Narcissus ( / n ɑːr ˈ s ɪ s ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Νάρκισσος , romanized : Nárkissos ) is a hunter from Thespiae in Boeotia (alternatively Mimas or modern-day Karaburun , İzmir ), known for his beauty which was noticed by all. According to the best-known version of the story in Ovid's Metamorphoses , Narcissus rejected the advances of all women and men who approached him, instead falling in love with his own reflection in a pool of water.

[ 1 ] In some versions, he beat his breast purple in agony at being kept apart from this reflected love, and in his place sprouted a flower bearing his name .

The character of Narcissus is the origin of the term narcissism , a self-centered personality style. This quality in extreme contributes to the definition of narcissistic personality disorder , a psychiatric condition marked by grandiosity , excessive need for attention and admiration, and an impaired ability to empathize .

Etymology [ edit ] In his Etymological Dictionary of Greek , R. S. P. Beekes says that "[t]he suffix [-ισσος] clearly points to a Pre-Greek word." [ 2 ] Family [ edit ] In some versions, Narcissus was the son of the river god Cephissus and nymph Liriope , [ 3 ] while Nonnus instead has him as the son of the lunar goddess Selene and her mortal lover Endymion .

[ 4 ] Mythology [ edit ] Several versions of the myth have survived from ancient sources, one from Pausanias, the Greek traveler and geographer of the second century AD, and a more popular one from Ovid, published before 8 AD, found in Book 3 of his Metamorphoses . This is the story of Echo and Narcissus . In Ovid's narrative, the framing revolves around a test of the prophetic abilities of Tiresias , an individual who has experienced life as both a man and a woman. His sight was taken from him during a dispute between Juno and Jove ; siding with Jove led to his blinding by an enraged Juno. In compensation for his lost sight, Jove granted him the gift of prophecy. The prophecy that solidified Tiresias's reputation is the tale of Echo and Narcissus.

After being "ravaged" by the river god Cephissus , the nymph Liriope gave birth to Narcissus, who was "beautiful even as a child."  As was the custom, she consulted the seer Tiresias about the boy's future, who predicted that the boy would live a long life only if he never "came to know himself". During his 16th year, after getting lost while hunting with friends, Narcissus came to be followed by a nymph, Echo.

Echo was an Oread (mountain nymph) and, like Tiresias, had a sensory ability altered after an argument between Juno and Jove. Echo had kept Juno occupied with gossip while Jove had an affair behind her back. In another similar version by Ovid, Echo kept the goddess Juno occupied with stories while Zeus's lovers escaped Mount Olympus.

[ 5 ] As a punishment, Juno took from Echo her agency in speech; Echo was thereafter never able to speak unless it was to repeat the last few words of those she heard.

[ 6 ] Echo had deceived using gossip; she would be condemned to be only that from then on.

Meanwhile, Echo spied Narcissus, separated from his hunting friends, and she became immediately infatuated, following him, waiting for him to speak so her feelings might be heard. Narcissus sensed he was being followed and shouted "Who's there?" Echo repeated, "Who's there?" While this interaction continued, Echo came close enough so that she was revealed, and attempted to embrace him.

[ 7 ] Horrified, he stepped back and told her to "keep her chains". Heartbroken, Echo wasted away, losing her body amidst lonely glens, until nothing of her but her chaste verbal ability remained.

Nemesis , the goddess of revenge, heard the pleas of a young man, Ameinias , who had fallen for Narcissus but was ignored and cursed him; Nemesis listened, proclaiming that Narcissus would never be able to be loved by the one he fell in love with.

After spurning Echo and the young man, Narcissus became thirsty. He found a pool of water which, in Ovid's account, no animal had ever approached. Leaning down to drink, Narcissus sees his reflection, which he finds as beautiful as a marble statue. Not realizing it was his own reflection, Narcissus fell deeply in love with it. Thus both Tiresias's prophecy and Nemesis' curse came true in the same instance.

[ 8 ] [ a ] [ b ] Unable to leave the allure of this image, Narcissus eventually realized that his love could not be reciprocated and he melted away from the fire of passion burning inside him, eventually turning into a gold and white flower.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Ovid was probably influenced by an earlier version ascribed to the captive Greek poet Parthenius of Nicaea , composed around 50 BC and rediscovered in 2004 by Dr Benjamin Henry among the Oxyrhynchus papyri at Oxford .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] This version is very concise and makes no mention of Echo.

[ 11 ] He had a cruel heart, and hated all of them, till he conceived a love for his own form: He wailed, seeing his face, delightful as a dream, within a spring; he wept for his beauty. Then the boy shed his blood and gave it to the earth... to bear.

A version of the myth by Conon , a contemporary of Ovid, has an even bloodier ending ( Narrations, 24), relating how a young man named Ameinias fell in love with Narcissus, who had already spurned his  suitors, all of whom were male.

[ 11 ] Narcissus spurned him too and gave him a sword, which Ameinias used to kill himself at Narcissus's doorstep after praying to the gods to teach Narcissus a lesson for all the pain he provoked. Narcissus walked by a pool of water and decided to drink some. He saw his reflection, became entranced by it, and killed himself because he could not have his object of desire. Because of this tragedy, the Thespians came to honor and reverence Eros especially among the gods.

[ 13 ] [ 9 ] A century later the travel writer Pausanias recorded a novel variant of the story, in which Narcissus falls in love with his twin sister rather than himself.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In all versions, his body disappears and all that is left is a narcissus flower .

Narcissus at the Spring by Jan Roos depicts Narcissus gazing at his own reflection.

Influence on culture [ edit ] The myth of Narcissus has inspired artists for at least two thousand years, even before the Roman poet Ovid featured a version in book III of his Metamorphoses . This was followed in more recent centuries by other poets (e.g.

Keats and Alfred Edward Housman ) and painters ( Caravaggio , Poussin , Turner , Dalí (see Metamorphosis of Narcissus ), and Waterhouse ).

Literature [ edit ] Narcissus gazes at the spring. From a 14th Century copy of Roman de la Rose .

Narcissus by Gyula Benczúr This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The myth had a decided influence on English Victorian homoerotic culture, via André Gide 's study of the myth, Le Traité du Narcisse ('The Treatise of the Narcissus', 1891).

Oscar Wilde also used the myth within his works. One of his poems from 1894, The Disciple [ 16 ] ,continues the story of Narcissus after his death, `We do not wonder that you should mourn in this manner for Narcissus, so beautiful was he.' `But was Narcissus beautiful?' said the pool.

— The Oreads and the pool Narcissus gazed in, in Oscar Wilde, The Disciple, Poems in Prose Before this Wilde published The Picture of Dorian Gray in 1890, and used Narcissus as an example of beauty multiple times. In Chapter 1, Lord Henry used the myth to describe the beauty of the man Basil (the protagonist) had painted. Basil explained to Lord Henry he did not want to part with his work because he had put much of himself into it.

[ 17 ] ...and this young Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves. Why, my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you—well...

— Lord Henry, in Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray, Chapter 1 Paulo Coelho 's The Alchemist also starts with a story about Narcissus, found (we are told) by the alchemist in a book brought by someone in the caravan. The alchemist's (and Coelho's) source was very probably Hesketh Pearson 's The Life of Oscar Wilde (1946) in which this story is recorded (Penguin edition, p. 217) as one of Wilde's inspired inventions. This version of the Narcissus story is based on Wilde's "The Disciple" from his " Poems in Prose (Wilde) ".

Author and poet Rainer Maria Rilke visits the character and symbolism of Narcissus in several of his poems.

Seamus Heaney references Narcissus in his poem "Personal Helicon" [ 18 ] from his first collection "Death of a Naturalist": To stare, big-eyed Narcissus, into some spring Is beneath all adult dignity.

In Rick Riordan 's Heroes of Olympus series , Narcissus appears as a minor antagonist in the third book The Mark of Athena .

William Faulkner 's character "Narcissa" in Sanctuary , sister of Horace Benbow, was also named after Narcissus. Throughout the novel, she allows the arrogant, pompous pressures of high-class society to overrule the unconditional love that she should have for her brother.

Hermann Hesse 's character "Narcissus" in " Narcissus and Goldmund " shares several of mythical Narcissus' traits, although his narcissism is based on his intellect rather than his physical beauty.

A. E. Housman refers to the 'Greek Lad', Narcissus, in his poem "Look not in my Eyes" from A Shropshire Lad set to music by several English composers including George Butterworth . At the end of the poem stands a jonquil, a variety of daffodil, Narcissus jonquilla , which like Narcissus looks sadly down into the water.

Herman Melville references the myth of Narcissus in his novel Moby-Dick , in which Ishmael explains the myth as "the key to it all," referring to the greater theme of finding the essence of Truth through the physical world.

On Sophia de Mello Breyner Andresen 's A Fada Oriana, the eponymous protagonist is punished with mortality for abandoning her duties in order to stare at herself in the surface of a river.

Joseph Conrad 's novel The Nigger of the 'Narcissus' features a merchant ship named Narcissus . An incident involving the ship, and the difficult decisions made by the crew, explore themes involving self-interest vs. altruism and humanitarianism.

Naomi Iizuka 's play Polaroid Stories , a contemporary rewrite of the Orpheus and Eurydice myth, features Narcissus as a character. In the play he is portrayed as a self obsessed, and drug addicted young man who was raised on the streets. He is alluded to being a member of the LGBT+ community and mentions his sexual endeavours with older men, some ending with the death of these men due to drug overdoses. He is accompanied by the character Echo, whom he continuously spurns.

Petrarchan poetry, often in the form of a Petrarchan sonnet , has been profoundly impacted by the myth of Narcissus. Most notably, Petrarch's Sonnet 45 contains themes and motifs inspired by the myth of Narcissus when the love interest, Laura, loves her reflection more than the narrator.

[ 19 ] Music [ edit ] In Gilbert and Sullivan's opera Patience , the idyllic poet Archibald Grosvenor calls himself "a very Narcissus" after gazing at his own reflection.

[ 20 ] Composer Nikolai Tcherepnin wrote his ballet "Narcisse et Echo, Op. 40" in 1911 for Sergei Diaghilev 's Ballets Russes and was danced by Nijinski .

The fifth of Benjamin Britten 's Six Metamorphoses after Ovid for solo oboe (1951) is titled "Narcissus", "who fell in love with his own image and became a flower".

Visual art [ edit ] Narcissus has been a subject for many painters such as Caravaggio , Poussin , Turner , Dalí , Waterhouse , Carpioni , Lagrenée , and Roos .

Narciso , Jan Cossiers Liriope Bringing Narcissus before Tiresias , Giulio Carpioni Narkisos , Magnus Enckell Narcissus by Caravaggio Narcissus , follower of Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio Sculptors such as Paul Dubois , John Gibson , Henri-Léon Gréber , Benvenuto Cellini and Hubert Netzer have sculpted Narcissus.

[ 21 ] Narcisse , Paul Dubois Narcissus , John Gibson Narziss , Hubert Netzer Narcissus , possibly Valerio Cioli Narcisse , Henri-Léon Gréber Narcisse , Benvenuto Cellini Narcisse , Gabriel Grupello and Albert Desenfans Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Narcissus is in danger when he sees the image but not, because of that, lost. He is lost when he recognizes himself in the image. It is not until then that death becomes the only possible solution. Narcissus dies when he loses the illusion but cannot escape from the feeling that it has aroused; he dies when there is no hope left that the passion can be satisfied. — Vinge (1967a) [ 8 ] ^ Finally, Narcissus realises that he has an insoluble problem and gives it a concise formulation: [Ovid writes] "Quod cupio, mecum est: Inopem me copia fecit." [Translation: "What I desire is with me: Abundance made me destitute."] At this point [continues Vinge] Schickel makes an important comment: "Er durchschaut wen er im Wasser vor sich hat; weder liebt er sein Spiegelbild, wie ein Leser dem andern nachirrt, noch treibt er 'Narzissmus,' wie man seit Freud missversteht." [Translation: "He sees through who he has in front of him in the water; he neither loves his reflection, like one reader follows another, nor does he practice 'narcissism', as has been misunderstood since Freud"]49.

— Vinge (1967a) [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Egocentrism References [ edit ] ^ Ovid, Metamorphoses.

3.377-434 ^ R. S. P. Beekes , Etymological Dictionary of Greek , Brill, 2009, p. 997.

^ "The myth of Narcissus" . 2 August 2009.

^ Nonnus , Dionysiaca 48.581 ff.

^ Cartwright, Mark (5 March 2023).

"Narcissus" .

World History Encyclopedia .

^ Stone, Greg (2016).

"The Myth of Narcissus as a Surreptitious Allegory about Creativity" .

Philosophy and Literature .

40 (1): 273– 284.

doi : 10.1353/phl.2016.0021 .

ISSN 1086-329X .

^ Bergmann, Martin S. (1984).

"The Legend of Narcissus" .

American Imago .

41 (4): 389– 411.

ISSN 0065-860X .

JSTOR 26303609 .

^ a b c Vinge, Louise (1967a).

"The Narcissus Myth in Western Literature up until the Early 19th Century" .

litteraturbanken.se . Gleerups.

^ a b "The myth of Narcissus" .

^ Tzetzes, John.

"Chiliades, 1.9" . lines 235–238.

^ a b c Henry, W. B.

"New Light on the Narcissus Myth" .

The Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Oxford University . Archived from the original on 15 January 2025 . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

^ Keys, David (May 2004).

"Ancient manuscript sheds new light on an enduring myth" .

BBC History Magazine . Vol. 5, no. 5. p. 9. Archived from the original on 24 November 2010 . Retrieved 26 February 2025 – via Papyrology / University of Oxford .

^ "ToposText" .

topostext.org . Archived from the original on 22 March 2019 . Retrieved 15 November 2019 .

^ "ToposText" .

topostext.org . Retrieved 1 August 2025 .

^ Jacoby, Mario (1991).

Individuation and Narcissism: The psychology of self in Jung and Kohut (1st ed.). Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415064644 .

^ Wilde, Oscar (1894).

"Poems in Prose/The Disciple" .

Wikisource (Full poem available for free.). Q91306633.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2021 . Retrieved 4 August 2025 .

^ Wilde, Oscar (1891).

"The Picture of Dorian Gray" .

Wikisource (Full free text available.) (1st ed.). Q69637774.

Archived from the original on 12 February 2025 . Retrieved 4 August 2025 .

^ Cf. Ibiblio , Internet Poetry Archive: Text of the Poem Personal Helicon ^ Archdeacon, Anthony (2018).

"The Influence of Ovid's Echo and Narcissus Myth on English Petrarchan Poetry" .

Early Modern Literary Studies .

20 (1): 1– 29.

ProQuest 2135049025 .

^ Glinert, Ed, ed. (2006).

The Complete Gilbert and Sullivan . Penguin Books. p. 237.

ISBN 978-0-713-99860-3 .

^ "Paul Dubois, Narcisse, Orsay" . Archived from the original on 1 May 2018 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .

Modern sources [ edit ] Graves, R.

(1968).

The Greek Myths . London, UK: Cassell.

Gantz, T.

(1993).

Early Greek Myth . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Kerényi, K.

(1959).

The Heroes of the Greeks . New York, NY / London, UK: Thames and Hudson.

Vinge, Louise (1967).

The Narcissus Theme in Western Literature up to the Early 19th Century .

Calimach, A.

(2001).

Lovers' Legends: The gay Greek myths . New Rochelle, NY: Haiduk Press.

ISBN 9780971468603 .

On-line version Alexander, M.

(2012).

Narcissus .

available online External links [ edit ] "Images of Narcissus" .

Iconographic Database . The Warburg Institute.

Media related to Narcissus (mythology) at Wikimedia Commons Henry, W. B. (n.d.).

"New light on the Narcissus myth (P.Oxy. LXIX 4711) " . Articles. Papyrology. Oxford, UK: University of Oxford.

v t e Narcissism Similar personality concepts Egomania Egotism God complex Grandiosity Healthy narcissism Hubris Messiah complex Superiority complex In society Collective narcissism In the workplace Leadership Me generation Narcissus (mythology) Parents Pathological narcissism Narcissistic personality disorder history Malignant narcissism Narcissistic Personality Inventory Phenomena Narcissistic injury neurosis elation mortification supply withdrawal defences Related psychology concepts Compensation Dark triad Empathy Entitlement Grandiosity Manipulation (psychology) Selfishness Category v t e Metamorphoses in Greek mythology Animals Avian Abas Acanthis Acanthus Acmon Aëdon Aegolius Aegypius Aëtos Aesacus Agrius and Oreius Agron Alcander Alcyone Alcyone and Ceyx Alcyonides Alectryon Anthus Antigone Argus Arne Sithonis Artemiche Ascalaphus Asteria Autonous Botres Bulis Byssa Caeneus Celeus Cerberus Chelidon Cinyras Clinis Combe Corone Ctesylla Cycnus (son of Apollo) Cycnus (son of Ares) Cycnus (son of Poseidon) Cycnus (son of Sthenelus) Daedalion Erinoma Erodius Eumelus Gerana Harmothoë Harpalyce Harpasus Harpe Hierax Hippodamia Hyperippe Hyria Ictinus Idas Ino Itys Iynx Laius Lelante Lycius Lycus Megaletor Meleagrids Memnonides Meropis Merops Minyades Munichus Neophron Nisus Nyctaea Nyctimene Oenoe Oenotropae Ortygius Pandareus Pelia Perdix Periphas Peristera Picus Pierides Phene Philaeus Philomela Pleiades Polyphonte Polytechnus Procne Rhexenor Schoeneus Scylla Tereus Timandra Non-avian Abas Actaeon Arachne Arcas Arge Aristaeus Ascalabus Atalanta Cadmus Calchus Callisto Cephissus Cerambus Cercopes Chelone Circe Curetes Cynosura Galanthis Gale Harmonia Hecuba Helice Hippomenes Io Lycaon Lycian peasants Lyncus Megisto Melanippe Melian nymphs Melissa Minyades Myia Myrmex Naïs Nerites Ocyrhoe Odysseus Pentheus Phalanx Phineus Phoenice Pompilus Taygete Theophane Tiresias Titanis Tithonus Tyrrhenian pirates Aethalides Alcimedon Dictys Epopeus Melas Medon Opheltes Base appearance Achilles Antigone Charybdis Lamia Medusa Midas Mulberry fruit Phaon Scylla Sirens White raven Humanoids Arne Calliste Cymodoce Cephalus' wife Galatea Leleges Myrmidons Nephele Spartoi Weasel Inanimate objects Aconteus Aglaurus Alcmene Anaxarete Ariadne Arsinoë Aspalis Battus Britomartis Calydon Cercopes Cragaleus Daphnis Iodame Laelaps Lethaea Lyco and Orphe Olenus Pallas Pandareus Phineus Polydectes Proetus Propoetides Pyrrhus Teumessian fox Wolf Landforms Achelous Acheron Acis Aea Alope Alpheus Arethusa (Boeotia) Arethusa (nymph) Asteria Atlas Aura Byblis Calliste Castalia Chione Cleite Comaetho Cyane Dirce Haemus Lichas Lilaeus Manto Marsyas Menippe and Metioche Niobe Perimele Pirene Pyramus and Thisbe Rhodope Rhodopis Sangas Selemnus Sybaris Opposite sex Caeneus Hermaphroditus Iphis Leucippus Salmacis Siproites Sithon Tiresias Plants Adonis Agdistis Ajax Amaracus Ambrosia Ampelus Anethus Attis Baucis and Philemon Carpus Carya Cissus Clytie Crocus Cyparissus Daphne Diopatra Dryope Elaea Elate Eteocleides Heliades Aegle Dioxippe Lampetia Merope Phaethusa Phoebe Hesperides Aegle Erytheia Hyacinthus Kalamos Leuce Leucothoe Libanus Lotis Lycurgus Mecon Melos Messapians Milk Minthe Myrice Myrina Myrsine Narcissus Oechalides Philyra Phyllis Picolous Pitys Platanus Psalacantha Saliva Side Smilax Smyrna Spear Syceus Syrinx Voluntary Greek gods Kobalos Mestra Periclymenus Other Cumaean Sibyl Echo Hyades Hylas Milk of Hera Pleiades False myths Acantha Amethyste Orchis Rhodanthe Metamorphoses v t e Echo and Narcissus from Ovid 's Metamorphoses Characters Echo Narcissus Operas Amor d'un'ombra e gelosia d'un'aura (1714) Écho et Narcisse (1779) Art Narcissus at the Fountain (Boltraffio, 1500–10) Narcissus (Boltraffio follower, 1500) Narcissus (Caravaggio, 1597–99) Echo and Narcissus (Poussin, 1627–28) Narcissus (Lemoyne, 1728) Echo and Narcissus (Waterhouse, 1903) Metamorphosis of Narcissus (Dali, 1937) Film Narcissus (1983 film) Narcissus (2012 film) Music Narcissus (1891) Related Narcissism Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 WorldCat National Germany United States Poland Israel People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5b4gd
Cached time: 20250817043952
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.731 seconds
Real time usage: 0.988 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3751/1000000
Revision size: 24290/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 140163/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4732/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 139567/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.438/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17767491/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  770.666      1 -total
 21.24%  163.686      2 Template:Reflist
 15.14%  116.683     13 Template:Cite_web
 11.59%   89.334      1 Template:Langx
 11.48%   88.457      1 Template:Greek_mythology_sidebar
 11.28%   86.943      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.19%   78.524      1 Template:Infobox_deity
  7.65%   58.922      1 Template:Short_description
  5.78%   44.515      8 Template:Cite_book
  5.18%   39.884      4 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22099:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043952 and revision id 1304247492. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Narcissus_(mythology)&oldid=1304247492 " Categories : Mythological Boeotians Children of Greek river gods Children of Selene LGBTQ themes in Greek mythology Mythological hunters Metamorphoses into flowers in Greek mythology Narcissism Suicides in Greek mythology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2019 Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 22:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Narcissus (mythology) 73 languages Add topic

