Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Thought Toggle Thought subsection 2.1 General sociological and psychological views 2.2 Humanity's environmental predicament 2.3 Social ecology 2.3.1 Kurdish movement 2.4 Municipalism and communalism 2.4.1 Municipalization as a foundation for an ecological society 2.5 Critique of privatization and nationalization 3 Legacy and influence 4 Selected works 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Murray Bookchin 40 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français گیلکی 한국어 Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Occitan پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Volapük 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Social ecology (theory) ) American social theorist (1921–2006) "Bookchin" redirects here. For the artist, see Natalie Bookchin .

Murray Bookchin Bookchin in 1990 Born Mortimore Bookchin January 14, 1921 New York City, US Died July 30, 2006 (2006-07-30) (aged 85) Burlington , Vermont, US Philosophical work Era 20th- / 21st-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy , anarchism , libertarian socialism , Hegelianism Main interests Philosophy of ecology , social hierarchy , dialectics , post-scarcity , anarchism , libertarian socialism , ethics, environmental sustainability , ecology, history of popular revolutionary movements Notable ideas Communalism , libertarian municipalism , social ecology , dialectical naturalism This article is part of a series on Anarchism in the United States Ideologies Anarcho-capitalism Anarcho-pacifism Autarchism Chicago idea Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Philosophical anarchism History Cincinnati Time Store Most–Grottkau debate Haymarket affair Homestead strike Assassination of William McKinley Immigration Act of 1903 Ferrer Center and Colony Immigration Act of 1918 Galleanisti First Red Scare 1919 bombings Palmer Raids Sacco and Vanzetti Libertarian Book Club and League Counterculture of the 1960s Protests of 1968 Battle of Seattle Occupy Wall Street Qilombo Capitol Hill Occupied Protest People Abbott Alston Andrews Appleton Austin Balagoon Bari Berkman Best Biehl Bookchin Bushnell Carson Chomsky Cleyre Cornell Czologsz Day Dixon Dolgoff Duffy Turner Emerson Ervin Esteve Fielden Fischer Galleani Goldman Goodman Grace Graeber Greene Hahnel Haldeman-Julius Hammond Harman Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hill Hoffman Holmes Ingalls Kaczynski Konkin Labadie Lingg Lloyd Lum Magón Milstein Most Parsons Perlman Sale Schwab (Justus) Schwab (Michael) Solanas Spies Spooner Thoreau Tucker Waisbrooker Walker Warren Wilson Winn Wolff Zerzan Zinn Active Organizations ABC No Rio Anarcho-Syndicalist Review Anti-Racist Action Beehive Design Collective Catholic Worker Movement Common Ground Collective CrimethInc.

Earth Liberation Front Indecline Industrial Workers of the World Institute for Anarchist Studies Institute for Social Ecology Kate Sharpley Library Labadie Collection Metropolitan Anarchist Coordinating Council MOVE Profane Existence Red Emma's Ruckus Society Zizians Defunct Organizations Cincinnati Time Store Curious George Brigade Diggers Don't Just Vote, Get Active Ferrer Center and Colony George Jackson Brigade Institute for Applied Autonomy International Working People's Association Libertarian Book Club and League Love and Rage New England Non-Resistance Society New York Social Revolutionary Club Portland Anarchist Road Care Qilombo Right to Existence Group Spanish Camp Tenacious Unicorn Ranch Union of Russian Workers Up Against the Wall Motherfucker Vanguard Group Why? Group Youth International Party Media Publications AK Press Autonomedia The Blast Catholic Worker Cronaca Sovversiva Fifth Estate Free Society Freiheit Golos Truda Liberty Loompanics Mother Earth PM Press Regeneración Vanguard The Word Works " Resistance to Civil Government " (1849) " To the Workingmen of America " (1883) Anarchism and Other Essays (1910) Now and After (1929) In Defense of Anarchism (1970) Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971) " The Abolition of Work " (1986) Industrial Society and Its Future (1995) From Bakunin to Lacan (2001) Understanding Power (2002) Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology (2004) Direct Action: An Ethnography (2009) Related topics American Left Anarchism in Puerto Rico Libertarianism in the U.S.

Labor history of the United States Minarchism Socialism in the U.S.

Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Murray Bookchin ( / ˈ b ʊ k t ʃ ɪ n / ; January 14, 1921 – July 30, 2006 [ 1 ] ) was an American social theorist , author, orator, historian, and political philosopher.

Influenced by G. W. F. Hegel , Karl Marx , and Peter Kropotkin , [ 2 ] he was a pioneer in the environmental movement .

[ 3 ] Bookchin formulated and developed the theory of social ecology and urban planning within anarchist , libertarian socialist , and ecological thought. He was the author of two dozen books covering topics in politics, philosophy, history, urban affairs, and social ecology. Among the most important were Our Synthetic Environment (1962), Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971), The Ecology of Freedom (1982), and Urbanization Without Cities (1987). In the late 1990s, he became disenchanted with what he saw as an increasingly apolitical " lifestylism " of the contemporary anarchist movement, stopped referring to himself as an anarchist, and founded his own libertarian socialist ideology called " communalism ", which seeks to reconcile and expand Marxist , syndicalist , and anarchist thought.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Bookchin was a prominent anti-capitalist , anti-fascist and advocate of social decentralization along ecological and democratic lines. His ideas have influenced social movements since the 1960s, including the New Left , the anti-nuclear movement , the anti-globalization movement , Occupy Wall Street , and the democratic confederalism of the Democratic Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria . He was a central figure in the American green movement . An autodidact who never attended college, he is considered to be one of the most important left theorists of the twentieth century.

Biography [ edit ] Bookchin was born in New York City to Nathan Bookchin (born Nacham Wisotsky) and his first wife, Rose (Kalusky) Bookchin, Jewish immigrants from the Russian Empire.  His father was from Mazyr (now Belarus) and his mother from Vilnius (Lithuania).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] He was embarrassed by his given name Mortimore and went by his childhood nickname, Murray.

[ 9 ] His father adopted the name of a relative, Bukczin, and anglicized it to Bookchin. His parents divorced in 1934. He grew up in the Bronx with his mother, uncle Daniel, and maternal grandmother, Zeitel, a Socialist Revolutionary who imbued him with Russian populist ideas.

After his grandmother's death in 1930, he joined the Young Pioneers of America , the Communist youth organization (for children 9 to 14) [ 10 ] and the Young Communist League (for youths) in 1935. He attended the Workers School near Union Square, where he studied Marxism . In the late 1930s he broke with Stalinism and gravitated toward Trotskyism , joining the Socialist Workers Party (SWP). In the early 1940s, he worked in a foundry in Bayonne , New Jersey, where he was a trade union organizer and shop steward for the United Electrical Workers as well as a recruiter for the SWP. Within the SWP, he adhered to the Goldman- Morrow faction, which broke away after the war ended. He was an auto worker and UAW member at the time of the great General Motors strike of 1945–46 . In 1949, while speaking to a Zionist youth organization at City College , Bookchin met a mathematics student, Beatrice Appelstein, whom he married in 1951.

[ 11 ] They were married for 12 years and lived together for 35, remaining close friends and political allies for the rest of his life. They had two children, Debbie and Joseph.

[ 12 ] On religious views, Bookchin was an atheist, but was considered to be tolerant of religious views.

[ 13 ] From 1947, Bookchin collaborated with a fellow lapsed Trotskyist, the German expatriate Josef Weber, in New York in the Movement for a Democracy of Content , a group of 20 or so post-Trotskyists who collectively edited the periodical Contemporary Issues – A Magazine for a Democracy of Content .

Contemporary Issues embraced utopianism . The periodical provided a forum for the belief that previous attempts to create utopia had foundered on the necessity of toil and drudgery; but now modern technology had obviated the need for human toil, a liberatory development. To achieve this " post-scarcity " society, Bookchin developed a theory of ecological decentralism. The magazine published Bookchin's first articles, including the pathbreaking "The Problem of Chemicals in Food" (1952). In 1958, Bookchin defined himself as an anarchist, [ 10 ] seeing parallels between anarchism and environmentalism. His first book, Our Synthetic Environment , was published under the pseudonym Lewis Herber, in 1962, a few months before Rachel Carson 's famous Silent Spring .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In 1964, Bookchin joined the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), and protested racism at the 1964 World's Fair . During 1964–1967, while living on Manhattan's Lower East Side , he cofounded and was the principal figure in the New York Federation of Anarchists. His groundbreaking essay "Ecology and Revolutionary Thought" introduced environmentalism and, more specifically, ecology as a concept in radical politics.

[ 16 ] In 1968, he founded another group that published the influential Anarchos magazine, which published that and other innovative essays on post-scarcity and sustainable technologies such as solar and wind energy, and on decentralization and miniaturization. Lecturing throughout the United States, he helped popularize the concept of ecology to the counterculture . His widely republished 1969 essay "Listen, Marxist!" [ 17 ] warned Students for a Democratic Society (in vain) against an impending takeover by a Marxist group. "Once again the dead are walking in our midst," he wrote, "ironically, draped in the name of Marx , the man who tried to bury the dead of the nineteenth century. So the revolution of our own day can do nothing better than parody, in turn, the October Revolution of 1917 and the civil war of 1918–1920, with its 'class line,' its Bolshevik Party, its ' proletarian dictatorship ,' its puritanical morality, and even its slogan, 'Soviet power'".

[ 18 ] In 1969–1970, he taught at the Alternate U, a counter-cultural radical school based on 14th Street in Manhattan. In 1971, he moved to Burlington, Vermont, with a group of friends, to put into practice his ideas of decentralization. In the fall of 1973, he was hired by Goddard College to lecture on technology; his lectures led to a teaching position and to the creation of the Social Ecology Studies program in 1974 and the Institute for Social Ecology (ISE) soon thereafter, of which he became the director. In 1974, he was hired by Ramapo College in Mahwah , New Jersey, where he quickly became a full professor. The ISE was a hub for experimentation and study of appropriate technology in the 1970s. In 1977–78 he was a member of the Spruce Mountain Affinity Group of the Clamshell Alliance . Also in 1977, he published The Spanish Anarchists , a history of the Spanish anarchist movement up to the revolution of 1936 . During this period, Bookchin briefly forged some ties with the nascent libertarian movement, speaking at a Libertarian Party convention and contributing to a newsletter edited by Karl Hess . Nevertheless, Bookchin rejected the types of libertarianism that advocated unconstrained individualism.

[ 19 ] In 1980, Bookchin co-established the New England Anarchist Conference (NEAC) to organize the anarchist movement in the United States. At its first meeting in October 1980, 175 anarchists from the northeastern US and Quebec attended. By the second conference in January 1981 in Somerville , Massachusetts, the NEAC devolved into sectarianism , which moved Bookchin to lose faith in a socialist revolution happening in the US.

[ 20 ] During the 1980s, Bookchin engaged in occasional critiques of Bernie Sanders ' mayorship in Burlington.  Bookchin criticized Sanders' politics, claiming he lacked a drive to establish direct democracy , followed a Marxian deprioritization of ecology, and was a “'centralist' who narrowly focused on economic growth." [ 21 ] Bookchin and his social ecologist colleagues in the Burlington Greens, which he co-founded with his former wife Bea Bookchin, criticized the Sanders administration for pushing for a luxury condo waterfront redevelopment, which was eventually rejected by Burlington voters. They advocated for a moratorium on growth, a moral economy, and social justice rooted in grassroots democracy.

[ 22 ] In 1988, Bookchin and Howie Hawkins founded the Left Green Network "as a radical alternative to U.S. Green liberals", based around the principles of social ecology and libertarian municipalism.

[ 23 ] In 1995, Bookchin lamented the decline of American anarchism into primitivism , anti-technologism, neo- Situationism , individual self-expression, and "ad hoc adventurism," at the expense of forming a social movement. He formally broke with anarchism in 1999, describing himself in 2002 as a "communalist" in a major essay elaborating his late-life views, called "The Communalist Project".

[ 24 ] [ page needed ] He continued to teach at the ISE until 2004. Bookchin died of congestive heart failure on July 30, 2006, at his home in Burlington, at the age of 85.

[ 25 ] Thought [ edit ] In addition to his political writings, Bookchin wrote extensively on philosophy, calling his ideas dialectical naturalism .

[ 2 ] : 31 The dialectical writings of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , which articulate a developmental philosophy of change and growth, seemed to him to lend themselves to an organic, environmentalist approach.

[ 2 ] : 96–97 Although Hegel "exercised a considerable influence" on Bookchin, he was not, in any sense, a Hegelian.

[ 26 ] His philosophical writings emphasize humanism , rationality , and the ideals of the Enlightenment .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] General sociological and psychological views [ edit ] Bookchin was critical of class-centered analysis of Marxism and simplistic anti-state forms of libertarianism and liberalism and wished to present what he saw as a more complex view of societies. In The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of Hierarchy, he says that: My use of the word hierarchy in the subtitle of this work is meant to be provocative. There is a strong theoretical need to contrast hierarchy with the more widespread use of the words class and State; careless use of these terms can produce a dangerous simplification of social reality. To use the words hierarchy, class, and State interchangeably, as many social theorists do, is insidious and obscurantist. This practice, in the name of a "classless" or "libertarian" society, could easily conceal the existence of hierarchical relationships and a hierarchical sensibility, both of which—even in the absence of economic exploitation or political coercion—would serve to perpetuate unfreedom.

[ 29 ] Bookchin also points to an accumulation of hierarchical systems throughout history that has occurred up to contemporary societies which tends to determine the human collective and individual psyche : The objective history of the social structure becomes internalized as a subjective history of the psychic structure. Heinous as my view may be to modern Freudians , it is not the discipline of work but the discipline of rule that demands the repression of internal nature. This repression then extends outward to external nature as a mere object of rule and later of exploitation. This mentality permeates our individual psyches in a cumulative form up to the present day—not merely as capitalism but as the vast history of hierarchical society from its inception.

[ 30 ] Bookchin argued that both Marxism and syndicalism had focused too narrowly on appealing to workers and workplace issues.

Yes, class struggles still exist, but they occur farther and farther below the threshold of class war. Workers, as I can attest from my own experience as a foundryman and as an autoworker for General Motors, do not regard themselves as mindless adjuncts to machines or as factory dwellers or even as "instruments of history," as Marxists might put it. They regard themselves as living human beings: as fathers and mothers, as sons and daughters, as people with dreams and visions, as members of communities—not only of trade unions.

[ 24 ] Humanity's environmental predicament [ edit ] Bookchin's book about humanity's collision course with the natural world, Our Synthetic Environment , was published six months before Rachel Carson 's Silent Spring .

[ 24 ] [ page needed ] Bookchin rejected Barry Commoner 's belief that the environmental crisis could be traced to technological choices, Paul Ehrlich 's views that it could be traced to overpopulation, or the even more pessimistic view that traces this crisis to human nature. Rather, Bookchin felt that our environmental predicament is the result of the cancerous logic of capitalism, a system aimed at maximizing profit instead of enriching human lives: "By the very logic of its grow-or-die imperative, capitalism may well be producing ecological crises that gravely imperil the integrity of life on this planet." The solution to this crisis, he said, is not a return to hunter-gatherer societies, which Bookchin characterized as xenophobic and warlike. Bookchin likewise opposed "a politics of mere protest, lacking programmatic content, a proposed alternative, and a movement to give people direction and continuity." [ 24 ] [ page needed ] He claims we need: ...a constant awareness that a given society's irrationality is deep-seated, that its serious pathologies are not isolated problems that can be cured piecemeal but must be solved by sweeping changes in the often hidden sources of crisis and suffering—that awareness alone is what can hold a movement together, give it continuity, preserve its message and organization beyond a given generation, and expand its ability to deal with new issues and developments.

[ 24 ] [ page needed ] The answer then lies in communalism, a system encompassing a directly democratic political organization anchored in loosely confederated popular assemblies, decentralization of power, absence of domination of any kind, and replacing capitalism with human-centered forms of production.

[ 24 ] [ page needed ] Social ecology [ edit ] See also: Social ecology Social ecology is a philosophical theory associated with Bookchin, concerned with the relationship between ecological and social issues.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] It is not a movement but a theory primarily associated with his thought and elaborated over his body of work.

[ 33 ] He presents a utopian philosophy of human evolution that combines the nature of biology and society into a third "thinking nature" beyond biochemistry and physiology, which he argues is a more complete, conscious, ethical, and rational nature. Humanity, by this line of thought, is the latest development from the long history of organic development on Earth. Bookchin's social ecology proposes ethical principles for replacing a society's propensity for hierarchy and domination with that of democracy and freedom.

[ 34 ] It emerged from a time in the mid-1960s, under the emergence of both the global environmental and the American civil rights movements, and played a much more visible role from the upward movement against nuclear power by the late 1970s.

[ 35 ] It presents ecological problems as arising mainly from social problems, in particular from different forms of hierarchy and domination beginning with gerontocracy and patriarchy and extending through various forms of oppression including gender, race, and class status. It seeks to resolve them through the model of a non-hierarchical ecological society based on self-determination at the local level, [ 36 ] which opposes the current capitalist system of production and consumption . It aims to set up a moral, decentralized, united society, guided by reason. While Bookchin distanced himself from anarchism later in his life, the philosophical theory of social ecology is often considered to be a form of eco-anarchism.

[ 37 ] Bookchin wrote about the effects of urbanization on human life in the early 1960s during his participation in the civil rights and related social movements. He then began to pursue the connection between ecological and social issues, culminating with his best-known book, The Ecology of Freedom , which he had developed over a decade.

[ 38 ] His argument, that human domination and destruction of nature follows from social domination between humans, was a breakthrough position in the growing field of ecology. He writes that life develops from self-organization and evolutionary cooperation ( symbiosis ).

[ 39 ] Bookchin wrote of preliterate societies organized around mutual need but ultimately overrun by institutions of hierarchy and domination, such as city-states and capitalist economies, which he attributes uniquely to societies of humans and not communities of animals.

[ 40 ] He proposes confederation between communities of humans run through democracy rather than through administrative logistics.

[ 41 ] Bookchin's work, beginning with anarchist writings on the subject in the 1960s, has continuously evolved. Towards the end of the 1990s, he increasingly integrated the principle of communalism, with aspirations more inclined towards institutionalized municipal democracy, which distanced him from certain evolutions of anarchism . Bookchin's work draws inspiration from, and expands up, anarchism (mainly Kropotkin ), Syndicalism , and Marxism (including the writings of Marx and Engels ). Social ecology refuses the pitfalls of a Neo-Malthusian ecology which erases social relationships by replacing them with "natural forces", but also of a technocratic ecology which considers that environmental progress must rely on technological breakthroughs and that the state will play an integral role in this technological development. According to Bookchin, these two currents depoliticize ecology and mythologize the past and the future.

[ 31 ] In May 2016, the first "International Social Ecology Meetings" were organized in Lyon , France, which brought together a hundred radical environmentalists, decreasing figures and libertarians, most of whom came from France, Belgium , Spain and Switzerland , but also from the United States, Guatemala and Canada. At the center of the debates: libertarian municipalism as an alternative to the nation state and the need to rethink activism.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Kurdish movement [ edit ] Bookchin's reflections on social ecology and libertarian municipalism also inspired Abdullah Öcalan , the historical leader of the Kurdish movement, to create the concept of democratic confederalism , which aims to bring together the peoples of the Middle East in a confederation of democratic, multicultural and ecological communes.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Adopted by the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) since 2005, Öcalan's project represents a major ideological shift away from their previous goal of establishing a Marxist–Leninist state.

[ 45 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] In addition to the PKK, Öcalan's internationalist project was also well received by its Syrian counterpart, the Party of Democratic Union (PYD), which would become the first organization in the world to actually found a society based on the principles of democratic confederalism.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] On January 6, 2014, the cantons of Rojava , in Syrian Kurdistan , federated into autonomous municipalities, adopting a social contract which established a decentralized non-hierarchical society, based on principles of direct democracy , feminism , ecology, cultural pluralism , participatory politics and economic cooperativism .

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 52 ] Municipalism and communalism [ edit ] Bookchin's vision of an ecological society is based on highly participatory , grassroots politics, in which municipal communities democratically plan and manage their affairs through popular assembly , a program he called communalism . This democratic deliberation purposefully promotes autonomy and self-reliance, as opposed to centralized state politics. While this program retains elements of anarchism, it emphasizes a higher degree of organization (community planning, voting, and institutions) than general anarchism. In Bookchin's communalism, these autonomous municipal communities connect with each other via confederations .

[ 53 ] Starting in the 1970s, Bookchin argued that the arena for libertarian social change should be the municipal level. In 1980 Bookchin used the term " libertarian municipalism " to describe a libertarian socialist [ 54 ] system in which institutions of directly democratic assemblies would oppose and replace the state with a confederation of free municipalities.

[ 55 ] In The Next Revolution , Bookchin stresses the link that libertarian municipalism has with his earlier philosophy of social ecology. He writes: Libertarian Municipalism constitutes the politics of social ecology, a revolutionary effort in which freedom is given institutional form in public assemblies that become decision-making bodies.

[ 56 ] Bookchin proposes that these institutional forms must take place within differently scaled local areas. In a 2001 interview he summarized his views this way: The overriding problem is to change the structure of society so that people gain power. The best arena to do that is the municipality—the city, town, and village—where we have an opportunity to create a face-to-face democracy.

[ 57 ] Libertarian municipalism intends to create a situation in which the two powers—the municipal confederations and the nation state cannot coexist.

[ 57 ] Municipalization as a foundation for an ecological society [ edit ] Bookchin posits that neither privatization nor nationalization can effectively pave the way toward an ecological society. He asserts that both models are deeply embedded in structures of domination, failing to address the root causes of environmental crises. In contrast, Bookchin advocates for municipalization as a core principle in his libertarian municipalist framework [ 58 ] Critique of privatization and nationalization [ edit ] Bookchin critiques private property as a central driver of both social and ecological harm, associating it with exploitation, domination, and the prioritization of profit over community and environmental well-being. According to Bookchin, systems based on private ownership promote competition and individualism, which he argues are incompatible with the cooperation and solidarity needed to build a fair and sustainable society.

Nationalization, often positioned as a remedy to capitalism's excesses, is also seen by Bookchin as inadequate. He contends that nationalization typically shifts control from private companies to centralized bureaucratic entities, merely replacing one form of dominance with another. In this state-centered model, the apparatus of the state, rather than the market, assumes authority over economic activities. This can lead to what Bookchin describes as a "privatized economy in a collectivized form," where workers remain detached from their labor and ecological exploitation persists.

[ 59 ] Legacy and influence [ edit ] Though Bookchin, by his own recognition, failed to win over a substantial body of supporters during his own lifetime, his ideas have nonetheless influenced movements and thinkers across the globe.

Among these are the Kurdish People's Protection Units (YPG) and closely aligned Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) in Turkey, which have fought the Turkish state since the 1980s to try to secure greater political and cultural rights for the country's Kurds . The PKK is designated as a terrorist organization by the Turkish and United States governments, while the YPG has been considered an ally of the US against ISIS .

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Though founded on a rigid Marxist–Leninist ideology, the PKK has seen a shift in its thought and aims since the capture and imprisonment of its leader, Abdullah Öcalan , in 1999. Öcalan began reading a variety of post-Marxist political theory while in prison, and found particular interest in Bookchin's works.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Öcalan attempted in early 2004 to arrange a meeting with Bookchin through his lawyers, describing himself as Bookchin's "student" eager to adapt his thought to Middle Eastern society. Bookchin was too ill to accept the request. In May 2004 Bookchin conveyed this message "My hope is that the Kurdish people will one day be able to establish a free, rational society that will allow their brilliance once again to flourish. They are fortunate indeed to have a leader of Mr. Öcalan's talents to guide them". When Bookchin died in 2006, the PKK hailed the American thinker as "one of the greatest social scientists of the 20th century", and vowed to put his theory into practice.

[ 62 ] " Democratic confederalism ", the variation on communalism developed by Öcalan in his writings and adopted by the PKK, does not outwardly seek Kurdish rights within the context of the formation of an independent state separate from Turkey. The PKK claims that this project is not envisioned as being only for Kurds, but rather for all peoples of the region, regardless of their ethnic, national, or religious background. Rather, it promulgates the formation of assemblies and organizations beginning at the grassroots level to enact its ideals in a non-state framework beginning at the local level. It also places a particular emphasis on securing and promoting women's rights .

[ 62 ] The PKK has had some success in implementing its programme, through organizations such as the Democratic Society Congress (DTK), which coordinates political and social activities within Turkey, and the Koma Civakên Kurdistan (KCK), which does so across all countries where Kurds live.

[ 64 ] Selected works [ edit ] Main article: Murray Bookchin bibliography Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971) The Spanish Anarchists: The Heroic Years (1977) The Ecology of Freedom: The Emergence and Dissolution of Hierarchy (1982) See also [ edit ] Anarchism portal Communism portal Environment portal Libertarianism portal Organized Labour portal Politics portal Socialism portal Feminism portal Eco-socialism History of the Green Party of the United States Insurrectionary communes in France in 1870–1871 Outline of libertarianism References [ edit ] ^ Small, Mike (August 8, 2006).

"Murray Bookchin" (Obituary) .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on July 16, 2022 . Retrieved June 30, 2018 .

^ a b c Bookchin, Murray (January 2005).

The Ecology of Freedom; The Emergence and Dissolution of Hierarchy . Chico, California: AK Press . pp. 8, 11.

ISBN 978-1904859260 .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2022 . Retrieved June 30, 2018 .

^ John Muir Institute for Environmental Studies, University of New Mexico, Environmental Philosophy, Inc, University of Georgia , Environmental Ethics v. 12 1990: 193.

^ Bookchin 2015 , pp. 157–158.

^ Biehl, Janet .

"Bookchin Breaks with Anarchism Communalism October 2007: 1" .

theanarchistlibrary.org .

Archived from the original on July 30, 2020 . Retrieved May 25, 2023 .

^ New York, U.S., Naturalization Records, 1882–1944 ^ " The Murray Bookchin Reader: Introduction " . Archived from the original on October 14, 2007.

^ "The Murray Bookchin Reader: Intro" . Dwardmac.pitzer.edu.

Archived from the original on September 6, 2011 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

^ Biehl 2015 , p.

25fn8 .

^ a b " Anarchism in America documentary" . YouTube. January 9, 2007.

Archived from the original on November 14, 2021 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

^ Price, Andy (August 19, 2006).

"Murray Bookchin, Political philosopher and activist who became a founder of the ecological movement" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on June 18, 2022 . Retrieved November 11, 2012 .

^ Martin, Douglas (August 7, 2006).

"Murray Bookchin, 85, writer, Activist and Ecology Theorist Dies August 7, 2006" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 31, 2015 . Retrieved November 11, 2012 .

^ Light 1998 , p. 27.

^ Paull, John (2013) "The Rachel Carson Letters and the Making of Silent Spring" Archived November 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine , Sage Open, 3(July):1–12.

^ " A Short Biography of Murray Bookchin by Janet Biehl" . Dwardmac.pitzer.edu.

Archived from the original on August 7, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

^ "Ecology and Revolution" . Dwardmac.pitzer.edu. June 16, 2004.

Archived from the original on August 29, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

^ "Listen, Marxist!" . Nasalam.org.

Archived from the original on August 29, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2012 .

^ Walker, Jesse (July 31, 2006) Murray Bookchin, RIP Archived October 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , Reason ^ "Reflections: Murray Bookchin" .

dwardmac.pitzer.edu .

Archived from the original on October 15, 2018 . Retrieved October 16, 2019 .

^ Biehl 2015 .

^ Rossi, Marco Rosaire (April 3, 2022).

"The Sanders-Bookchin Debate" .

Capitalism Nature Socialism .

33 (2): 120– 138.

doi : 10.1080/10455752.2022.2051058 .

ISSN 1045-5752 .

S2CID 247404346 .

Archived from the original on June 27, 2023 . Retrieved June 27, 2023 .

^ Vote Green leaflet https://www.scribd.com/doc/229304919/Vote-Bea Retrieved February 24, 2024 ^ Biehl, Janet (March 22, 2015).

"The Left Green Network (1988–91)" .

Ecology or Catastrophe . Archived from the original on March 25, 2015 . Retrieved November 16, 2019 .

^ a b c d e f Bookchin 2015 .

^ Martin, Douglas (August 7, 2006).

"Murray Bookchin, visionary social theorist, dies at 85" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2018 . Retrieved February 22, 2017 .

^ Bookchin, Murray (1996).

The Philosophy of Social Ecology: Essays on Dialectical Naturalism . Montreal: Black Rose Books . p. x.

^ Bookchin, Murray (1982).

The Ecology of Freedom . US: Cheshire Books. p. 20.

^ See Re-Enchanting Humanity , London: Cassell, 1995, amongst other works.

^ Murray Bookchin.

The Ecology of Freedom: the emergence and dissolution of Hierarchy . Cheshire Books: Palo Alto. 1982. p. 3 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Murray Bookchin.

The Ecology of Freedom: the emergence and dissolution of Hierarchy . Cheshire Books: Palo Alto. 1982. p. 8 [ ISBN missing ] ^ a b Bookchin, Murray (2006).

Social Ecology and Communalism (PDF) .

AK Press .

ISBN 978-1-904859-49-9 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Bookchin, Murray (2007).

"What is Social Ecology?" (PDF) . psichenatura.it.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 27, 2015 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Light 1998 , p. 5.

^ Stokols, Daniel (2018).

Social Ecology in the Digital Age: Solving Complex Problems in a Globalized World .

Elsevier Science . p. 33.

ISBN 978-0-12-803114-8 .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2023 . Retrieved July 22, 2018 – via Google Books .

^ Tokar, Brian (2018).

"On Bookchin's Social Ecology and its Contributions to Social Movements" .

Institute for Social Ecology . social-ecology.org.

Archived from the original on September 29, 2017 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Bookchin 2015 , p. 39 It is a theory of radical political ecology based on communalism ^ McKay, Iain.

An Anarchist FAQ.

AK Press: Oakland. 2008. pp. 65.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Light 1998 , pp. 5–6.

^ Light 1998 , p. 6.

^ Light 1998 , p. 7.

^ Light 1998 , p. 8.

^ "Questions pour un autre futur" [Questions for another future].

LeCourrier (in French). Le Courrier. July 25, 2016.

Archived from the original on May 27, 2017 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ "Rencontres Internationales de l'Écologie Sociale – 27 28 et 29 mai 2016 Lyon" [International Meetings of Social Ecology – 27 28 and 29 May 2016, Lyon] (in French). Passerelle éco. March 16, 2016.

Archived from the original on February 23, 2023 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Tokar, Brian (2010). "Bookchin's Social Ecology and its Contributions to the Red-Green Movement". In Huan, Qingzhi (ed.).

Eco-socialism as Politics: Rebuilding the Basis of Our Modern Civilisation .

Springer Science+Business Media . pp. 123–140 [123–127].

doi : 10.1007/978-90-481-3745-9_8 .

ISBN 978-90-481-3745-9 .

^ a b Bookchin, Debbie (June 15, 2018).

"How My Father's Ideas Helped the Kurds Create a New Democracy" .

The New York Review of Books .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2020 . Retrieved May 20, 2016 .

^ Fernandez, Benjamin (July 2016).

"Murray Bookchin, écologie ou barbarie" [Murray Bookchin, ecology or barbarism] (in French). Le Monde diplomatique.

Archived from the original on November 17, 2016 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ a b "A Dream of Secular Utopia in ISIS' Backyard" .

The New York Times . November 24, 2015.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2016 . Retrieved July 1, 2020 .

^ a b Shilton, Dor (June 9, 2019).

"In the Heart of Syria's Darkness, a Democratic, Egalitarian and Feminist Society Emerges" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2020 . Retrieved July 2, 2020 .

^ Malik, Kenan (October 27, 2019).

"Syria's Kurds dreamt of a 'Rojava revolution'. Assad will snuff this out" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2020 . Retrieved July 2, 2020 .

^ "Revolution in Rojava Democratic Autonomy and Women's Liberation in Syrian Kurdistan" .

Pluto Books .

Archived from the original on June 22, 2020 . Retrieved July 2, 2020 .

^ Krajeski, Jenna (October 14, 2019).

"What the World Loses if Turkey Destroys the Syrian Kurds" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2020 . Retrieved July 2, 2020 .

^ Baird, Vanessa (June 22, 2020).

"In the Autonomous Zones" . The New International.

Archived from the original on July 1, 2020 . Retrieved July 2, 2020 .

^ Bookchin, Murray.

Free Cities: Communalism and the Left .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2022 . Retrieved March 18, 2022 .

^ Taylor, Rafael (March 22, 2016).

"The New PKK: unleashing a social revolution in Kurdistan" .

Co-operation in Mesopotamia .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2023 . Retrieved July 24, 2023 .

^ Bookchin, M. (October 1991).

"Libertarian Municipalism: An Overview" .

Green Perspectives . No. 24. Burlington, Vermont.

^ Bookchin 2015 , p. 96.

^ a b Bookchin, Murray; Vanek, David (October 1, 2001).

"Interview with Murray Bookchin" .

Harbinger , a Journal of Social Ecology . Vol. 2, no. 1. Institute for Social Ecology.

^ Carter, Mason (November 9, 2024).

"Home Libertarian Socialism Libertarian Municipalism: Theory to Build Socialism from Below" .

Class with Mason .

^ Carter, Mason (November 9, 2024).

"Libertarian Municipalism: Theory to Build Socialism from Below" .

Class with Mason .

^ Bookchin, Debbie (June 15, 2018).

"How My Father's Ideas Helped the Kurds Create a New Democracy" .

The New York Review of Books .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 23, 2019 .

^ Barnard, Anne; Hubbard, Ben (January 25, 2018).

"Allies or Terrorists: Who Are the Kurdish Fighters in Syria?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2020 . Retrieved October 23, 2019 .

^ a b c Biehl, Janet (February 16, 2012).

"Bookchin, Öcalan, and the Dialectics of Democracy" . New Compass.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2016 . Retrieved January 27, 2014 .

^ de Jong, Alex (March 2016).

"The New–Old PKK" .

Jacobin .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2016 . Retrieved March 29, 2016 .

^ Biehl, Janet (October 9, 2011).

"Kurdish Communalism" . New Compass.

Archived from the original on September 1, 2020 . Retrieved January 27, 2014 .

Sources [ edit ] Biehl, Janet (2015).

Ecology or Catastrophe: The Life of Murray Bookchin . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-934248-8 .

Bookchin, Murray (January 6, 2015).

The Next Revolution: Popular Assemblies and the Promise of Direct Democracy . Verso Books.

ISBN 978-1781685815 . Retrieved October 7, 2024 .

Curran, Giorel (2007).

21st Century Dissent: Anarchism, Anti-Globalization and Environmentalism . International Political Economy. Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-4039-4881-6 .

Light, Andrew, ed. (1998).

Social Ecology After Bookchin .

Guilford Press .

ISBN 1-57230-379-4 .

LCCN 98-35447 .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2023 . Retrieved July 22, 2018 .

Price, Andy (2012). "Social Ecology". In Kinna, Ruth (ed.).

The Continuum Companion to Anarchism .

Continuum International Publishing Group . pp.

231– 249.

ISBN 978-1-4411-4270-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Tarinski, Yavor, ed.

Enlightenment and ecology: The legacy of Murray Bookchin in the 21st Century . Montréal: Black Rose Books, 2021.

Price, Andy, Recovering Bookchin: Social Ecology and the Crises of Our Time, New Compass (2012) Biehl, Janet , The Murray Bookchin Reader (Cassell, 1997) ISBN 0-304-33874-5 .

Biehl, Janet, "Mumford Gutkind Bookchin: The Emergence of Eco-Decentralism" (New Compass, 2011) ISBN 978-82-93064-10-7 Jacoby, Russell.

The Last Intellectuals . Basic Books.

Marshall, P. (1992), "Murray Bookchin and the Ecology of Freedom", pp. 602–622 in, Demanding the Impossible . Fontana Press.

ISBN 0-00-686245-4 .

Morris, Brian (2017). "Anarchism and Environmental Philosophy". In Jun, Nathan (ed.).

Brill's Companion to Anarchism and Philosophy .

Leiden : Brill . pp.

369– 400.

doi : 10.1163/9789004356894_015 .

ISBN 978-90-04-35689-4 .

Selva Varengo, La rivoluzione ecologica. Il pensiero libertario di Murray Bookchin (2007) Milano: Zero in condotta.

ISBN 978-88-95950-00-6 .

E. Castano, Ecologia e potere. Un saggio su Murray Bookchin , Mimesis, Milano 2011 ISBN 978-88-575-0501-5 .

Damian F. White 'Bookchin – A Critical Appraisal'. Pluto Press (UK/Europe), University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-7453-1965-0 (hardback); ISBN 978-0745319643 (paperback).

Neither Washington Nor Stowe: Common Sense For The Working Vermonter , by David Van Deusen, Sean West, and the Green Mountain Anarchist Collective (NEFAC Vermont), Catamount Tavern Press, 2004. This libertarian socialist manifesto took many of Bookchin's ideas and articulated them as they would manifest in a revolutionary Vermont.

External links [ edit ] Murray Bookchin at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Library resources about Murray Bookchin Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Murray Bookchin Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Murray Bookchin entry at the Anarchy Archives TRISE Online Conference 2021: "100 years Murray Bookchin" & Video recordings available here Institute of Social Ecology (official site) v t e Murray Bookchin Bibliography Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971) The Spanish Anarchists (1976) The Ecology of Freedom (1982) Related Ecology or Catastrophe v t e Environmentalism Outline of environmentalism Key topics Climate justice Ecological crisis Environmental conflict Environmental movement History List of environmental conflicts Organizations Environmental studies Human impact on the environment Disciplines Communication Ecology Education Ethics Health History Humanities Law Philosophy Politics Psychology Religion Science Social science Sociology Views Philosophical Political ecology Environmental philosophy Biocentrism Deep ecology Earth jurisprudence Ecocentrism Resacralization of nature Social ecology Political Bioconservatism Bright green environmentalism Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Eco-terrorism Ecomodernism Free-market environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green politics Green syndicalism War on coal Religious Ecotheology Christianity Evangelical Islam Judaism Stewardship (theology) Opposition Anti-environmentalism Environmental skepticism List of environmental killings Biophilia hypothesis Environmentalism of the poor Environmental stewardship Hardline Nature conservation Radical environmentalism Offshoots Anti-fracking movement Anti-nuclear movement Car-free movement Climate movement Conservation movement Cultural environmentalism Degrowth Earth Optimism Eco-anxiety Ecological grief Environmental defender Environmental justice Ethical banking Ethical consumerism Flight shame Impact investing Product stewardship Slow movement Sustainability organization Goals Circular economy Climate action Climate change mitigation Conservation community Ecological civilization Environmental personhood Environmental protection Environmental policy Environmental, social, and corporate governance Environmentally friendly Greening Green economy Greenwashing Natural resource management Environmental resource management Rights of nature Short-haul flight ban Smoke abatement Sustainability Vegetarianism Protests Tree sitting By country Albania Australia Brazil Rio Grande do Sul China Anti-incinerator movement India Chipko movement Israel New Zealand Philippines South Africa Switzerland United Kingdom United States In culture Art Books Ecofiction Conspicuous conservation Film list festivals horror Journalism The Lord of the Rings Music Ecomusicology Motorsport Sculpture Surfing Tourism Eco hotel Publications Environmentalists Environmentalist Environmental defender Water protector Notable people Sunderlal Bahuguna Murray Bookchin David Brower Rachel Carson Jacques Cousteau Ng Cho-nam Tim Flannery Al Gore Aldo Leopold Wangari Maathai Seyyed Hossein Nasr Chico Mendes John Muir Theodore Roosevelt Shōzō Tanaka Greta Thunberg Related topics Barriers to pro-environmental behaviour Business ethics Land ethic Lifeboat ethics Tragedy of the commons Environment portal v t e Libertarian socialism Schools of thought Anarchism Collectivist anarchism Anarchist communism Anarcho-syndicalism Guild socialism Marxism Autonomism Chalieu–Montal Tendency Council communism Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Johnson–Forest Tendency Situationism Utopian socialism Concepts Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Class conflict Common ownership Decentralization Economic democracy Egalitarian community Free association Mutual aid Worker cooperative Workers' control Workers' self-management Models Communalism Decentralized planning Economic democracy Guild socialism Inclusive Democracy Market abolitionism Participatory economics Socialization People 19th c.

Charles Fourier Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin Joseph Déjacque Thomas Hodgskin Peter Kropotkin Gustav Landauer Herbert Marcuse William Morris Antonie Pannekoek Francesc Pi i Margall Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Wilhelm Reich Rudolf Rocker Otto Rühle 20th c.

Michael Albert Murray Bookchin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky G. D. H. Cole Takis Fotopoulos Paul Goodman Robin Hahnel Daniel Guérin Chris Pallis Significant events International Workingmen's Association Revolutions of 1917–1923 Spanish Revolution of 1936 New Left New social movements Related Communism Democratic socialism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Socialism Syndicalism Critique of political economy v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Anarchism in the United States History Cincinnati Time Store Most–Grottkau debate Haymarket affair Homestead strike Assassination of William McKinley Immigration Act of 1903 Ferrer Center and Colony Immigration Act of 1918 First Red Scare 1919 bombings Palmer Raids Sacco and Vanzetti Libertarian Book Club and League Counterculture of the 1960s Protests of 1968 Battle of Seattle Occupy Wall Street Qilombo Capitol Hill Occupied Protest People Abbott Alston Andrews Appleton Austin Balagoon Bari Berkman Best Biehl Bookchin Bushnell Carson Chomsky Cleyre Cornell Czologsz Day Dixon Dolgoff Duffy Turner Emerson Ervin Fielden Fischer Goldman Goodman Graeber Greene Hahnel Haldeman-Julius Hammond Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hill Hoffman Holmes Ingalls Kaczynski Labadie Lingg Lloyd Lum Magón Milstein Most Newman Parsons Perlman Sale Schwab (Justus) Schwab (Michael) Solanas Spies Spooner Thoreau Tucker Waisbrooker Walker Warren Wilson Winn Wolff Zerzan Zinn Organizations Active ABC No Rio Anarcho-Syndicalist Review Anti-Racist Action Beehive Design Collective Catholic Worker Movement Common Ground Collective CrimethInc.

Curious George Brigade Earth Liberation Front Industrial Workers of the World Institute for Anarchist Studies Institute for Social Ecology Kate Sharpley Library Labadie Collection Metropolitan Anarchist Coordinating Council MOVE Portland Anarchist Road Care Profane Existence Red Emma's Ruckus Society Defunct Cincinnati Time Store Don't Just Vote, Get Active Ferrer Center and Colony George Jackson Brigade Institute for Applied Autonomy International Working People's Association Libertarian Book Club and League New England Non-Resistance Society New York Social Revolutionary Club Qilombo Spanish Camp Tenacious Unicorn Ranch Union of Russian Workers Up Against the Wall Motherfucker Vanguard Group Why? Group Youth International Party Media Publications AK Press Autonomedia The Blast Catholic Worker Cronaca Sovversiva Fifth Estate Free Society Freiheit Golos Truda Liberty Loompanics Mother Earth PM Press Regeneración Vanguard The Word Works " Resistance to Civil Government " (1849) " To the Workingmen of America " (1883) Anarchism and Other Essays (1910) Now and After (1929) In Defense of Anarchism (1970) Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971) " The Abolition of Work " (1986) From Bakunin to Lacan (2001) Understanding Power (2002) Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology (2004) Direct Action: An Ethnography (2009) See also American Left Anarchism History in Puerto Rico Anarchist economics Anarcho-capitalism Anarcho-pacifism Autarchism Chicago idea Galleanisti Green anarchism Individualist anarchism in the United States Labor history of the United States Libertarianism in the U.S.

Minarchism Outline of anarchism Philosophical anarchism Politics of the United States Socialism in the U.S.

Anarchism portal Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐j84l7
Cached time: 20250817043935
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.473 seconds
Real time usage: 1.738 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10607/1000000
Revision size: 56381/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 409990/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12729/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 274780/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.861/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13169218/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1331.657      1 -total
 31.27%  416.454      1 Template:Reflist
 11.47%  152.697     15 Template:Navbox
 10.70%  142.490     23 Template:Cite_web
 10.13%  134.953      9 Template:Cite_news
  9.63%  128.205      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  9.01%  119.935      1 Template:Anarchism_US
  8.83%  117.571      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.69%   89.056     14 Template:Cite_book
  6.11%   81.336     16 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:153803:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043935 and revision id 1304737218. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Murray_Bookchin&oldid=1304737218 " Categories : 20th-century American historians 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American historians 21st-century American male writers American anarchists American anti-capitalists American anti-fascists American anti-war activists American atheists American environmentalists American feminists American libertarians American male non-fiction writers American non-fiction environmental writers American political philosophers American syndicalists Anarchist theorists American anarchist writers Anarcho-communists Anti-consumerists Degrowth advocates Ecofeminists Environmental philosophers Environmental writers Green anarchists Historians from New York City Historians of anarchism Jewish anarchists Jewish American atheists Jewish American feminists Jewish American historians Jewish American non-fiction writers Jewish American socialists Jewish anti-fascists Jewish philosophers Judaism and environmentalism Left-libertarians Libertarian socialists New Left New York (state) socialists Vermont socialists Writers from Burlington, Vermont Writers from New York City American people of Belarusian-Jewish descent American people of Lithuanian-Jewish descent 1921 births 2006 deaths Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2023 Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2025 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 21:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Murray Bookchin 40 languages Add topic

