Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sigmund Freud 2 Emergence Toggle Emergence subsection 2.1 Wilhelm Reich 3 Critical theory Toggle Critical theory subsection 3.1 Frankfurt School 3.1.1 Herbert Marcuse 3.1.2 Erich Fromm 4 Other developments Toggle Other developments subsection 4.1 Frantz Fanon 4.2 Paul Ricœur 5 Lacanianism Toggle Lacanianism subsection 5.1 Louis Althusser 5.2 Cornelius Castoriadis 5.3 Slavoj Žižek 6 Post-structuralism 7 Major works 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Bibliography 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Freudo-Marxism 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano 日本語 Português Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical perspectives This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this article. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Freudo-Marxism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series of articles on Psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud's couch Concepts Psychosexual development Psychosocial development (Erikson) Unconscious Preconscious Consciousness Psychic apparatus Id, ego and superego Ego defenses Projection Introjection Libido Drive Transference Countertransference Resistance Denial Dreamwork Cathexis Important figures Abraham Adler Balint Bion Breuer Chodorow Erikson Fairbairn Ferenczi Freud (Anna) Freud (Sigmund) Fromm Guattari Horney Irigaray Jacobson Jones Jung Kohut Klein Kristeva Lacan Laing Laplanche Mahler Rank Reich Spielrein Stekel Strachey Sullivan Winnicott Žižek Important works The Interpretation of Dreams (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Psychology of the Unconscious (1912) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) The Ego and the Id (1923) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1964) Anti-Oedipus (1972) The Sublime Object of Ideology (1989) Schools of thought Adlerian Ego psychology Jungian Lacanian Interpersonal Intersubjective Marxist Object relations Reichian Relational Self psychology Training Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis British Psychoanalytic Council British Psychoanalytical Society Columbia University Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research International Psychoanalytical Association World Association of Psychoanalysis List of schools of psychoanalysis See also Child psychoanalysis Depth psychology Psychodynamics Psychoanalytic theory Psychology portal v t e Freudo-Marxism is a loose designation for philosophical perspectives informed by both the Marxist philosophy of Karl Marx and the psychoanalytic theory of Sigmund Freud . Its history within continental philosophy began in the 1920s and '30s and running since through critical theory , Lacanian psychoanalysis , and post-structuralism .

Sigmund Freud [ edit ] Sigmund Freud engages with Marxism in his 1932 New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis , in which he hesitantly contests what he sees as the Marxist view of history .

According to Freud, Marx erroneously attributes the trajectory of society to a necessary "natural law or conceptual [dialectical] evolution"; instead, Freud suggests, it can be attributed to contingent factors: "psychological factors, such as the amount of constitutional aggressiveness", "the firmness of the organization within the horde" and "material factors, such as the possession of superior weapons".

[ 1 ] However, Freud does not completely dismiss Marxism: "The strength of Marxism clearly lies, not in its view of history or its prophecies of the future that are based on it, but in its sagacious indication of the decisive influence which the economic circumstances of men have upon their intellectual, ethical and artistic attitudes." [ 2 ] Emergence [ edit ] The beginnings of Freudo-Marxist theorizing took place in the 1920s in Germany and the Soviet Union. The Soviet pedagogist Aron Zalkind was the most prominent proponent of Marxist psychoanalysis in the Soviet Union. The Soviet philosopher V. Yurinets and the Freudian analyst Siegfried Bernfeld both discussed the topic. The Soviet linguist Valentin Voloshinov , a member of the Bakhtin circle , began a Marxist critique of psychoanalysis in his 1925 article "Beyond the Social", which he developed more substantially in his 1927 book Freudianism: A Marxist Critique .

[ 3 ] In 1929, Wilhelm Reich 's Dialectical Materialism and Psychoanalysis was published in German and Russian in the bilingual communist theory journal Unter dem Banner des Marxismus , ' Under the Banner of Marxism ' .

At the end of this line of thought can be considered Otto Fenichel 's 1934 article Psychoanalysis as the Nucleus of a Future Dialectical-Materialistic Psychology which appeared in Reich's Zeitschrift für Politische Psychologie und Sexualökonomie , ' Journal for Political Psychology and Sex-Economy '. One member of the Berlin group of Marxist psychoanalysts around Reich was Erich Fromm , who later brought Freudo-Marxist ideas into the exiled Frankfurt School led by Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno .

Wilhelm Reich [ edit ] Wilhelm Reich in his mid-20s Wilhelm Reich [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] was an Austrian psychoanalyst, [ 8 ] a member of the second generation of psychoanalysts after Freud, and a radical psychiatrist . He was the author of several influential books and essays, most notably Character Analysis (1933), The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933), [ 8 ] and The Sexual Revolution (1936).

[ 9 ] His work on character contributed to the development of Anna Freud 's The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defence (1936), and his idea of muscular armour – the expression of the personality in the way the body moves – shaped innovations such as body psychotherapy , Fritz Perls 's Gestalt therapy , Alexander Lowen 's bioenergetic analysis , and Arthur Janov 's primal therapy . His writing influenced generations of intellectuals: during the 1968 student uprisings in Paris and Berlin, students scrawled his name on walls and threw copies of The Mass Psychology of Fascism at the police.

[ 10 ] Critical theory [ edit ] Frankfurt School [ edit ] Part of a series on the Frankfurt School Major works Dialectic of Enlightenment Eclipse of Reason Eros and Civilization Escape from Freedom Minima Moralia Negative Dialectics One-Dimensional Man Reason and Revolution The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere The Theory of Communicative Action " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " Notable theorists Adorno Apel Benjamin Fromm Forst Grünberg Geuss Habermas Honneth Horkheimer Jaeggi Kluge Kracauer Kirchheimer Kompridis Kuhlmann Löwenthal Marcuse McCarthy Negt Neumann Offe Pollock Schmidt Sohn-Rethel Wellmer Wingert Important concepts Advanced capitalism Antipositivism Communicative rationality Critical theory Culture industry Dialectic Legitimation crisis Non-identity Popular culture Praxis Privatism Psychoanalysis Related topics Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Freudo-Marxism Marxist humanism Recognition Reification Social alienation Western Marxism Philosophy portal Society portal v t e The Frankfurt School , from the Institute for Social Research , took up the task of choosing what parts of Marx's thought might serve to clarify social conditions which Marx himself had never seen. They drew on other schools of thought to fill in Marx's perceived omissions.

Max Weber exerted a major influence, as did Freud. In the Institute's extensive Studien über Authorität und Familie (ed.

Max Horkheimer , Paris 1936), Erich Fromm authored the social-psychological part. Another new member of the institute was Herbert Marcuse , who would become famous during the 1950s in the US.

Herbert Marcuse [ edit ] Eros and Civilization is one of Marcuse's best known early works. Written in 1955, it is an attempted dialectical synthesis of Marx and Freud whose title alludes to Freud's Civilization and its Discontents . Marcuse's vision of a non-repressive society (which runs rather counter to Freud's conception of society as naturally and necessarily repressive), based on Marx and Freud, anticipated the values of 1960s countercultural social movements.

In the book, Marcuse writes about the social meaning of biology – history seen not as a class struggle , but fight against repression of our instincts. He argues that capitalism (if never named as such) is preventing us from reaching the non-repressive society "based on a fundamentally different experience of being, a fundamentally different relation between man and nature, and fundamentally different existential relations".

Erich Fromm [ edit ] Erich Fromm , once a member of the Frankfurt School , left the group at the end of the 1930s. The culmination of Fromm's social and political philosophy was his book The Sane Society , published in 1955, which argued in favor of humanist, democratic socialism . Building primarily upon the works of Marx, Fromm sought to re-emphasise the ideal of personal freedom, missing from most Soviet Marxism , and more frequently found in the writings of classic liberals . Fromm's brand of socialism rejected both Western capitalism and Soviet communism , which he saw as dehumanizing and bureaucratic social structures that resulted in a virtually universal modern phenomenon of alienation .

Other developments [ edit ] Frantz Fanon [ edit ] The French West Indian psychiatrist and philosopher Frantz Fanon drew on both psychoanalytic and Marxist theory in his critique of colonialism . His seminal works in this area include Black Skin, White Masks (1952) and The Wretched of the Earth (1961).

Paul Ricœur [ edit ] In his 1965 book Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation , the French philosopher Paul Ricœur compared the two (together with Friedrich Nietzsche ), characterizing their common method as the " hermeneutics of suspicion ".

Lacanianism [ edit ] Further information: Lacanianism Jacques Lacan was a philosophically minded French psychoanalyst, whose perspective gained widespread influence in French psychiatry and psychology. Lacan saw himself as loyal to and rescuing Freud's legacy. In his 16th Seminar , D'un Autre à l'autre , Lacan proposes and develops a homology between the Marxist notion of surplus value and his own notion of surplus- jouissance / objet a .

[ 11 ] While Lacan was not himself a Marxist, many Marxists (particularly Maoists ) drew on his ideas.

Louis Althusser [ edit ] The French Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser is widely known as a theorist of ideology , and his best-known essay is Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses: Notes Toward an Investigation . The essay establishes the concept of ideology, also based on Gramsci's theory of hegemony . Whereas hegemony is ultimately determined entirely by political forces, ideology draws on Freud's and Lacan's concepts of the unconscious and mirror-phase respectively, and describes the structures and systems that allow us to meaningfully have a concept of the self . These structures, for Althusser, are both agents of repression and inevitable – it is impossible to escape ideology, to not be subjected to it. The distinction between ideology and science or philosophy is not assured once and for all by the epistemological break (a term borrowed from Gaston Bachelard ): this "break" is not a chronologically determined event, but a process. Instead of an assured victory, there is a continuous struggle against ideology: "Ideology has no history".

His essay Contradiction and Overdetermination borrows the concept of overdetermination from psychoanalysis, in order to replace the idea of "contradiction" with a more complex model of multiple causality in political situations (an idea closely related to Gramsci's concept of hegemony ).

Cornelius Castoriadis [ edit ] Greek-French philosopher, psychoanalyst, and social critic Cornelius Castoriadis also followed up on the work of Lacan.

Slavoj Žižek [ edit ] Slavoj Žižek in 2008 The Slovenian philosopher Slavoj Žižek promotes a form of Marxism highly modified by Lacanian psychoanalysis and Hegelian philosophy. Žižek contests Althusser's account of ideology, because it misses the role of subjectivity .

[ 12 ] Post-structuralism [ edit ] Major French philosophers associated with post-structuralism , post-modernism , and/or deconstruction , including Jean-François Lyotard , Michel Foucault , and Jacques Derrida , engaged deeply with both Marxism and psychoanalysis. Most notably, Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari collaborated on the theoretical work Capitalism and Schizophrenia in two volumes: Anti-Oedipus (1972) and A Thousand Plateaus (1980).

Major works [ edit ] Freudianism: A Marxist Critique (1927) by Valentin Voloshinov Character Analysis (1933) by Wilhelm Reich Black Skin, White Masks (1952) by Frantz Fanon Eros and Civilization: A Philosophical Inquiry into Freud (1955) by Herbert Marcuse The Sane Society (1955) by Erich Fromm Life Against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History (1959) by Norman O. Brown Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses (1970) by Louis Althusser Capitalism and Schizophrenia (1972/1980) by Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari Libidinal Economy (1974) by Jean-François Lyotard False Consciousness: An Essay on Reification by Joseph Gabel The Sublime Object of Ideology (1989) by Slavoj Žižek See also [ edit ] Class consciousness Crowd psychology Critical psychology Critique of political economy References [ edit ] ^ Freud 1973 , p. 214.

^ Freud 1973 , p. 215.

^ Voloshinov, V.N. (1976). "Translator's Introduction".

Freudianism: a Marxist critique . Titunik I. R., Bruss Neal H. New York, New York: Academic Press. pp.

xxiv– xxviii.

ISBN 978-1-4832-9679-1 .

OCLC 899000369 .

^ "J.6 What methods of child rearing do anarchists advocate?".

An Anarchist FAQ .

Wilhelm Reich is again the main pioneer in this field (an excellent, short introduction to his ideas can be found in Maurice Brinton's The Irrational in Politics). In Children of the Future, Reich made numerous suggestions, based on his research and clinical experience, for parents, psychologists, and educators striving to develop libertarian methods of child rearing. (He did not use the term "libertarian," but that is what his methods are.) Hence, in this and the following sections we will summarise Reich's main ideas as well as those of other libertarian psychologists and educators who have been influenced by him, such as A.S. Neill and Alexander Lowen .

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) ^ "In an earlier article ("Some Thoughts on Libertarianism," Broadsheet No. 35), I argued that to define a position as "anti-authoritarian" is not, in fact, to define the position at all "but merely to indicate a relationship of opposition to another position, the authoritarian one...On the psychoanalytic side, Wilhelm Reich (The Sexual Revolution, Peter Neville-Vision Press, London, 1951|Character Analysis, Orgone Institute Press, N.Y., 1945; and The Function of the Orgasm, Orgone Institute Press, N.Y., 1942) was preferred to Freud because, despite his own weaknesses – his Utopian tendencies and his eventual drift into "orgones" and "bions" – Reich laid more emphasis on the social conditions of mental events than did Freud (see, e.g., A.J. Baker, "Reich's Criticism of Freud," Libertarian No. 3, January 1960)." "A Reading List for Libertarians" by David Iverson. Broadsheet No. 39 ^ Martin, Jim.

Orgone Addicts: Wilhelm Reich Versus The Situationists .

I will also discuss other left-libertarians who wrote about Reich, as they bear on the general discussion of Reich's ideas...In 1944, Paul Goodman, author of Growing Up Absurd , The Empire City , and co-author of Gestalt Therapy , began to discover the work of Wilhelm Reich for his American audience in the tiny libertarian socialist and anarchist milieu.

^ Baker, A.J. (March 1975). "Sydney Libertarianism & The Push".

Broadsheet . No. 81.

In the summer of 1950-51, numerous member of the A.C.C. and other interested people held a series of meetings in the Ironworkers' Hall with a view to forming a downtown political society. Here a division developed between a more radical wing (including e.g. Waters and Grahame Harrison) and a more conservative wing (including e.g. Stove and Eric Dowling). The general orientation of these meetings may be judged from the fact that when Harry Hooton proposed "Anarchist" and some of the conservative proposed "Democratic" as the name for the new Society, both were rejected and "Libertarian Society" was adopted as an acceptable title. Likewise then accepted as the motto for this Society - and continued by the later Libertarian society - was the early Marx quotation used by Wilhelm Reich as the motto for his The Sexual Revolution, vis: "Since it is not for us to create a plan for the future that will hold for all time, all the more surely what we contemporaries have to do is the uncompromising critical evaluation of all that exists, uncompromising in the sense that our criticism fears neither its own results nor the conflict with the powers that be.

^ a b Pavón-Cuéllar, David [in Spanish] (2017).

"Marxism, psychoanalysis, and critique of psychology – Reich: subversive Freudo-Marxist proposals against adaptive psychological concessions of burgeois psychoanalysis" .

Marxism and Psychoanalysis: In or Against Psychology?

. Concepts for Critical Psychology (1st ed.).

New York and London : Routledge . pp.

125– 129.

ISBN 9781138916586 .

LCCN 2016032101 .

^ That he was one of the most radical figures in psychiatry, see Sheppard 1973 .

Danto 2007 , p. 43: "Wilhelm Reich, the second generation psychoanalyst perhaps most often associated with political radicalism ..." Turner 2011, p. 114: "[Reich's mobile clinic was] perhaps the most radical, politically engaged psychoanalytic enterprise to date." For the publication and significance of The Mass Psychology of Fascism and Character Analysis , see Sharaf 1994 , pp. 163–164, 168.

For Character Analysis being an important contribution to psychoanalytic theory, see: Young-Bruehl 2008 , p. 157: "Reich, a year and a half younger than Anna Freud, was the youngest instructor at the Training Institute, where his classes on psychoanalytic technique, later presented in a book called Character Analysis , were crucial to his whole group of contemporaries." Sterba 1982 , p. 35: "This book [ Character Analysis ] serves even today as an excellent introduction to psychoanalytic technique. In my opinion, Reich's understanding of and technical approach to resistance prepared the way for Anna Freud's Ego and the Mechanisms of Defence (1936)." Guntrip 1961 , p. 105: "... the two important books of the middle 1930s, Character Analysis (1935) by Wilhelm Reich and The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defence (1936) by Anna Freud." For more on the influence of The Mass Psychology of Fascism , see Kirkpatrick 1947 , Burgess 1947 ; Bendix 1947 ; and Turner 2011, p. 152.

^ For Anna Freud, see Bugental, Schneider and Pierson 2001 , p. 14: "Anna Freud's work on the ego and the mechanisms of defense developed from Reich's early research (A. Freud, 1936/1948)." For Perls, Lowen and Janov, see Sharaf 1994 , p. 4.

For the students, see Elkind, 18 April 1971 ; and Turner 2011, pp. 13–14.

^ Lacan, Jacques (18 August 2011).

The seminar of Jacques Lacan : Book XVI : From an Other to the other : 1968-1969 . p. 9 . Retrieved 4 May 2022 .

Just as every object carries in it something of surplus value , in the same way surplus enjoying [ plus-de-jouir ] is what allows the isolation of the o-object [ objet a ].

^ Žižek, Slavoj (1989).

The Sublime Object of Ideology . London & New York: Verso Books . p. 43ff.

Bibliography [ edit ] Freud, Sigmund (1973).

New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis . Harmondsworth: Penguin Books .

Further reading [ edit ] Bruno Bosteels.

Marx and Freud in Latin America: politics, psychoanalysis, and religion in times of terror . London: Verso, 2012.

Fenichel, Otto (1967). "Psychoanalysis as the Nucleus of a Future Dialectical-Materialistic Psychology".

American Imago .

24 (4): 290– 311.

JSTOR 26302273 .

PMID 4868452 .

Palmier, Jean-Michel [in French] (1969).

Wilhelm Reich: Essai Sur La Naissance Du Freudo-marxisme [ Wilhelm Reich: Essay on the Birth of Freudo-Marxism ] (in French). Paris: U.G.E.

ISBN 9780320059612 .

Pavón-Cuéllar, David [in Spanish] (2017).

Marxism and Psychoanalysis: In Or Against Psychology?

. London: Routledge .

ISBN 9781138916562 .

Reich, Wilhelm (1972). "Dialectical Materialism and Psychoanalysis". In Baxandall, Lee (ed.).

Sex-Pol; essays, 1929–1934 (PDF) . New York: Vintage Books . pp.

1– 74.

ISBN 0-394-71791-0 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-04-18 . Retrieved 2020-05-15 .

External links [ edit ] Roger Kimball: The Marriage of Marx and Freud v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory v t e Sexual revolution Main topics Birth control Male contraceptive Free love Gay liberation Die Sexualität im Kulturkampf Milestones Abortion law Boys in the Sand Blue Movie Myra Breckinridge Deep Throat Divorce law by country Freedom of speech Freedom of the press Golden Age of Porn Loving v. Virginia Miller Test Obergefell v. Hodges " Porno chic " Pornography Pornography in the United States Swinging The Pill (1965) Slogans " Make love, not war " " The personal is political " Events AIDS epidemic Kinsey Reports Masters and Johnson Institute Playboy Protests of 1968 Stonewall riots Summer of Love People Pat Califia Marilyn Chambers Aleister Crowley Gerard Damiano Betty Dodson Larry Flynt Sigmund Freud Ralph Ginzburg Al Goldstein Bob Guccione Terri Hall Fred Halsted Nina Hartley Hugh Hefner Magnus Hirschfeld David Hurles Virginia Johnson Alfred Kinsey Linda Lovelace Robert Mapplethorpe William Margold William Masters Radley Metzger Bettie Page Wilhelm Reich Marquis de Sade Margaret Sanger Annie Sprinkle Andy Warhol Ruth Westheimer Oscar Wilde Places 55th Street Playhouse Caldron (sex club) Catacombs (sex club) Club Baths The Factory Gay bathhouse LGBT culture Dallas-Fort Worth Houston Miami New York City San Francisco Mineshaft (gay club) New Andy Warhol Garrick Theatre Plato's Retreat Sandstone retreat South of Market Related Counterculture of the 1960s Feminist views of pornography Freudo-Marxism Hippie Inside Deep Throat (2005 film) Kinsey (2004 film) LGBT Lust Lovelace (2013 film) Make Love, Not War: The Sexual Revolution: An Unfettered History (2001 book) The Notorious Bettie Page (2005 film) Peace movement Slut-shaming Whatever (1994 novel) v t e Wilhelm Reich Ideas Orgastic potency Character analysis Vegetotherapy Freudo-Marxism Orgone Works " Concerning Specific Forms of Masturbation " (1922) Genitality in the Theory and Therapy of Neurosis (1927) Character Analysis (1933) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) The Sexual Revolution (1936) The Function of the Orgasm (1942) Listen, Little Man!

(1945) Other Cloudbuster W.R.: Mysteries of the Organism (1971) Me and the Orgone (1971) " Cloudbusting " (1985) Wilhelm Reich in Hell (1987) The All Souls' Waiting Room (2002) The Strange Case of Wilhelm Reich (2013) Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freudo-Marxism&oldid=1302640857 " Categories : Freudo-Marxism Marxist schools of thought Critical theory Freudian psychology Wilhelm Reich Hidden categories: CS1 errors: requires URL CS1 interwiki-linked names Articles containing French-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 17:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Freudo-Marxism 15 languages Add topic

