Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Journalism 3 Visualization research Toggle Visualization research subsection 3.1 Collaborative analysis and collective intelligence 3.2 Visualization techniques and theory 4 Artwork 5 Publications 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Martin M. Wattenberg 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American artist and computer researcher (born 1970) Martin M. Wattenberg Wattenberg (2014) Born 1970 (age 54–55) United States Alma mater Ph.D. Mathematics, U.C. Berkeley Known for History Flow , Many Eyes, Treemap algorithms , Social Data Analysis Awards Gold award / ID Magazine Interactive Design (1999), TR100 (2003) Scientific career Fields Visualization , interactive art , journalism Institutions IBM Research Google Martin M. Wattenberg (born 1970) is an American scientist and artist known for his work with data visualization . He is currently the Gordon McKay Professor of Computer Science at the Harvard University School of Engineering and Applied Sciences .

Along with Fernanda Viégas , he worked at the Cambridge location of IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center as part of the Visual Communication Lab, and created Many Eyes. In April 2010, Wattenberg and Viégas started a new venture called Flowing Media, Inc., to focus on visualization aimed at consumers and mass audiences.

[ 1 ] Four months later, both of them joined Google as the co-leaders of the Google's "Big Picture" data visualization group in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Wattenberg grew up in Amherst, Massachusetts. He received an A.B. from Brown University in 1991, an M.S. from Stanford University in 1992, and a Ph.D. in Mathematics from U.C. Berkeley in 1996 under Charles C. Pugh with a thesis titled Generic families of dynamical systems on the circle .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] From 1996 through 2002, he lived in New York City and worked for Dow 
Jones, on the personal finance and investing site SmartMoney.com. In 2002 he took a position at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center , in its Cambridge, Massachusetts location; in 2004, he founded IBM Research's Visual Communication Lab.

[ 6 ] In Fall 2021 Wattenberg joined Harvard University as Gordon McKay Professor of Computer Science.

[ 7 ] Journalism [ edit ] While at SmartMoney.com, Wattenberg focused on new forms of interactive web-based journalism. Early work in 1996-1997 ranged from service pieces, such as worksheets to guide financial decisions, to expository graphical narratives on subjects such as bond yield curves . In 1998 Wattenberg created the Map of the Market, which visualized the stock price performance of hundreds of publicly traded companies. The Map was the first web-based treemap and was widely imitated.

[ 8 ] Subsequently, Wattenberg started a research and development group at SmartMoney, which was responsible for interactive charts, graphs, and simulations, as well as a library of visualization components. Outside of his work at Dow Jones, Wattenberg is known for interactive visualizations that have introduced mass audiences to data sets ranging from baby names [ 9 ] to museum collections at NASA [ 4 ] and the Smithsonian .

[ 10 ] Visualization research [ edit ] Collaborative analysis and collective intelligence [ edit ] Wattenberg (CLOUDS, 2014) Wattenberg, in partnership with Fernanda Viégas at IBM, has published widely on collective intelligence and the social use of data visualization. Their work with visualizations such as History Flow and Chromogram led to some of the earliest publications on the dynamics of Wikipedia, including the first scientific study of the repair of vandalism.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Wattenberg is one of the founders of IBM's experimental Many Eyes web site, created in 2007 [ 13 ] which seeks to make visualization technology accessible to the public. In addition to broad uptake from individuals, the technology from Many Eyes has been used by nonprofits and news outlets such as the New York Times Visualization Lab.

Visualization techniques and theory [ edit ] Wattenberg & Viégas (2016) Wattenberg invented or co-invented many visualization techniques. The Map of the Market was based on a new algorithm for treemap layouts (see Treemapping ). The Arc Diagram is a novel technique for visualizing structure in long sequences, [ 14 ] closely related to linear embeddings of networks, a technique that has since been used by many other designers.

[ 15 ] Wattenberg and Viégas together introduced several techniques for depicting text: in addition to the history flow technique described above, the two created such text visualizations as the Word Tree [ 16 ] and Chromogram.

[ 17 ] With collaborator Zan Armstrong, Wattenberg developed a new way to visualize Simpson's paradox .

[ 18 ] Artwork [ edit ] As an artist, Wattenberg uses interactive graphics and visualization as expressive media. He has primarily worked on internet-accessible projects, but has also created installations, videos, and prints.

In the 1990s he began to work with information visualization as an artistic medium. For example, his Shape of Song series (1999–2002) depicted the form of musical compositions; this project exists online as well as in prints that have been exhibited in multiple venues.

[ 19 ] Starrynight (1999), a collaboration with Alexander Galloway and Mark Tribe, provided a new form 
of social, visual navigation for an online discussion.

[ 20 ] Idealine (2001), an interactive representation of the online art universe, was the first internet artwork commissioned by the Whitney Museum of American Art, as well as a very early example of an 
artwork that used "crowdsourcing" to gather data.

[ 21 ] Wattenberg has also worked with Golan Levin , contributing to the visualization technique used in The Secret Lives of Numbers (2002).

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Wattenberg frequently works with Marek Walczak, with whom he formed a collaboration known as MW2MW.

[ 24 ] A key theme of their work is the relationship between language and space. For example, Apartment took inspiration from the concept of a memory palace , turning free-form text entered by a viewer into an architectural floorplan.

[ 25 ] The piece has appeared in many versions, including online (2000), an installation at the Whitney Museum of American Art (2001) and in many other venues.

[ 26 ] Other works explore the possibilities of interaction: the Thinking Machine series (2004–2008), for example, is based on a chess-playing program that attempts to best the viewer while displaying its own thinking process.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Since 2003, Wattenberg has collaborated with Fernanda Viégas to create interactive works that evoke the joy of "revelation".

[ 29 ] They have used academic techniques such as history flow to create prints that have been shown in venues such as the New York Museum of Modern Art.

[ 30 ] The two have also created purely artistic visualizations. For example, the Fleshmap series (2008-2009) portrays aspects of sensuality, and includes work on the web, video, and installations. For example, Fleshmap: Touch provides a collective view of erogenous zones, [ 31 ] while Fleshmap: Listen visualizes the language used to describe the body in song lyrics.

[ 32 ] Publications [ edit ] Key publications: 2007: Many Eyes: A Site for Visualization at Internet Scale. Fernanda B. Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, Frank van Ham, Jesse Kriss, Matt McKeon. IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization.

2005: Baby Names, Visualization, and Social Data Analysis  Martin Wattenberg. IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization.

2004: Studying Cooperation and Conflict between Authors with history flow Visualizations. Fernanda B. Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, and Kushal Dave. ACM Conference on Computer-Human Interaction (CHI).

2002: Ordered and quantum treemaps: Making effective use of 2D space to display hierarchies  Ben Bederson, Ben Shneiderman , and Martin Wattenberg. ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol 21, No. 4.

References [ edit ] ^ "A New Chapter — Visual Hint" . Hint.fm . Retrieved 2010-09-04 .

^ "That was fast! — Visual Hint" . Hint.fm . Retrieved 2010-09-04 .

^ "Fernanda B. Viégas" . Fernandaviegas.com. 2008-08-31 . Retrieved 2010-09-04 .

^ a b Jana, Reena (June 2007).

"IBM's Data-Visualization Champion" .

BusinessWeek Online . Archived from the original on July 16, 2007.

^ "Martin Watternberg" .

Mathematics Genealogy Project . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

^ Kirsner, Scott (December 2007).

"Image Conscious" .

Fast Company .

^ "Trailblazing visualization experts to join Harvard faculty | Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences" .

www.seas.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2020-11-15 .

^ Eckett, Stephen (2002).

Online Investing: 200 Essential Q&a's for the Internet . Harriman House Limited.

^ Baker, Billy (9 August 2001).

"He Creates Ways of Seeing Information" .

The Boston Globe .

^ Mirapaul, Matthew (9 August 2001).

"A Site Whose Riches Bob on the Surface" .

The New York Times .

^ 2004: Studying Cooperation and Conflict between Authors with history flow Visualizations. Fernanda B. Viégas, Martin Wattenberg, and Kushal Dave. ACM Conference on Computer-Human Interaction (CHI) ^ Shirky, Clay (2008).

Here Comes Everybody (book) . Penguin.

^ Lines and Bubbles and Bars, Oh My! New Ways to Sift Data , Anne Eisenberg, the New York Times, August 30, 2008.

^ Arc Diagrams: Visualizing Structure in Strings , Martin Wattenberg. IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 2002.

^ Visual Complexity Gallery of Arc Diagrams , accessed Sept. 2, 2009.

^ The Word Tree: An Interactive Visual Concordance Martin Wattenberg, Fernanda B. Viégas. IEEE InfoVis 2008 ^ Visualizing Activity on Wikipedia with Chromograms , Martin Wattenberg, Fernanda B. Viégas, and Kate Hollenbach. Interact 2007.

^ Armstrong, Zan; Wattenberg, Martin (December 2014).

"Visualizing Statistical Mix Effects and Simpson's Paradox" .

IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics .

20 (12): 2132– 2141.

doi : 10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346297 .

ISSN 1941-0506 .

PMID 26356927 .

^ Reas, Casey; Ben (2007).

Processing: a programming handbook for visual designers and artists . MIT Press.

^ Dodge, Martin; Kitchin (2007).

Atlas of Cyberspace . Addison Wesley.

^ Whitney Museum Artport Idealine , 2001 ^ The Secret Lives of Numbers (2002) ^ Bulajic, Viktorija Vesna (2007).

Database aesthetics: art in the age of information overflow . University of Minnesota Press.

^ MW2MW home page ^ Blais, Joline; Ippolito, Jon (2006).

At the Edge of Art . Thames and Hudson.

^ Altshuler, Bruce (2007).

Collecting the New: Museums and Contemporary Art . Princeton University Press.

^ Kurzweil, Ray (2005).

The singularity is near: when humans transcend biology . Penguin.

^ Adams, Randy; Gibson, Steve; Arisona, Stefan Muller (2008).

Transdisciplinary Digital Art: Sound, Vision and the New Screen: Digital Art . Springer.

^ Revelatory Interfaces , online video of MIT lecture, 2004.

^ Design and the Elastic Mind (Exhibit at the New York Museum of Modern Art, February 24, 2008–May 12, 2008) ^ Inside squash: art and sport confined , Cate McQuaid, The Boston Globe, April 29, 2009.

^ Body Parts In Song: From Hands To Eyes NPR Weekend Edition , August 30, 2008.

External links [ edit ] Martin Wattenberg Personal home page for Wattenberg Academic publications listed on IBM's site.

Many Eyes Experimental public visualization site.

SmartMoney Map of the Market .

History flow Project page for Wikipedia visualizations.

Name Voyager Visualization of baby names.

Fleshmap Site for the "Fleshmap" series of artworks.

Google+ Ripples v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases International VIAF Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project Google Scholar DBLP MathSciNet Artists ULAN Museum of Modern Art Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Martin_M._Wattenberg&oldid=1270906445 " Categories : 1970 births Living people American digital artists American technology company founders Data and information visualization experts Human–computer interaction Human–computer interaction researchers IBM employees Google employees Brown University alumni UC Berkeley College of Letters and Science alumni Stanford University alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Date of birth missing (living people) Place of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 21 January 2025, at 20:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Martin M. Wattenberg 1 language Add topic

