Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Main approaches Toggle Main approaches subsection 2.1 The liberal equality model 2.2 The sexual difference model 2.3 The dominance model 2.4 The anti-essentialist model 2.5 The postmodern model 3 Hedonic Jurisprudence 4 Influence on judicial decisions 5 Notable scholars 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Feminist legal theory 13 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Norsk bokmål Polski Română Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal theory Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Feminist legal theory , also known as feminist jurisprudence , is based on the belief that the law has been fundamental in women 's historical subordination.

[ 1 ] Feminist jurisprudence the philosophy of law is based on the political, economic, and social inequality of the sexes and feminist legal theory is the encompassment of law and theory connected. The project of feminist legal theory is twofold. First, feminist jurisprudence seeks to explain ways in which the law played a role in women's subordinate status. Feminist legal theory was directly created to recognize and combat the legal system built primarily by the and for male intentions, often forgetting important components and experiences women and marginalized communities face. The law perpetuates a male valued system at the expense of female values.

[ 2 ] Through making sure all people have access to participate in legal systems as professionals to combating cases in constitutional and discriminatory law, feminist legal theory is utilized for it all.

Second, feminist legal theory is dedicated to changing women's status through a rework of the law and its approach to gender .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] It is a critique of American law that was created to change the way women were treated and how judges had applied the law to keep women in the same position they had been in for years. The women who worked in this area viewed the law as holding women in a lower place in society than men based on gender assumptions, and judges have therefore relied on these assumptions to make their decisions. This movement originated in the 1960s and 1970s to achieve equality for women by challenging laws that made distinctions based on sex.

[ 4 ] One example of this sex-based discrimination during these times was the struggles for equal admission and access to their desired education. The women's experiences and persistence to fight for equal access led to low rates of retention and mental health issues, including anxiety disorders. Through their experiences, they were influenced to create new legal theory that fought for their rights and those that came after them in education and broader marginalized communities which led to the creation of the legal scholarship feminist legal theory in the 1970s and 1980s.

[ 5 ] It was crucial to allowing women to become their own people through becoming financially independent and having the ability to find real jobs that were not available to them before due to discrimination in employment.

[ 6 ] The foundation of feminist legal theory reflects these second and third-wave feminist struggles. However, feminist legal theorists today extend their work beyond overt discrimination by employing a variety of approaches to understand and address how the law contributes to gender inequality.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The first known use of the term feminist jurisprudence was in the late 1970s by Ann Scales during the planning process for Celebration 25, a party and conference held in 1978 to celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the first women graduating from Harvard Law School.

[ 7 ] [ 3 ] [ 8 ] The term was first published in 1978 in the first issue of the Harvard Women's Law Journal.

[ 9 ] This feminist critique of American law was developed as a reaction to the fact that the legal system was too gender-prioritized and patriarchal.

[ 6 ] [ 4 ] In 1984 Martha Fineman founded the Feminism and Legal Theory Project at the University of Wisconsin Law School to explore the relationships between feminist theory, practice, and law, which has been instrumental in the development of feminist legal theory.

[ 10 ] The foundation of the feminist legal theory was laid by women who challenged the laws that were in place to keep women in their respective places in the home. A driving force of this new movement was the need for women to start becoming financially independent.

[ 6 ] Women who were working in law started to focus on this idea more and started to work on achieving reproductive freedom, stopping gender discrimination in the law and workforce, and stopping the allowance of sexual abuse.

[ 6 ] Main approaches [ edit ] Some approaches to feminist jurisprudence are: the liberal equality model; the sexual difference model; the dominance model; the anti- essentialist model; and the postmodern model.

Each model provides a distinct view of the legal mechanisms that contribute to women's subordination, and each offers a distinct method for changing legal approaches to gender.

The liberal equality model [ edit ] Further information: Liberal feminism The liberal equality model operates from within the liberal legal paradigm and generally embraces liberal values and the rights-based approach to law, though it takes issue with how the liberal framework has operated in practice.  This model focuses on ensuring that women are afforded genuine equality including race, sexual orientation, and gender—as opposed to the nominal equality often given them in the traditional liberal framework—and seeks to achieve this either by way of a more thorough application of liberal values to women's experiences or the revision of liberal categories to take gender into account.  The liberal equality model applies Kimberlé Crenshaw 's theoretical framework of intersectionality in relation to a person's lived experience. For example, when black women are only provided legal relief when the case is against their race or gender.

[ 11 ] The sexual difference model [ edit ] The difference model emphasizes the significance of gender discrimination and holds that this discrimination should not be obscured by the law, but should be taken into account by it. Only by taking into account differences can the law provide adequate remedies for women's situation, which is in fact distinct from men's.

[ 12 ] The difference model suggests that differences between women and men put one sex at a disadvantage; therefore, the law should compensate women and men for their differences and disadvantages. These differences between women and men may be biological or culturally constructed.

[ 4 ] The difference model is in direct opposition to the sameness account which holds that women's sameness with men should be emphasized. To the sameness feminist, employing women's differences in an attempt to garner greater rights is ineffectual to that end and places emphasis on the very characteristics of women that have historically precluded them from achieving equality with men.

[ 12 ] The sameness feminist also argued that there was already special treatment for these so-called "differences" in the law, which is what was oppressing women. The idea of there being differences between the sexes led to the classical thought that feminist legal theory was trying to get rid of. It forced women to prove that they were like men by comparing their experiences to those of men, all in an attempt to gain legal protection. This all only led to women trying to meet norms that were made by men without questioning why these were accepted as the norm for equality.

[ 6 ] Men and women cannot be seen or defined as equal because they have completely different lived experiences. Understanding that access must be equal, but difference must still be recognized to diffract fairness and power struggle including unpaid societal standards like caring for children and the home, rather than feminine characteristics.

[ 2 ] The dominance model [ edit ] The dominance model rejects liberal feminism and views the legal system as a mechanism for the perpetuation of male dominance.

[ 13 ] By recognizing the foundation of law, scholars are able to conceptualize how women and marginalized communities were not written into the foundation of many structures limiting access and equal rights in all areas of life. Further, dominance theorists reject the difference model because it uses men as the benchmark of equality. While the liberal equality model and difference theory aim to achieve equality for women and men, the dominance model's end goal is to liberate women from men. Dominance theorists understand gender inequality as a result of an imbalance of power between women and men and believe the law contributes to this subordination of women.

[ 4 ] It thus joins certain strands of critical legal theory , which also consider the potential for law to act as an instrument for domination . This theory focuses on how male dominate females, but it also talks about other groups being oppressed such as how legal aid is not often offered to the transgender population. Also, any white female would have good legal representation compared to minority groups.

[ 13 ] In the account of dominance proposed by Catharine MacKinnon , sexuality is central to dominance.

[ 14 ] MacKinnon argues that women's sexuality is socially constructed by male dominance and the sexual domination of women by men is a primary source of the general social subordination of women. According to MacKinnon, the legal system perpetuates inequalities between women and men by creating laws about women using a male perspective.

[ 15 ] Additionally, MacKinnon further applies her dominance model of feminist legal theory to transgender sex equality. She criticizes the libertarian Textual and Literal Approach for exacerbating, rather than eliminating, the discrimination faced by lesbians , gay men , and transgender men and women . MacKinnon argues that the liberal Anti-Stereotyping Approach benefits only those who do not conform to stereotypes and yet meet the dominant standards while offering no help to those who face discrimination based on subordinated stereotypes. She asserts that only by adopting the Substantive Approach, inspired by her dominance model and focusing on the gender hierarchy driven by sexualized misogyny , can intersectionality be properly addressed, ultimately benefiting all women.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The anti-essentialist model [ edit ] Anti-essentialist feminist legal theory was created by women of color and lesbians in the 1980s who felt feminist legal theory was excluding their perspectives and experiences.

[ 4 ] Anti-essentialist and intersectionalist critiques of feminists have objected to the idea that there can be any universal women's voice and have criticized feminists, as did Black feminism , for implicitly basing their work on the experiences of white, middle class, heterosexual women. The anti-essentialist and intersectionalist project has been to explore the ways in which race, class, sexual orientation, and other axes of subordination interplay with gender and to uncover the implicit, detrimental assumptions that have often been employed in feminist theory.

[ 18 ] This model challenges feminist legal theorists who only address how the law affects heterosexual, middle-class white women. Anti-essentialist feminist legal theory recognizes that the identities of individual women shape their experiences, so the law does not influence all women in the same ways.

[ 4 ] It is about building actual equality for all regardless or gender, race, sexual orientation, class, or disability.

[ 18 ] When feminist legal theory practices under an essentialist lens, women of color are often dismissed as they would in historical legal theory.

[ 19 ] While race is an important factor in feminist legal theory, it can also be misconstrued in a way that silences women of color, furthering racism in a system created to build more access. For this reason, Crenshaw's "Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence against Women of Color" [ 20 ] should remain a canonical to this topic to continue to support and challenge the gender essentialism within feminism culture and ideology the marginalized women of color by protection them further in legal implications through support.

[ 19 ] Kimberlé Crenshaw's formation of intersectionality within feminist legal theory has given more women and people living multifaceted lives more representation in an arguable essentialist legal arena.

[ 20 ] Mari Matsuda created the term "multiple consciousness" to explain a person's ability to take on the perspective of an oppressed group.

[ 4 ] Anti-essentialist feminist legal theorists use multiple consciousness to understand how the law is affecting women belonging to groups other than their own.

[ 21 ] Feminist legal theory is still evolving to diminish gender and race essentialism to recognize how oppression and privilege work together to create a person's life experiences.

The postmodern model [ edit ] Postmodern feminist legal theorists reject the liberal equality idea that women are like men as well as the difference theory idea that women are inherently different from men. This is because they do not believe in singular truths and instead see truths as multiple and based on experience and perspective. Feminists from the postmodern camp use a method known as deconstruction in which they look at laws to find hidden biases within them. Postmodern feminists use deconstruction to demonstrate that laws should not be unchangeable since they are created by people with biases and may therefore contribute to female oppression.

[ 4 ] More recent scholarship has focused on sex/gender as manipulable tools of state policy, showing that state definitions of male and female often depend on the use of the category in furthering particular state projects.

[ 22 ] Hedonic Jurisprudence [ edit ] Feminist legal theory produced a new idea of using hedonic jurisprudence to show that women's experiences of assault and rape was a product of laws that treated them as less human and gave them fewer rights than men. With this feminist legal theorists argued that given examples were not only a description of possible scenarios but also a sign of events that have actually occurred, relying on them to support statements that the law ignores the interests and disrespects the existence of women.

[ 6 ] Influence on judicial decisions [ edit ] Over half of cases involving feminist issues in the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom included elements of feminist jurisprudence in their judgements.

[ 23 ] : 17 The most common form of feminist legal reasoning was placing the case within a wider context of the experience of those involved or another wider context, which could involve showing empathy for women involved in cases.

[ 23 ] : 18 Judges also considered the impact of judgments on disadvantaged groups, challenged gendered bias, and commented on historic injustice.

[ 23 ] : 20 Some feminist facts entered into the courts reasoning as common knowledge with feminist scholars being referred to.

[ 23 ] : 22 Lady Hale has used Intersectional arguments, [ 23 ] : 23 arguments that extend the concept of violence in cases that domestic violence outside of physical violence.

[ 23 ] : 24 Notable scholars [ edit ] Paisley Currah Martha Fineman Mary Joe Frug Catharine MacKinnon Mari Matsuda Kimberlé Crenshaw Dean Spade Ann Scales Robin West See also [ edit ] Critical race theory Feminist political theory Gender mainstreaming Women in law Feminist interventions in the philosophy of law Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Fineman, Martha Albertson (2005). "Feminist Legal Theory".

Journal of Gender, Social Policy & the Law .

13 (1).

SSRN 2132233 .

^ a b Bowman, Cynthia; Quade, Vicki (1993). "Redefining Notions: Feminist Legal Theory Pushes into the Mainstream".

Human Rights .

20 (4): 8– 11.

JSTOR 27879789 .

^ a b Scales, Ann (2006).

Legal Feminism: Activism, Lawyering, and legal Theory . New York: University Press.

^ a b c d e f g h i Levit, Nancy; Verchick, Robert R. M. (2015).

Feminist Legal Theory: A Primer . New York University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4798-0549-5 .

OCLC 929452292 .

[ page needed ] ^ West, Robin (1 December 2018).

"Women in the Legal Academy: A Brief History of Feminist Legal Theory" .

Georgetown Law Faculty Publications and Other Works .

^ a b c d e f Sagers, Christopher L. (1997).

"Review of Postmodern Legal Movements: Law and Jurisprudence at Century's End" .

Michigan Law Review .

95 (6): 1927– 1943.

doi : 10.2307/1290030 .

JSTOR 1290030 .

^ Cain, Patricia (1 January 1988).

"Feminist Jurisprudence: Grounding the Theories" .

Berkeley Women's Law Journal .

doi : 10.15779/Z38FG5W .

^ Ehrenreich, Nancy (3 December 2020).

"On Having Fun and Raising Hell; Symposium Honoring the Work of Professor Ann Scales" .

Denver Law Review .

91 (1): 1.

^ Smith, Patricia (2010). "Feminist Jurisprudence".

A Companion to Philosophy of Law and Legal Theory . pp.

290– 298.

doi : 10.1002/9781444320114.ch18 .

ISBN 978-1-4443-2011-4 .

^ "Feminism and Legal Theory Project | Emory University School of Law | Atlanta, GA" .

Emory University School of Law . Retrieved 2017-10-07 .

^ Crenshaw, Kimberlé (1989). "Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics".

University of Chicago Legal Forum .

1989 : 149.

^ a b Berkeley Journal Of Gender Law (2013). "Difference, Dominance, Differences: Feminist Theory, Equality, and the Law".

Berkeley Journal of Gender, Law & Justice .

5 (1).

doi : 10.15779/Z388C4M .

^ a b Spade, Dean (November 2010). "Be Professional".

Harvard Journal of Law & Gender : 5.

^ Baer, Judith A.

(2001).

Our Lives Before the Law: Constructing a Feminist Jurisprudence . Princeton University Press. p. 27.

^ MacKinnon, Catharine A. (2018). "Feminism, Marxism, Method, and the State: Toward Feminist Jurisprudence".

Feminist Legal Theory . pp.

181– 200.

doi : 10.4324/9780429500480-11 .

ISBN 978-0-429-50048-0 .

^ Catharine A. MacKinnon (November 28, 2022).

"Exploring Transgender Law and Politics" .

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society . Retrieved 2023-07-18 .

^ MacKinnon, Catharine (2023).

"A Feminist Defense of Transgender Sex Equality Rights" .

Yale Journal of Law & Feminism .

hdl : 20.500.13051/18252 . Retrieved 18 July 2023 .

^ a b Warner, J Cali. Proposal: the alignment of oppressed groups as post-Modern development. 2016.

^ a b Harris, Angela P. (1990). "Race and Essentialism in Feminist Legal Theory".

Stanford Law Review .

42 (3): 581– 616.

doi : 10.2307/1228886 .

JSTOR 1228886 .

^ a b Crenshaw, Kimberlé (1991). "Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence against Women of Color".

Stanford Law Review .

43 (6): 1241– 1299.

doi : 10.2307/1229039 .

JSTOR 1229039 .

^ Matsuda, Mari (1989). "When the First Quail Calls: Multiple Consciousness as Jurisprudential Method".

Women's Rights Law Reporter .

hdl : 10125/65954 .

^ Currah, Paisley (2022).

Sex Is As Sex Does: Governing Transgender Identity . New York: New York University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-1709-7 .

^ a b c d e f Hunter, Rosemary; Rackley, Erika (March 2020).

"Feminist Judgments on the UK Supreme Court" .

Canadian Journal of Women and the Law .

32 (1): 85– 113.

doi : 10.3138/cjwl.32.1.04 .

ISSN 0832-8781 .

S2CID 213021194 .

References [ edit ] Baer, Judith A. Our Lives Before the Law: Constructing a Feminist Jurisprudence. Princeton University Press, 2001.

Berkeley Journal Of Gender Law (2013). "Difference, Dominance, Differences: Feminist Theory, Equality, and the Law".

Berkeley Journal of Gender, Law & Justice .

5 (1).

doi : 10.15779/Z388C4M .

Cain, Patricia A. "Feminist Jurisprudence: Grounding the Theories." Berkeley Journal of Gender, Law & Justice, vol. 4, no. 2, September 2013, Accessed 3 October 2017.

Crenshaw, Kimberlé (7 December 2015).

"Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics" .

University of Chicago Legal Forum .

1989 (1).

Ehrenreich, Nancy. (2013). On "Having fun and raising hell": Symposium honoring the work of professor ann scales. Denver University law review. 91. 1–11.

"Feminism and Legal Theory Project | Emory University School of Law | Atlanta, GA." Emory University School of Law, law.emory.edu/faculty-and-scholarship/centers/feminism-and-legal-theory-project.html. Accessed 2 October 2017.

Levit, Nancy, and Robert R.M. Verchick. "Feminist Legal Theories." Feminist Legal Theory (Second Edition): A Primer.

, 2nd ed., NYU Press, 2015, pp. 11–41.

MacKinnon, Catharine A. (1983). "Feminism, Marxism, Method, and the State: Toward Feminist Jurisprudence".

Signs .

8 (4): 635– 658.

doi : 10.1086/494000 .

JSTOR 3173687 .

S2CID 145125690 .

Matsuda, Mari (1989). "When the First Quail Calls: Multiple Consciousness as Jurisprudential Method".

Women's Rights Law Reporter .

hdl : 10125/65954 .

Minda, Gary. "Feminist Legal Theory." In Postmodern Legal Movements: Law and Jurisprudence At Century's End , 128–48. New York; London: NYU Press, 1995.

Scales, Ann. Legal feminism: activism, lawyering, and legal theory. New York, New York University Press, 2006.

Spade, Dean (1 January 2010).

"Be Professional!" .

Harvard Journal of Law and Gender .

SSRN 1585388 .

Warner, J Cali. Proposal: the alignment of oppressed groups as post-Modern development. 2016.

Further reading [ edit ] Applications of Feminist Legal Theory: Sex, Violence, Work and Reproduction (Women in the Political Economy), ed. by D. Kelly Weisberg,  Temple University Press, 1996, ISBN 1-56639-424-4 Feminist Legal Theory: An Anti-Essentialist Reader , ed. by Nancy E. Dowd and Michelle S. Jacobs, New York Univ Press, 2003, ISBN 0-8147-1913-9 Nancy Levit, Robert R. M. Verchick: Feminist Legal Theory: A Primer (Critical America (New York University Paperback)), New York University Press 2006, ISBN 0-8147-5199-7 External links [ edit ] "Feminist Jurisprudence" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Feminism and Legal Theory Project v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_legal_theory&oldid=1293814984 " Categories : Feminism and law Theories of law Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 21:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist legal theory 13 languages Add topic

