Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 United States 2 Dalmatia 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Grazing rights 7 languages Čeština Deutsch Esperanto Italiano Македонски Русский Walon Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal right of a livestock owner to allow their animals to feed in a given area Grazing rights is the right of a user to allow their livestock to feed (graze) in a given area.

Grazing rights in action: Leyton Marshes in London , where historic grazing (and other) rights are still in place, although not always willingly acceded by the authorities A large sheep farm in Chile .

Historically dry stone walls were used for managing and protecting sheep livestock which had been a major food staple in Dalmatia .

United States [ edit ] See also: Grazing rights in Nevada Grazing rights have never been codified in United States law, because such common-law rights derive from the English concept of the commons, a piece of land over which people, often neighboring landowners, could exercise one of a number of such traditional rights, including livestock grazing.

[ 1 ] Prior to the 19th century, the traditional practice of grazing the open range in the United States was rarely disputed because of the sheer amount of unsettled open land. However, as the population of the western United States increased in the mid-to-late 19th century, range wars often erupted over the ranchers ' perceived rights to graze their cattle as the western range deteriorated with overuse.

[ 2 ] In 1934, the Taylor Grazing Act formally set out the federal government's powers and policy on grazing federal lands in the Western United States by establishing the Division of Grazing and procedures for issuing permits to graze federal lands for a fixed period of time. The Division of Grazing was renamed the US Grazing Service in 1939, and then merged in 1946 with the General Land Office to become the Bureau of Land Management , which along with the United States Forest Service oversees public lands grazing in 16 western states today.

[ 3 ] However, grazing was never established as a legal right in the U.S., [ 4 ] and the Taylor Grazing Act authorized only the permitted use of lands designated as available for livestock grazing while specifying that grazing permits "convey no right, title, or interest" to such lands.

[ 5 ] Although the regulations stipulated by the Taylor Grazing Act apply only to grazing on Bureau of Land Management lands, the Chief of the Forest Service is authorized to permit or suspend grazing on Forest Service administered property, and many Forest Service grazing regulations resemble those of the Taylor Grazing Act.

[ 6 ] Dalmatia [ edit ] In Dalmatia , a historical region of Croatia , judgments about grazing rights are a fundamental part of the jurisprudence . The oldest court verdict in Dalmatia in a court case about grazing rights dates from the 14th century. It is a usufruct of property , which belongs to someone else, or it is a use of a property. Use of someone else's  property requires a contract (written or not) about the usufruct. The court may declare parts of the contract as unlawful.

If there is no contract, common law (also called case law ) comes to apply. The decisions on who was allowed to judge on grazing rights cases were different in the Middle Ages , which reasoned in tradition and in the natural resources in each area, such as water, meadows, lawns and others. Some peasants wrote their own statute , like Poljica republic in 1440. Also, some dukes wrote together with some peasants their own statute, like Law codex of Vinodol from 1288.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Enclosure Leyton Marshes Tragedy of the commons Village green Water rights References [ edit ] ^ Merrill, K.R. 2002.

Public Lands and Political Meaning: Ranchers, the Government, and the Property Between Them . Berkeley: University of California Press, p. 183.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Fleischner, T. L. 2009. "Livestock grazing and wildlife conservation in the American West: historical, policy and conservation biology perspectives".

Wild Rangelands: Conserving Wildlife While Maintaining Livestock in Semi-Arid Ecosystems (eds J. T. du Toit, R. Kock and J. C. Deutsch). Chidester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp. 235–265.

doi : 10.1002/9781444317091 .

^ "DOI: BLM: Livestock Grazing" . Archived from the original on 2014-11-29 . Retrieved 2012-05-02 .

^ Donahue D. 2005. "Western grazing: the capture of grass, ground, and government." Environmental Law 35:721–806.

^ United States Code of Federal Regulations 4130.2 (c) Retrieved from [1] ^ United States Code of Federal Regulations 36 § 222.1–54.

^ Magyar Országos Levéltár v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Authority control databases National Germany Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grazing_rights&oldid=1283560906 " Categories : Legal history Ranches Agricultural law Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 07:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Grazing rights 7 languages Add topic

