Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Aiken Taylor Award for Modern American Poetry 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Sewanee Review 2 languages Deutsch Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American literary magazine Academic journal The Sewanee Review Discipline Literature Language English Edited by Adam Ross Publication details History 1892–present Publisher Johns Hopkins University Press for Sewanee: The University of the South (United States) Frequency Quarterly Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Sewanee Rev.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 0037-3052 (print) 1934-421X (web) JSTOR 00373052 OCLC no.

1936968 Links Journal homepage Online access The Sewanee Review at JHU Press The Sewanee Review is an American literary magazine established in 1892. It is the oldest continuously published quarterly in the United States.

[ 1 ] It publishes original fiction and poetry, essays, reviews, and literary criticism.

History [ edit ] The Sewanee Review was established in 1892 by William Peterfield Trent as a magazine "devoted to reviews of leading books and to papers on such topics of general Theology, Philosophy, History, Political Science, and Literature as require further treatment than they receive in specialist publications." [ 2 ] Telfair Hodgson took on the financial risks for the venture. As its managing editor , he handled advertising and accounting, freeing Trent to concentrate on the magazine's literary content.

[ 3 ] Trent remained editor-in-chief of the review until 1900.

After a number of short-term editors, George Herbert Clarke took over in 1920. Clarke was the first editor to publish poetry. Clarke remained editor until 1926 and was succeeded by William S. Knickerbocker, who published the first piece of fiction in the magazine.

In 1942, Tudor Seymour Long became editor, with Andrew Nelson Lytle serving as managing editor and Allen Tate as an advisory editor and de facto editor until 1944. In 1944, when Tate took over as editor, he and Lytle revolutionized the magazine's place in American letters.

[ citation needed ] It focused on New Criticism , alongside Cleanth Brooks 's Southern Review and John Crowe Ransom's The Kenyon Review . Tate also had the magazine redesigned by P. J. Conkwright , who crafted the distinctive blue cover and design.

[ 4 ] When Tate's editorship ended in 1946, John E. Palmer became editor. He was followed by Monroe K. Spears in 1952 and then Andrew Lytle again in 1965. George Core succeeded Lytle in 1973.

[ 2 ] After 43 years as editor, Core retired in 2016, and the novelist Adam Ross was appointed to succeed him.

[ 5 ] Early in Ross's tenure, the cover was redesigned by graphic artists Oliver Munday and Peter Mendelsund , the associate art director at Alfred A. Knopf . This marked the magazine's first new cover in over 70 years.

[ 6 ] Aiken Taylor Award for Modern American Poetry [ edit ] The Review gives the annual Aiken Taylor Award , a prize of $10,000, which begin in 1985 by the physician and poet K. P. A. Taylor in honor of his brother Conrad Aiken . Winners of the award, which has often been given to poets otherwise unaffiliated with the Review , have included Howard Nemerov , Richard Wilbur , Anthony Hecht , W. S. Merwin , Gwendolyn Brooks , Wendell Berry , Maxine Kumin , Carolyn Kizer , X. J. Kennedy , Eleanor Ross Taylor , Grace Schulman , Henry S. Taylor , B. H. Fairchild , Anne Stevenson , Donald Hall , Louise Glück , Billy Collins , Christian Wiman , Mary Ruefle , Heather McHugh , and Carl Phillips .

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] List of literary magazines References [ edit ] ^ "Sewanee Review" , Johns Hopkins University Press , retrieved January 9, 2025 ^ a b Jon Meecham. "Above the moment: The Review at Sewanee still bright at age 100".

The Chattanooga Times , October 29, 1992.

^ Henneman, John Bell (October 1902), "Ten Years of the Sewanee Review: A Retrospect", The Sewanee Review , 10 (4): 477– 492, JSTOR 27530519 ^ "Behind the Scenes: Redesigning the Cover of the Sewanee Review" .

The Sewanee Review . February 27, 2015. Archived from the original on October 12, 2016 . Retrieved September 8, 2016 .

^ "Ross Named Editor of Sewanee Review" Archived 2016-09-19 at the Wayback Machine ^ "About – The Sewanee Review" .

thesewaneereview.com . Retrieved December 12, 2017 .

^ "Aiken Taylor Award for Modern American Poetry" External links [ edit ] Official website The Sewanee Review on the JHU Press website The Sewanee Review at Project MUSE New Life for a 125-Year-Old Literary Journal in The New York Times Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Sewanee_Review&oldid=1280641607 " Categories : Sewanee: The University of the South Poetry magazines published in the United States Magazines established in 1892 Quarterly magazines published in the United States Johns Hopkins University Press academic journals English-language magazines Sewanee, Tennessee Magazines published in Tennessee Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 Short description is different from Wikidata Quarterly journals (infobox) All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2018 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 15 March 2025, at 17:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Sewanee Review 2 languages Add topic

