Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Catholic Church Toggle Catholic Church subsection 1.1 Roman imperial origins 1.2 Carolingian era 1.3 Middle Ages 1.4 Pluralism 1.5 French Revolution 2 Church of England Toggle Church of England subsection 2.1 Parochial clergy suitability 2.2 Pluralities Act 2.3 Current usage 3 See also 4 Notes 5 Footnotes 6 References 7 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Benefice 35 languages Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Frysk Galego Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Тоҷикӣ Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reward for services or future services A benefice ( / ˈ b ɛ n ɪ f ɪ s / ) or living is a reward received in exchange for services rendered and as a retainer for future services. The Roman Empire used the Latin term beneficium as a benefit to an individual from the Empire for services rendered.  Its use was adopted by the Western Church in the Carolingian era as a benefit bestowed by the crown or church officials. A benefice specifically from a church is called a precaria (pl.

precariae ), such as a stipend , and one from a monarch or nobleman is usually called a fief . A benefice is distinct from an allod , in that an allod is property owned outright, not bestowed by a higher authority.

Catholic Church [ edit ] Roman imperial origins [ edit ] In ancient Rome a benefice was a gift of land ( precaria ) for life as a reward for services rendered, originally, to the state. The word comes from the Latin noun beneficium , meaning "benefit".

Carolingian era [ edit ] Raphael's The Coronation of Charlemagne (1514–15). The 800 AD coronation led to disputes over an emperor's ability to hand out benefices.

In the 8th century, using their position as Mayor of the Palace, Charles Martel , Carloman I and Pepin III usurped a large number of church benefices for distribution to vassals, and later Carolingians continued this practice as emperors. These estates were held in return for oaths of military assistance, which greatly aided the Carolingians in consolidating and strengthening their power.

[ 1 ] Charlemagne (emperor 800–814) continued the late Roman concept of granting benefices in return for military and administrative service to his empire. Thus, the imperial structure was bound together through a series of oaths between the monarch and the recipient of land (and the resulting income) [ 2 ] (see Fief ). He ordered and administered his kingdom and later his empire through a series of published statutes called capitularies . The Capitulary of Herstal (AD 779) distinguished between his vassals who were styled casati (sing.

casatus ) and non-casati , that is those subjects who had received a benefice from the hand of the king and those who had not, and towards the end of Charlemagne's reign it appears that a royal vassal who had satisfactorily fulfilled his duties could always look forward to the grant of a benefice in some part of the Empire. Once he had received a benefice, he would take up his residence on it; it was only rarely that a vassus casatus continued to work in the Palace.

[ 3 ] In the year 800 Pope Leo III placed the crown of Holy Roman Emperor on the head of Charlemagne .

[ 4 ] This act caused great turmoil for future generations, who would afterward argue that the emperor thereby received his position as a benefice from the papacy. In his March 1075 Dictatus Papae , Pope Gregory VII declared that only the pope could depose an emperor, which implied that he could do so just as a lord might take a benefice away from a vassal. This declaration inflamed Holy Roman Emperor Henry IV and furthered the friction caused in the Investiture Conflict .

[ 5 ] Middle Ages [ edit ] The expanded practice continued through the Middle Ages within the European feudal system . This same customary method became adopted by the Catholic Church.

The church's revenue streams came from, amongst other things, rents and profits arising from assets gifted to the church, its endowment , given by believers, be they monarch, lord of the manor or vassal, and later also upon tithes calculated on the sale of the product of the people's personal labour in the entire parish such as cloth or shoes and the people's profits from specific forms of likewise God-given, natural increase such as crops and in livestock.

Initially the Catholic Church granted buildings, grants of land and greater and/or lesser tithes for life but the land was not alienated from the dioceses . The Synod of Lyon of 567 annexed these grants to the churches. By the time of the Council of Mainz of 813 these grants were known as beneficia .

Girolamo and cardinal Marco Corner investing Marco, abbot of Carrara, with his benefice.

Titian , c.

1520 Holding a benefice did not necessarily imply a cure of souls although each benefice had a number of spiritual duties attached to it. For providing these duties, a priest would receive " temporalities " .

Benefices were used for the worldly support of much of its pastoral clergy – clergy gaining rewards for carrying out their duties with rights to certain revenues, the "fruits of their office".  The original donor of the temporalities or his nominee, the patron [ n 1 ] and his successors in title, held the advowson (right to nominate a candidate for the post subject to the approval of the bishop or other prelate as to the candidate's sufficiency for the demands of the post).

Parish priests were charged with the spiritual and temporal care of their congregation. The community provided for the priest as necessary, later, as organisation improved, by tithe (which could be partially or wholly lost to a temporal lord or patron but relief for that oppression could be found under canon law ).

Cardinal Alessandro Farnese , grandson and cardinal-nephew of Pope Paul III , held sixty-four benefices simultaneously.

Some individual institutions within the church accumulated enormous endowments and, with that, temporal power. These endowments sometimes concentrated great wealth in the mortmain ("dead hand") of the church, so called because it endured beyond any individual's life. The church was exempt from some or all taxes. This was in contrast to feudal practice where the nobility would hold land on grant from the king in return for service, especially service in war. This meant that the church over time gained a large share of land in many feudal states and so was a cause of increasing tension between the church and the Crown.

[ 6 ] Pluralism [ edit ] Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e The holder of more than one benefice, later known as a pluralist, could keep the revenue to which he was entitled and pay lesser sums to deputies to carry out the corresponding duties.

By a Decree of the Lateran Council of 1215 no clerk could hold two benefices with cure of souls, and if a beneficed clerk took a second benefice with cure of souls, he vacated ipso facto his first benefice.  Dispensations could easily be obtained from Rome.

The benefice system was open to abuse.  Acquisitive prelates occasionally held multiple major benefices. The holding of more than one benefice is termed pluralism (unrelated to the political theory of the same name ). An English example was Stigand , Archbishop of Canterbury (1052–72).

After the Reformation , the new denominations generally adopted systems of ecclesiastical polity that did not entail benefices and the Second Vatican Council (1962–1965) called "for the abandonment or reform of the system of benefices".

[ 7 ] French Revolution [ edit ] The French Revolution replaced France's system by the Civil Constitution of the Clergy following debates and a report headed by Louis-Simon Martineau in 1790, confiscating all endowments of the church, which was until then the highest order ( premier ordre ) of the Ancien Régime ; instead, the state awarded a salary to the formerly endowment-dependent clergy,  and abolished canons, prebendaries and chaplains.

[ 8 ] This constitution kept the separation between the nomination (advowson) and the canonical institution (benefice/living, which conferred a jurisdiction) but the state set a fixed system of salaries and would elect the metropolitan bishops who in turn would elect the curates.

[ 9 ] Parts of these changes remain such as the abolition of the three historic roles mentioned, and the constitution is still in force in Belgium .

Church of England [ edit ] The term benefice, according to the canon law , denotes an ecclesiastical office (but not always a cure of souls ) in which the incumbent is required to perform certain duties or conditions of a spiritual kind (spiritualities) while being supported by the revenues attached to the office (temporalities).

[ 7 ] The spiritualities [ n 2 ] of parochial benefices, whether rectories , vicarages or perpetual curacies , include due observation of the ordination vows and due solicitude for the moral and spiritual welfare of the parishioners.

[ 7 ] The temporalities are the revenues of the benefice and assets such as the church properties and possessions within the parish.

[ 10 ] By keeping this distinction in mind, the right of patronage in the case of parochial benefices, or advowson , appears logical, being the right originally vested in the donor of the temporalities to present to his bishop a clerk to be admitted, if found fit by the bishop , to the office to which those temporalities are annexed. In other words, the gift of the glebe (a rectory manor or church furlong) was only ever granted subject to receiving an incorporeal hereditament (inheritable and transferable right) for the original donor.

Nomination or presentation on the part of the patron of the benefice is thus the first requisite in order that a clerk should become legally entitled to a benefice. The next requisite is that he should be admitted by the bishop as a fit person for the spiritual office to which the benefice is annexed, and the bishop is the judge of the sufficiency of the clerk to be so admitted.

Parochial clergy suitability [ edit ] Under the early constitutions of the Church of England a bishop was allowed a space of two months to inquire and inform himself of the sufficiency of every presentee, but by the 95th of the Canons of 1604 that interval was reduced to 28 days, within which the bishop must admit or reject the clerk. If the bishop rejects the clerk within that time he is liable to a duplex querela (Latin: "double complaint", the procedure in ecclesiastical law for challenging a bishop's refusal to admit a presentee to a benefice) [ 11 ] in the ecclesiastical courts or to a quare impedit in the common law courts , and the bishop must then certify the reasons of his refusal.

[ 11 ] In the rare cases where the patron happens to be a clergyman ( a clerk in orders ) and wishes to be admitted to the benefice of his own advowson , he must proceed by way of petition instead of by deed of presentation , reciting that the benefice is in his own patronage, and petitioning the bishop to examine him and admit him.

[ 11 ] Upon the bishop having satisfied himself of the sufficiency of the clerk, he proceeded to institute him to the spiritual office to which the benefice is annexed, but before such institution could take place, the clerk had to make the declaration of assent, the Thirty-nine Articles of Religion and the Book of Common Prayer , take the oaths of allegiance and canonical obedience and make a declaration against simony .  The first was laid down by the Canons of 1603/04 and modified by the Clerical Subscription Act 1865 which also prescribed the form of the declaration against simony ; the words of the oath of allegiance accorded to the form in the Promissory Oaths Act 1868 .

[ 12 ] Current practice is to make a declaration of assent to the doctrine and liturgical practice of the Church of England, and take the oaths of allegiance and canonical obedience as defined by Canons of the Church of England.

[ 13 ] The bishop, by the act of institution, commits to the presentee the cure of souls attached to the office to which the benefice is annexed. In cases where the bishop himself is patron of the benefice, no presentation or petition is required to be tendered by the clerk, but the bishop having satisfied himself of the sufficiency of the clerk, collates him to the benefice and office. A bishop need not personally institute or collate a clerk; he may issue a fiat to his vicar-general or to a special commissary for that purpose.

After the bishop or his commissary has instituted the presentee, he issues a mandate under seal, addressed to the archdeacon or some other neighbouring clergyman, authorizing him to induct the clerk into his benefice – in other words, to put him into legal possession of the temporalities, which is done by some outward form, and for the most part by delivery of the bell-rope to the presentee, who then tolls the church bell . This form of induction is required to give the clerk a legal title to his beneficium, [ n 3 ] although his admission to the office by institution is sufficient to vacate any other benefice which he may already possess.

A benefice is avoided or vacated by death; by resignation, if the bishop is willing to accept the resignation. (Before the introduction of the Church of England Pensions Board, by the Incumbents' Resignation Act 1871 (Amendment) Act 1887 ( 50 & 51 Vict.

c. 23), any clergyman who had been an incumbent of one benefice continuously for seven years, and became incapacitated by permanent mental or bodily infirmities from fulfilling his duties, could, if the bishop thought fit, have a commission appointed to consider the fitness of his resigning; and if the commission reported in favour, he could, with the consent of the patron (or, if that is refused, with the consent of the archbishop) resign the cure of souls into the bishop's hands, and have assigned to him, out of the benefice, a retiring pension not exceeding one third of its annual value, recoverable as a debt from his successor); by cession, upon the clerk being instituted to another benefice or some other preferment incompatible with it; by deprivation and sentence of an ecclesiastical court; under the Clergy Discipline Act 1892 ( 55 & 56 Vict.

c. 32), an incumbent who has been convicted of offences against the law of bastardy, or against whom judgment has been given in a divorce or matrimonial cause, is deprived, and on being found guilty in the consistory court of immorality or ecclesiastical offences (not in respect of doctrine or ritual), he may be deprived or suspended or declared incapable of preferment; by act of law in consequence of simony; by default of the clerk in neglecting to read publicly in the church the Book of Common Prayer, and to declare his assent thereto within two months after his induction, pursuant to the Act of Uniformity 1662 ( 14 Cha. 2 . c. 4); more recently, also on reaching statutory retirement age.

Pluralities Act [ edit ] Pluralities Act 1838 Act of Parliament Parliament of the United Kingdom Long title An Act to abridge the holding of Benefices in Plurality, and to make better provision for the Residence of the Clergy.

Citation 1 & 2 Vict.

c. 106 Territorial extent England and Wales Ireland [ a ] Dates Royal assent 14 August 1838 Commencement 14 August 1838 [ b ] Other legislation Amends Augmentation of Benefices Act 1665 Repeals/revokes Benefices Act 1545 Augmentation of Benefices Act 1665 Amended by Statute Law Revision Act 1874 (No. 2) Pluralities Act 1850 Pluralities Acts Amendment Act 1885 Relates to Ecclesiastical Licences Act 1533 Status: Partially repealed Text of statute as originally enacted Text of the Pluralities Act 1838 as in force today (including any amendments) within the United Kingdom, from legislation.gov.uk .

Dispensation, enabling a clerk to hold several ecclesiastical dignities or benefices at the same time, was transferred to the Archbishop of Canterbury by the Ecclesiastical Licences Act 1533 ( 25 Hen. 8 . c. 21), [ n 4 ] certain ecclesiastical persons having been declared by a previous statute (of 1529) to be entitled to such dispensations. The system of pluralities carried with it, as a direct consequence, systematic non-residence on the part of many incumbents, and delegation of their spiritual duties in respect of their cures of souls to assistant curates . The evils attendant on this system were found to be so great that the Pluralities Act 1838 ( 1 & 2 Vict.

c. 106) was passed to abridge the holding of benefices in plurality, requiring that no person should hold under any circumstances more than two benefices and such privilege was subject to the restriction that both benefices must be within 10 miles (16 km) of each other.

Pluralities Act 1850 Act of Parliament Parliament of the United Kingdom Long title An Act to amend the Law relating to the holding of Benefices in Plurality.

Citation 13 & 14 Vict.

c. 98 Territorial extent England and Wales Ireland [ c ] Dates Royal assent 14 August 1850 Commencement 14 August 1850 [ d ] Repealed 1 June 1992 [ e ] Other legislation Amends Pluralities Act 1838 Amended by Statute Law Revision Act 1875 Pluralities Acts Amendment Act 1885 Repealed by Church of England (Miscellaneous Provisions) Measure 1992 Status: Repealed Text of statute as originally enacted By the Pluralities Act 1850 ( 13 & 14 Vict.

c. 98) restrictions were further narrowed so that no spiritual person could hold two benefices except the churches of such benefices within 3 miles (4.8 km) of each other by the nearest road, and the annual value of one of such benefices did not exceed £100. By this statute the term "benefice" is defined to mean "benefice with cure of souls" and no other, and therein to comprehend all parishes, perpetual curacies, donatives, endowed public chapels, parochial chapelries and chapelries or districts belonging or reputed to belong, or annexed or reputed to be annexed, to any church or chapel.

Pluralities Acts Amendment Act 1885 [ f ] Act of Parliament Parliament of the United Kingdom Long title An Act to amend the Law relating to Pluralities.

Citation 48 & 49 Vict.

c. 54 Territorial extent United Kingdom Dates Royal assent 6 August 1885 Commencement 6 August 1885 [ g ] Repealed 1 7 2018 Other legislation Amends Pluralities Act 1838 Pluralities Act 1850 Repealed by Statute Law (Repeals) Measure 2018 Status: Repealed Text of statute as originally enacted Text of the Pluralities Acts Amendment Act 1885 as in force today (including any amendments) within the United Kingdom, from legislation.gov.uk .

The Pluralities Acts Amendment Act 1885 ( 48 & 49 Vict.

c. 54) superseded these and enacted that by dispensation from the Archbishop of Canterbury, two benefices can be held together, the churches of which are within 4 miles (6.4 km) of each other, and the annual value of one of which does not exceed £200.

Current usage [ edit ] A benefice or living in the Church of England describes any ecclesiastical parish or group of ecclesiastical parishes under a single stipendiary minister, as well as its related historical meaning.

The term dates from the grant of benefices by bishops to clerks in holy orders as a reward for extraordinary services.

[ 10 ] The holder of a benefice owns the " freehold " of the post (the church and the parsonage house) for life.

Such a life freehold is now subject to certain constraints.  To comply with European Regulations on atypical workers, the parson's freehold is being phased out in favour of new conditions of service called "common tenure".

[ n 5 ] [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] In commendam Chop-church Concordat of Worms Statutes of Mortmain Cestui que Tithe Glebe Notes [ edit ] ^ Section 133.

^ The Acts of Parliament (Commencement) Act 1793 .

^ Section 12.

^ The Acts of Parliament (Commencement) Act 1793 .

^ The Church of England (Miscellaneous Provisions) Measure 1992 (Appointed Day Instrument 1992) .

^ Section 1.

^ The Acts of Parliament (Commencement) Act 1793 .

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ A patron would typically be a Lord of the Manor, noble or monarch as they would have initially have granted the land.

^ It appears that the term "spiritualities" was used by a few authors to refer to the revenues received for the carrying out of spiritual responsibilities (see Chambers Twentieth Century Dictionary , 1954) ^ Beneficium is a third alternative word, Latin for a living or benefice.

^ Alternatively called the Peterpence, Dispensations, etc. Act 1534 ^ The term "common tenure" has been chosen to describe more accurately that a benefice has nothing to do with acquiring permanently a freehold property References [ edit ] ^ Gasthof, p. 157 ^ Hollister, pp. 120–121.

^ Ganshof, p. 151 ^ Tierney, pp. 22–23.

^ Tierney, pp. 45–50 ^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Mortmain" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ a b c ODCC art Benefice ^ "Histoire apologétique du Comité ecclésiastique de l'Assemblée Nationale", by Durand de Maillane, in French, 1791.

^ Constitution Civile du Clergé (Statute in French) Titre II, art. 19.

^ a b "Benefice" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 3 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

725– 726.

^ a b c Church of England – Appointment of clergy based on an advowson ^ Blunt J.H. and Phillimore Sir W.G.F, The Book of Church Law , Rivingtons, 1885, pp. 202–203, 244.

^ "Canons 7th Edition" . Retrieved 27 January 2016 .

^ Q&A on Common Tenure http://www.churchofengland.org/clergy-office-holders/common-tenure.aspx Bibliography [ edit ] Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Benefice" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

725– 726.

Coredon, Christopher (2007).

A Dictionary of Medieval Terms & Phrases (Reprint ed.). Woodbridge: D. S. Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-84384-138-8 .

Creagh, J. T. (1913).

"Benefice" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Ganshof, F. L. “Benefice and Vassalage in the Age of Charlemagne”. Cambridge Historical Journal 6, No. 2 (1939): 147–175.

Hollister, C. Warren, ed.

Medieval Europe: A Short History . (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994) ODCC = Cross & Livingstone, Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (OUP, 1974) Tierney, Brian.

The Crisis of Church and State 1050–1300 . (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Medieval Academy of America, 1988).

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7d5d5cd5fb‐kvp8c
Cached time: 20250818161248
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.512 seconds
Real time usage: 0.681 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4089/1000000
Revision size: 24645/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 113013/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7532/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 44389/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.298/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15342876/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  539.254      1 -total
 21.22%  114.434      2 Template:Reflist
 18.44%   99.418      1 Template:Catholic_canon_law
 18.05%   97.362      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 17.67%   95.313      2 Template:CathEncy
 14.69%   79.210      1 Template:Wikt-lang
 12.79%   68.979      1 Template:Short_description
 12.68%   68.364      3 Template:Infobox_UK_legislation
 11.62%   62.674      3 Template:Infobox
  7.94%   42.798      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1038380:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818161248 and revision id 1306589239. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Benefice&oldid=1306589239 " Categories : Catholic Church and finance Anglicanism Catholic canon law of property Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 16:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Benefice 35 languages Add topic

