Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Branches Toggle Branches subsection 2.1 Anthropology 2.2 Communication studies 2.3 Economics 2.4 Education 2.5 Geography 2.6 History 2.7 Law 2.8 Linguistics 2.9 Political science 2.10 Psychology 2.11 Sociology 3 Additional fields of study 4 Methodology Toggle Methodology subsection 4.1 Social research 4.2 Theory 4.3 Recursivity 5 Education and degrees 6 Funding 7 People associated with the social sciences 8 See also Toggle See also subsection 8.1 General 8.2 Methods 8.3 Other 9 Notes 10 References 11 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 11.1 20th and 21st centuries sources 11.2 19th century sources 11.3 General sources 11.4 Academic resources 11.5 Opponents and critics 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Social science 135 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Galego Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kalaallisut ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Ladin Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés Монгол Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Social sciences ) Branch of science that studies society and its relationships For the integrated field of study intended to promote civic competence, see Social studies . For the social-political-economic theory first pioneered by Karl Marx, see Scientific socialism .

"Social Sciences" redirects here. For other uses, see Social Sciences (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Science General History Literature Method Philosophy Branches Formal Natural Physical Life Social Behavioural Cognitive Applied In society Communication Community Education Funding Policy Pseudoscience Scientist Science fiction Science portal Outline Category Article indexes Glossaries v t e Social science (often rendered in the plural as the social sciences ) is one of the branches of science , devoted to the study of societies and the relationships among members within those societies. The term was formerly used to refer to the field of sociology , the original "science of society", established in the 18th century. It now encompasses a wide array of additional academic disciplines , including anthropology , archaeology , economics , geography , history , linguistics , management , communication studies , psychology , culturology , and political science .

[ 1 ] The majority of positivist social scientists use methods resembling those used in the natural sciences as tools for understanding societies, and so define science in its stricter modern sense . Speculative social scientists, otherwise known as interpretivist scientists, by contrast, may use social critique or symbolic interpretation rather than constructing empirically falsifiable theories, and thus treat science in its broader sense.

[ 2 ] In modern academic practice, researchers are often eclectic , using multiple methodologies (combining both quantitative and qualitative research ).

[ 3 ] To gain a deeper understanding of complex human behavior in digital environments, social science disciplines have increasingly integrated interdisciplinary approaches, big data, and computational tools.

[ 4 ] The term social research has also acquired a degree of autonomy as practitioners from various disciplines share similar goals and methods.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of the social sciences The history of the social sciences began in the Age of Enlightenment after 1651, [ 6 ] which saw a revolution within natural philosophy , changing the basic framework by which individuals understood what was scientific. Social sciences came forth from the moral philosophy of the time and were influenced by the Age of Revolutions , such as the Industrial Revolution and the French Revolution .

[ 7 ] The social sciences developed from the sciences ( experimental and applied ), or the systematic knowledge-bases or prescriptive practices, relating to the social improvement of a group of interacting entities .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The beginnings of the social sciences in the 18th century are reflected in the grand encyclopedia of Diderot , with articles from Jean-Jacques Rousseau and other pioneers. The growth of the social sciences is also reflected in other specialized encyclopedias. The term "social science" was coined in French by Mirabeau in 1767, before becoming a distinct conceptual field in the nineteenth century.

[ 10 ] Social science was influenced by positivism, [ 7 ] focusing on knowledge based on actual positive sense experience and avoiding the negative; metaphysical speculation was avoided.

Auguste Comte used the term science sociale to describe the field, taken from the ideas of Charles Fourier ; Comte also referred to the field as social physics .

[ 7 ] [ 11 ] Following this period, five paths of development sprang forth in the social sciences, influenced by Comte in other fields.

[ 7 ] One route that was taken was the rise of social research. Large statistical surveys were undertaken in various parts of the United States and Europe . Another route undertaken was initiated by Émile Durkheim , studying "social facts", and Vilfredo Pareto , opening metatheoretical ideas and individual theories. A third means developed, arising from the methodological dichotomy present, in which social phenomena were identified with and understood; this was championed by figures such as Max Weber .

[ 12 ] The fourth route taken, based in economics, was developed and furthered economic knowledge as a hard science . The last path was the correlation of knowledge and social values ; the antipositivism and verstehen sociology of Max Weber firmly demanded this distinction. In this route, theory (description) and prescription were non-overlapping formal discussions of a subject.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The foundation of social sciences in the West implies conditioned relationships between progressive and traditional spheres of knowledge. In some contexts, such as the Italian one, sociology slowly affirms itself and experiences the difficulty of affirming a strategic knowledge beyond philosophy and theology.

[ 15 ] Around the start of the 20th century, Enlightenment philosophy was challenged in various quarters. After the use of classical theories since the end of the scientific revolution, various fields substituted mathematics studies for experimental studies and examining equations to build a theoretical structure. The development of social science subfields became very quantitative in methodology. The interdisciplinary and cross-disciplinary nature of scientific inquiry into human behaviour, social and environmental factors affecting it, made many of the natural sciences interested in some aspects of social science methodology.

[ 16 ] Examples of boundary blurring include emerging disciplines like social research of medicine , sociobiology , neuropsychology , bioeconomics and the history and sociology of science . Increasingly, quantitative research and qualitative methods are being integrated in the study of human action and its implications and consequences. In the first half of the 20th century, statistics became a free-standing discipline of applied mathematics.

[ 17 ] Statistical methods were used confidently.

In the contemporary period, Karl Popper and Talcott Parsons influenced the furtherance of the social sciences.

[ 7 ] Researchers continue to search for a unified consensus on what methodology might have the power and refinement to connect a proposed "grand theory" with the various midrange theories that, with considerable success, continue to provide usable frameworks for massive, growing data banks; for more, see consilience . The social sciences will for the foreseeable future be composed of different zones in the research of, and sometimes distinct in approach toward, the field.

[ 7 ] The term "social science" may refer either to the specific sciences of society established by thinkers such as Comte, Durkheim, Marx, and Weber, or more generally to all disciplines outside of "noble science" and arts . By the late 19th century, the academic social sciences were constituted of five fields: jurisprudence and amendment of the law , education , health , economy and trade , and art .

[ 8 ] Around the start of the 21st century, the expanding domain of economics in the social sciences has been described as economic imperialism .

[ 18 ] A distinction is usually drawn between the social sciences and the humanities . Classicist Allan Bloom writes in The Closing of the American Mind (1987): Social science and humanities have a mutual contempt for one another, the former looking down on the latter as unscientific, the latter regarding the former as philistine . [...] The difference comes down to the fact that social science really wants to be predictive, meaning that man is predictable, while the humanities say that he is not.

[ 19 ] Branches [ edit ] For a topical guide, see Outline of social science § Branches of social science .

The social science disciplines are branches of knowledge taught and researched at the college or university level. Social science disciplines are defined and recognized by the academic journals in which research is published, and the learned social science societies and academic departments or faculties to which their practitioners belong. Social science fields of study usually have several sub-disciplines or branches, and the distinguishing lines between these are often both arbitrary and ambiguous.

[ 20 ] The following are widely-considered to be social sciences: [ 7 ] Accounting Anthropology Archaeology Archival science Area studies Behavioural science Business studies Cartography Cognitive science Commerce Communication studies Crime science Criminology Cultural studies Culturology Demography Development studies Discourse analysis Economics Education Education science Environmental science Environmental social science Environmental studies Ethics Ethnobotany Ethnography Ethnology Finance Folklore studies Futures studies Gender studies Geography Global studies History Home economics Human resource management Industrial relations Information sciences International relations Journalism Landscape ecology Law Legal management Library science Linguistics Management Management science Marketing Media studies Military science Organizational behavior Organizational studies Paralegal studies Penology Philosophy Political science Public administration Public health Public policy Public relations Psychology Religious studies Social work Sociology Strategic studies Strategic management Sustainable development Sustainability studies Theology Anthropology [ edit ] Main articles: Anthropology and Outline of anthropology Anthropology is the holistic "science of man", a science of the totality of human existence. The discipline deals with the integration of different aspects of the social sciences, humanities , and human biology . In the twentieth century, academic disciplines have often been institutionally divided into three broad domains. Firstly, the natural sciences seek to derive general laws through reproducible and verifiable experiments. Secondly, the humanities generally study local traditions, through their history, literature, music, and arts, with an emphasis on understanding particular individuals, events, or eras. Finally, the social sciences have generally attempted to develop scientific methods to understand social phenomena in a generalizable way, though usually with methods distinct from those of the natural sciences.

[ citation needed ] The anthropological social sciences often develop nuanced descriptions rather than the general laws derived in physics or chemistry, or they may explain individual cases through more general principles, as in many fields of psychology. Anthropology (like some fields of history) does not easily fit into one of these categories, and different branches of anthropology draw on one or more of these domains.

[ 21 ] Within the United States, anthropology is divided into four sub-fields: archaeology, physical or biological anthropology , anthropological linguistics , and cultural anthropology . It is an area that is offered at most undergraduate institutions. The word anthropos ( ἄνθρωπος ) in Ancient Greek means "human being" or "person".

Eric Wolf described sociocultural anthropology as "the most scientific of the humanities, and the most humanistic of the sciences".

[ citation needed ] The goal of anthropology is to provide a holistic account of humans and human nature. This means that, though anthropologists generally specialize in only one sub-field, they always keep in mind the biological, linguistic, historic and cultural aspects of any problem. Since anthropology arose as a science in Western societies that were complex and industrial, a major trend within anthropology has been a methodological drive to study peoples in societies with more simple social organization, sometimes called "primitive" in anthropological literature, but without any connotation of "inferior".

[ 22 ] Today, anthropologists use terms such as "less complex" societies or refer to specific modes of subsistence or production , such as "pastoralist" or "forager" or "horticulturalist" to refer to humans living in non-industrial, non-Western cultures, such people or folk ( ethnos ) remaining of great interest within anthropology.

[ citation needed ] The quest for holism leads most anthropologists to study a people in detail, using biogenetic, archaeological, and linguistic data alongside direct observation of contemporary customs.

[ 23 ] In the 1990s and 2000s, calls for clarification of what constitutes a culture , of how an observer knows where his or her own culture ends and another begins, and other crucial topics in writing anthropology were heard. It is possible to view all human cultures as part of one large, evolving global culture. These dynamic relationships, between what can be observed on the ground, as opposed to what can be observed by compiling many local observations remain fundamental in any kind of anthropology, whether cultural, biological, linguistic or archaeological.

[ 24 ] Communication studies [ edit ] Main articles: Communication studies and History of communication studies Communication studies deals with processes of human communication , commonly defined as the sharing of symbols to create meaning . The discipline encompasses a range of topics, from face-to-face conversation to mass media outlets such as television broadcasting. Communication studies also examine how messages are interpreted through the political, cultural, economic, and social dimensions of their contexts. Communication is institutionalized under many different names at different universities, including communication , communication studies , speech communication , rhetorical studies , communication science , media studies , communication arts , mass communication , media ecology , and communication and media science .

Communication studies integrate aspects of both social sciences and the humanities. As a social science, the discipline often overlaps with sociology, psychology, anthropology, biology, political science, economics, and public policy, among others. From a humanities perspective, communication is concerned with rhetoric and persuasion (traditional graduate programs in communication studies trace their history to the rhetoricians of Ancient Greece ). The field applies to outside disciplines as well, including engineering, architecture, mathematics, and information science.

[ citation needed ] Economics [ edit ] Main articles: Economics and Outline of economics Economics is a social science that seeks to analyze and describe the production, distribution, and consumption of wealth.

[ 25 ] The word "economics" is from the Ancient Greek οἶκος ( oikos , "family, household, estate") and νόμος ( nomos , "custom, law"), and hence means "household management" or "management of the state". An economist is a person using economic concepts and data in the course of employment, or someone who has earned a degree in the subject. The classic brief definition of economics, set out by Lionel Robbins in 1932, is "the science which studies human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce means which have alternative uses". Without scarcity and alternative uses, there is no economic problem . Briefer yet is "the study of how people seek to satisfy needs and wants" and "the study of the financial aspects of human behavior".

[ citation needed ] Buyers bargain for good prices while sellers put forth their best front in Chichicastenango Market, Guatemala .

Economics has two broad branches: microeconomics , where the unit of analysis is the individual agent, such as a household or firm, and macroeconomics , where the unit of analysis is an economy as a whole. Another division of the subject distinguishes positive economics, which seeks to predict and explain economic phenomena, from normative economics , which orders choices and actions by some criterion; such orderings necessarily involve subjective value judgments. Since the early part of the 20th century, economics has focused largely on measurable quantities, employing both theoretical models and empirical analysis. Quantitative models, however, can be traced as far back as the physiocratic school . Economic reasoning has been increasingly applied in recent decades to other social situations such as politics , law, psychology , history , religion , marriage and family life, and other social interactions.

[ citation needed ] The expanding domain of economics in the social sciences has been described as economic imperialism.

[ 18 ] [ 26 ] Education [ edit ] Main articles: Education and Outline of education A depiction of world's oldest university, the University of Bologna , in Italy Education encompasses teaching and learning specific skills, and also something less tangible but more profound: the imparting of knowledge, positive judgement and well-developed wisdom. Education has as one of its fundamental aspects the imparting of culture from generation to generation (see socialization ). To educate means 'to draw out', from the Latin educare , or to facilitate the realization of an individual's potential and talents. It is an application of pedagogy , a body of theoretical and applied research relating to teaching and learning and draws on many disciplines such as psychology, philosophy , computer science , linguistics, neuroscience , sociology and anthropology.

[ 27 ] Geography [ edit ] Main articles: Geography and Outline of geography Map of the Earth Geography as a discipline can be split broadly into two main sub fields: human geography and physical geography . The former focuses largely on the built environment and how space is created, viewed and managed by humans as well as the influence humans have on the space they occupy. This may involve cultural geography , transportation , health , military operations , and cities . The latter examines the natural environment and how the climate, vegetation and life, soil, oceans , water and landforms are produced and interact (is also commonly regarded as an Earth Science ).

[ 28 ] Physical geography examines phenomena related to the measurement of earth . As a result of the two subfields using different approaches a third field has emerged, which is environmental geography . Environmental geography combines physical and human geography and looks at the interactions between the environment and humans.

[ 29 ] Other branches of geography include social geography , regional geography , and geomatics .

Geographers attempt to understand the Earth in terms of physical and spatial relationships. The first geographers focused on the science of mapmaking and finding ways to precisely project the surface of the earth. In this sense, geography bridges some gaps between the natural sciences and social sciences.

Historical geography is often taught in a college in a unified Department of Geography.

[ citation needed ] Modern geography is an all-encompassing discipline, closely related to Geographic Information Science , that seeks to understand humanity and its natural environment. The fields of urban planning , regional science , and planetology are closely related to geography. Practitioners of geography use many technologies and methods to collect data such as Geographic Information Systems , remote sensing , aerial photography , statistics , and global positioning systems .

History [ edit ] Main articles: History and Outline of history History is the continuous, systematic narrative and research into past human events as interpreted through historiographical paradigms or theories. When used as the name of a field of study , history refers to the study and interpretation of the record of humans , societies, institutions, and any topic that has changed over time.

[ citation needed ] Traditionally, the study of history has been considered a part of the humanities . In modern academia , whether or not history remains a humanities-based subject is contested. In the United States the National Endowment for the Humanities includes history in its definition of humanities (as it does for applied linguistics).

[ 30 ] However, the National Research Council classifies history as a social science.

[ 31 ] The historical method comprises the techniques and guidelines by which historians use primary sources and other evidence to research and then to write history . The Social Science History Association , formed in 1976, brings together scholars from numerous disciplines interested in social history .

[ 32 ] Law [ edit ] Main articles: Law and Outline of law A trial at a criminal court, the Old Bailey in London The social science of law, jurisprudence, in common parlance, means a rule that (unlike a rule of ethics ) is capable of enforcement through institutions.

[ 33 ] However, many laws are based on norms accepted by a community and thus have an ethical foundation. The study of law crosses the boundaries between the social sciences and humanities, depending on one's view of research into its objectives and effects. Law is not always enforceable, especially in the international relations context. It has been defined as a "system of rules", [ 34 ] as an "interpretive concept" [ 35 ] to achieve justice, as an "authority" [ 36 ] to mediate people's interests, and even as "the command of a sovereign, backed by the threat of a sanction".

[ 37 ] However one likes to think of law, it is a completely central social institution. Legal policy incorporates the practical manifestation of thinking from almost every social science and the humanities. Laws are politics, because politicians create them. Law is philosophy, because moral and ethical persuasions shape their ideas. Law tells many of history's stories, because statutes, case law and codifications build up over time. And law is economics, because any rule about contract , tort , property law , labour law , company law and many more can have long-lasting effects on the distribution of wealth. The noun law derives from the Old English lagu , meaning something laid down or fixed [ 38 ] and the adjective legal comes from the Latin word lex .

[ 39 ] Linguistics [ edit ] Main articles: Linguistics and Outline of linguistics Ferdinand de Saussure , recognized as the father of modern linguistics Linguistics investigates the cognitive and social aspects of human language. The field is divided into areas that focus on aspects of the linguistic signal, such as syntax (the study of the rules that govern the structure of sentences), semantics (the study of meaning), morphology (the study of the structure of words), phonetics (the study of speech sounds) and phonology (the study of the abstract sound system of a particular language); however, work in areas like evolutionary linguistics (the study of the origins and evolution of language) and psycholinguistics (the study of psychological factors in human language) cut across these divisions.

[ 40 ] The overwhelming majority of modern research in linguistics takes a predominantly synchronic perspective (focusing on language at a particular point in time), and a great deal of it—partly owing to the influence of Noam Chomsky —aims at formulating theories of the cognitive processing of language. However, language does not exist in a vacuum, or only in the brain, and approaches like contact linguistics, creole studies, discourse analysis , social interactional linguistics, and sociolinguistics explore language in its social context. Sociolinguistics often makes use of traditional quantitative analysis and statistics in investigating the frequency of features, while some disciplines, like contact linguistics, focus on qualitative analysis. While certain areas of linguistics can thus be understood as clearly falling within the social sciences, other areas, like acoustic phonetics and neurolinguistics , draw on the natural sciences. Linguistics draws only secondarily on the humanities, which played a rather greater role in linguistic inquiry in the 19th and early 20th centuries.

Ferdinand Saussure was one of the founders of 20th century linguistics.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Political science [ edit ] Main articles: Political science , Outline of political science , and Politics Aristotle asserted that man is a political animal in his Politics .

[ 45 ] Political science is an academic and research discipline that deals with the theory and practice of politics and the description and analysis of political systems and political behaviour. Fields and subfields of political science include political economy , political theory and philosophy , civics and comparative politics , theory of direct democracy , apolitical governance, participatory direct democracy, national systems, cross-national political analysis, political development, international relations, foreign policy , international law , politics, public administration, administrative behaviour, public law, judicial behaviour, and public policy . Political science also studies power in international relations and the theory of great powers and superpowers .

[ 46 ] ri Political science is methodologically diverse, although recent years have witnessed an upsurge in the use of the scientific method , [ 47 ] [ page needed ] that is, the proliferation of formal-deductive model building and quantitative hypothesis testing. Approaches to the discipline include rational choice , classical political philosophy, interpretivism , structuralism , and behaviouralism , realism , pluralism, and institutionalism . Political science, as one of the social sciences, uses methods and techniques that relate to the kinds of inquiries sought: primary sources such as historical documents, interviews, and official records, as well as secondary sources such as scholarly articles , are used in building and testing theories. Empirical methods include survey research, statistical analysis or econometrics , case studies , experiments, and model building.

[ citation needed ] Psychology [ edit ] Main articles: Psychology and Outline of psychology Wilhelm Maximilian Wundt was the founder of experimental psychology .

Psychology is an academic and applied field involving the study of behaviour and mental processes.

[ 48 ] Psychology also refers to the application of such knowledge to various spheres of human activity, including problems of individuals' daily lives and the treatment of mental illness .

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] The word psychology comes from the Ancient Greek ψυχή ( psyche , "soul" or "mind") and the suffix logy ("study").

[ 51 ] Psychology differs from anthropology, economics, political science, and sociology in seeking to capture explanatory generalizations about the mental function and overt behaviour of individuals, while the other disciplines focus on creating descriptive generalizations about the functioning of social groups or situation-specific human behaviour. In practice, however, there is quite a lot of cross-fertilization that takes place among the various fields. Psychology differs from biology and neuroscience in that it is primarily concerned with the interaction of mental processes and behaviour, and of the overall processes of a system, and not simply the biological or neural processes themselves, though the subfield of neuropsychology combines the study of the actual neural processes with the study of the mental effects they have subjectively produced.

[ 52 ] Many people associate psychology with clinical psychology , [ 53 ] which focuses on assessment and treatment of problems in living and psychopathology. In reality, psychology has myriad specialties including social psychology , developmental psychology , cognitive psychology , educational psychology , industrial-organizational psychology , mathematical psychology , neuropsychology, and quantitative analysis of behaviour.

[ 54 ] Psychology is a very broad science that is rarely tackled as a whole, major block. Although some subfields encompass a natural science base and a social science application, others can be clearly distinguished as having little to do with the social sciences or having a lot to do with the social sciences. For example, biological psychology [ 55 ] is considered a natural science with a social scientific application (as is clinical medicine), social and occupational psychology are, generally speaking, purely social sciences, whereas neuropsychology is a natural science that lacks application out of the scientific tradition entirely.

[ 56 ] In British universities, emphasis on what tenet of psychology a student has studied and/or concentrated is communicated through the degree conferred: BPsy indicates a balance between natural and social sciences, BSc indicates a strong (or entire) scientific concentration, whereas a BA underlines a majority of social science credits. This is not always necessarily the case however, and in many UK institutions students studying the BPsy , BSc , and BA follow the same curriculum as outlined by The British Psychological Society and have the same options of specialism open to them regardless of whether they choose a balance, a heavy science basis, or heavy social science basis to their degree. If they applied to read the BA . for example, but specialized in heavily science-based modules, then they will still generally be awarded the BA .

[ citation needed ] Sociology [ edit ] Main articles: Sociology and Outline of sociology This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Émile Durkheim is considered one of the founding fathers of sociology.

Sociology is the systematic study of society, individuals' relationship to their societies, the consequences of difference, and other aspects of human social action .

[ 57 ] The meaning of the word comes from the suffix -logy , which means "study of", derived from Ancient Greek, and the stem soci- , which is from the Latin word socius , meaning "companion", or society in general.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Auguste Comte (1798–1857) coined the term sociology to describe a way to apply natural science principles and techniques to the social world in 1838.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Comte endeavoured to unify history, psychology and economics through the descriptive understanding of the social realm. He proposed that social ills could be remedied through sociological positivism, an epistemological approach outlined in The Course in Positive Philosophy [1830–1842] and A General View of Positivism (1844). Though Comte is generally regarded as the "Father of Sociology", the discipline was formally established by another French thinker, Émile Durkheim (1858–1917), who developed positivism as a foundation to practical social research. Durkheim set up the first European department of sociology at the University of Bordeaux in 1895, publishing his Rules of the Sociological Method . In 1896, he established the journal L'Année sociologique . Durkheim's seminal monograph, Suicide (1897), a case study of suicide rates among Catholic and Protestant populations, distinguished sociological analysis from psychology or philosophy.

[ 62 ] Karl Marx rejected Comte's positivism but nevertheless aimed to establish a science of society based on historical materialism , becoming recognized as a founding figure of sociology posthumously as the term gained broader meaning. Around the start of the 20th century, the first wave of German sociologists, including Max Weber and Georg Simmel , developed sociological antipositivism. The field may be broadly recognized as an amalgam of three modes of social thought in particular: Durkheimian positivism and structural functionalism ; Marxist historical materialism and conflict theory ; and Weberian antipositivism and verstehen analysis. American sociology broadly arose on a separate trajectory, with little Marxist influence, an emphasis on rigorous experimental methodology, and a closer association with pragmatism and social psychology . In the 1920s, the Chicago school developed symbolic interactionism . Meanwhile, in the 1930s, the Frankfurt School pioneered the idea of critical theory , an interdisciplinary form of Marxist sociology drawing upon thinkers as diverse as Sigmund Freud and Friedrich Nietzsche . Critical theory would take on something of a life of its own after World War II, influencing literary criticism and the Birmingham School establishment of cultural studies .

[ citation needed ] Sociology evolved as an academic response to the challenges of modernity , such as industrialization , urbanization , secularization , and a perceived process of enveloping rationalization .

[ 63 ] The field generally concerns the social rules and processes that bind and separate people not only as individuals, but as members of associations , groups , communities and institutions , and includes the examination of the organization and development of human social life. The sociological field of interest ranges from the analysis of short contacts between anonymous individuals on the street to the study of global social processes . In the terms of sociologists Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann , social scientists seek an understanding of the Social Construction of Reality . Most sociologists work in one or more subfields . One useful way to describe the discipline is as a cluster of sub-fields that examine different dimensions of society. For example, social stratification studies inequality and class structure; demography studies changes in population size or type; criminology examines criminal behaviour and deviance; and political sociology studies the interaction between society and state.

[ 64 ] Since its inception, sociological epistemologies, methods, and frames of enquiry, have significantly expanded and diverged.

[ 65 ] Sociologists use a diversity of research methods, collecting both quantitative and qualitative data, draw upon empirical techniques, and engage critical theory.

[ 61 ] Common modern methods include case studies, historical research , interviewing, participant observation , social network analysis , survey research, statistical analysis, and model building, among other approaches. Since the late 1970s, many sociologists have tried to make the discipline useful for purposes beyond the academy. The results of sociological research aid educators, lawmakers, administrators, developers, and others interested in resolving social problems and formulating public policy, through subdisciplinary areas such as evaluation research , methodological assessment, and public sociology .

[ citation needed ] In the early 1970s, women sociologists began to question sociological paradigms and the invisibility of women in sociological studies, analysis, and courses.

[ 66 ] In 1969, feminist sociologists challenged the discipline's androcentrism at the American Sociological Association's annual conference.

[ 67 ] This led to the founding of the organization Sociologists for Women in Society, and, eventually, a new sociology journal, Gender & Society . Today, the sociology of gender is considered to be one of the most prominent sub-fields in the discipline.

[ 68 ] New sociological sub-fields continue to appear — such as community studies , computational sociology , environmental sociology , network analysis, actor-network theory , gender studies, and a growing list, many of which are cross-disciplinary in nature.

[ 69 ] Additional fields of study [ edit ] See also: Auxiliary sciences of history Additional applied or interdisciplinary fields related to the social sciences or are applied social sciences include: Archaeology , a science that is focused on the study of human cultures by means of the recovery, documentation, analysis, and interpretation of material remains and environmental data, including architecture, artifacts, features, and landscapes.

[ 70 ] Area studies , interdisciplinary fields of research and scholarship pertaining to particular geographical, national/federal, or cultural regions.

[ 71 ] Behavioural science , which encompasses disciplines that explore the activities of and interactions among organisms in the natural world.

[ 72 ] Computational social science , an umbrella field encompassing computational approaches within the social sciences.

[ 73 ] Demography , the statistical study of human populations.

[ 74 ] Development studies , a branch of social science that addresses issues of concern to developing countries.

[ 75 ] Environmental social science , the broad study of interrelations between humans and the natural environment.

[ 76 ] Environmental studies , which integrates social, humanistic, and natural science perspectives on the relation between humans and the natural environment.

[ 77 ] Gender studies , which is focused on the study of gender identity, masculinity, femininity, transgender issues, and sexuality .

[ 78 ] Information science , an interdisciplinary science primarily concerned with the collection, classification, manipulation, storage, retrieval and dissemination of information.

[ 79 ] International studies , which covers both international relations (the study of foreign affairs and global issues among states within the international system) and international education .

[ 80 ] Legal management , a social sciences discipline that is designed for students interested in the study of state and legal elements.

[ 81 ] Library science , a field that applies the practices, perspectives, and tools of management, information technology, education, and other areas to libraries; and the collection, organization, preservation and dissemination of information resources.

[ 82 ] Management , which consists of various levels of leadership and administration of an organization in all business and human organizations. It is the effective execution of getting people together to accomplish desired goals and objectives through adequate planning, executing and controlling activities.

[ 83 ] Marketing , the identification of human needs and wants, defines and measures their magnitude for demand and understanding the process of consumer buying behaviour to formulate products and services, pricing, promotion and distribution to satisfy these needs and wants through exchange processes and building long-term relationships.

[ 84 ] Political economy , the study of production, buying and selling, and their relations with law, custom, and government.

[ 85 ] Public administration , the development, implementation and study of branches of government policy. Though public administration has been historically referred to as government management, [ 86 ] it increasingly encompasses non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that also operate with a similar, primary dedication to the betterment of humanity.

Religious studies and Western esoteric studies , which incorporate social-scientific research on phenomena deemed religious.

[ 87 ] Methodology [ edit ] Social research [ edit ] Main article: Social research The origin of the survey can be traced back at least as early as the Domesday Book in 1086, [ 88 ] [ 89 ] while some scholars pinpoint the origin of demography to 1663 with the publication of John Graunt 's Natural and Political Observations upon the Bills of Mortality .

[ 90 ] Social research began most intentionally, however, with the positivist philosophy of science in the 19th century.

In contemporary usage, "social research" is a relatively autonomous term, encompassing the work of practitioners from various disciplines that share in its aims and methods. Social scientists employ a range of methods in order to analyse a vast breadth of social phenomena; from census survey data derived from millions of individuals, to the in-depth analysis of a single agent's social experiences; from monitoring what is happening on contemporary streets, to the investigation of ancient historical documents. The methods originally rooted in classical sociology and statistical mathematics have formed the basis for research in other disciplines, such as political science, media studies, and marketing and market research .

Social research methods may be divided into two broad schools: Quantitative designs approach social phenomena through quantifiable evidence, and often rely on statistical analysis of many cases (or across intentionally designed treatments in an experiment) to create valid and reliable general claims.

Qualitative designs emphasize understanding of social phenomena through direct observation, communication with participants, or analysis of texts, and may stress contextual and subjective accuracy over generality.

Social scientists will commonly combine quantitative and qualitative approaches as part of a multi-strategy design. Questionnaires, field-based data collection, archival database information and laboratory-based data collections are some of the measurement techniques used. It is noted the importance of measurement and analysis, focusing on the (difficult to achieve) goal of objective research or statistical hypothesis testing . A mathematical model uses mathematical language to describe a system. The process of developing a mathematical model is termed 'mathematical modelling' (also modeling). A mathematical model is "a representation of the essential aspects of an existing system (or a system to be constructed) that presents knowledge of that system in usable form".

[ 91 ] Mathematical models can take many forms, including but not limited to dynamical systems , statistical models , differential equations , or game theoretic models .

These and other types of models can overlap, with a given model involving a variety of abstract structures. The system is a set of interacting or interdependent entities, real or abstract, forming an integrated whole. The concept of an integrated whole can also be stated in terms of a system embodying a set of relationships that are differentiated from relationships of the set to other elements, and from relationships between an element of the set and elements not a part of the relational regime. A dynamical system modeled as a mathematical formalization has a fixed "rule" that describes the time dependence of a point's position in its ambient space . Small changes in the state of the system correspond to small changes in the numbers. The evolution rule of the dynamical system is a fixed rule that describes what future states follow from the current state. The rule is deterministic : for a given time interval only one future state follows from the current state.

Social scientists often conduct program evaluation , which is a systematic method for collecting, analyzing, and using information to answer questions about projects, policies and programs, [ 92 ] particularly about their effectiveness and efficiency. In both the public and private sectors, stakeholders often want to know whether the programs they are funding, implementing, voting for, receiving or objecting to are producing the intended effect. While program evaluation first focuses around this definition, important considerations often include how much the program costs per participant, how the program could be improved, whether the program is worthwhile, whether there are better alternatives, if there are unintended outcomes, and whether the program goals are appropriate and useful.

[ 93 ] Theory [ edit ] Main article: Social theory Some social theorists emphasize the subjective nature of research. These writers espouse social theory perspectives that include various types of the following: Critical theory is the examination and critique of society and culture, drawing from knowledge across social sciences and humanities disciplines.

Dialectical materialism is the philosophy of Karl Marx, which he formulated by taking the dialectic of Hegel and joining it to the materialism of Feuerbach.

Feminist theory is the extension of feminism into theoretical, or philosophical discourse; it aims to understand the nature of gender inequality.

Marxist theories , such as revolutionary theory , scientific socialism , and class theory , cover work in philosophy that is strongly influenced by Karl Marx's materialist approach to theory or is written by Marxists.

Phronetic social science is a theory and methodology for doing social science focusing on ethics and political power, based on a contemporary interpretation of Aristotelian phronesis.

Post-colonial theory is a reaction to the cultural legacy of colonialism.

Postmodernism refers to a point of departure for works of literature, drama, architecture, cinema, and design, as well as in marketing and business and in the interpretation of history, law, culture and religion in the late 20th century.

Rational choice theory is a framework for understanding and often formally modeling social and economic behaviour.

Social constructionism considers how social phenomena develop in social contexts.

Structuralism is an approach to the human sciences that attempts to analyze a specific field (for instance, mythology) as a complex system of interrelated parts.

Structural functionalism is a sociological paradigm that addresses what social functions various elements of the social system perform in regard to the entire system.

Other fringe social theorists delve into the alternative nature of research. These writers share social theory perspectives that include various types of the following: Anti-intellectualism describes a sentiment of critique towards, or evaluation of, intellectuals and intellectual pursuits.

Antiscience is a position critical of science and the scientific method.

Recursivity [ edit ] Authors use the concept of recursivity to foreground the situation in which social scientists find themselves when producing knowledge about the world they are always already part of.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] According to Audrey Alejandro, "as social scientists, the recursivity of our condition deals with the fact that we are both subjects (as discourses are the medium through which we analyse) and objects of the academic discourses we produce (as we are social agents belonging to the world we analyse)." [ 96 ] From this basis, she identifies in recursivity a fundamental challenge in the production of emancipatory knowledge which calls for the exercise of reflexive efforts: we are socialised into discourses and dispositions produced by the socio-political order we aim to challenge, a socio-political order that we may, therefore, reproduce unconsciously while aiming to do the contrary. The recursivity of our situation as scholars – and, more precisely, the fact that the dispositional tools we use to produce knowledge about the world are themselves produced by this world – both evinces the vital necessity of implementing reflexivity in practice and poses the main challenge in doing so.

[ 97 ] Education and degrees [ edit ] Most universities offer degrees in social science fields.

[ 98 ] The Bachelor of Social Science is a degree targeted at the social sciences in particular, it is often more flexible and in-depth than other degrees that include social science subjects.

[ a ] In the United States, a university may offer a student who studies a social sciences field a Bachelor of Arts degree, particularly if the field is within one of the traditional liberal arts such as history, or a BSc: Bachelor of Science degree such as those given by the London School of Economics , as the social sciences constitute one of the two main branches of science (the other being the natural sciences ). In addition, some institutions have degrees for a particular social science, such as the Bachelor of Economics degree, though such specialized degrees are relatively rare in the United States.

Graduate students may receive a master's degree ( Master of Arts , Master of Science or a field-specific degree such as Master of Public Administration ) or a doctoral degree (e.g.

PhD ).

Funding [ edit ] The funding of social science programs varies across countries and includes both private and public financing. The development of such programs typically see an increased funding and attention when their topics coincide with national political activities or economic policies.

[ 99 ] In South America, namely Brazil , the institutionalisation of social sciences took place in a political context where the state struggled to assert its territorial power, and the social scientific field was expected to produce investigation but also political inputs towards the construction of a new nation.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] Immediately following the 1932 Brazilian revolution , social science programs experience a surge in funding, later becoming the largest of such capital expenditure in South America.

[ 99 ] Subsequently, these developments led to the deployment of university programs and the institution of national associations in anthropology, economics, sociology and political science.

[ 99 ] People associated with the social sciences [ edit ] Al-Kindi Augustine Franz Boas Manuel Castells Confucius Wade Davis W. E. B. Du Bois Louis Dumont Norbert Elias Friedrich Engels Frantz Fanon Milton Friedman Anthony Giddens Erving Goffman Thomas Hobbes Arlie Hochschild David Hume Marie Jahoda John Maynard Keynes Ibn Khaldun Paul F. Lazarsfeld John Locke John Lubbock, 1st Baron Avebury Niklas Luhmann Niccolò Machiavelli Karl Marx Marcel Mauss Margaret Mead John Stuart Mill Montesquieu Jean Piaget Steven Pinker Plato John Rawls David Ricardo Edward Said Jean-Baptiste Say Alfred Schutz B.F. Skinner Adam Smith Herbert Spencer Deborah Tannen Victor Turner See also [ edit ] Society portal Science portal General [ edit ] Outline of social science Humanities Structure and agency Methods [ edit ] Ethnography Participatory action research Representation theory Other [ edit ] Ethnology Gulbenkian commission Labelling Obshestvovedeny Philosophy of social sciences Notes [ edit ] ^ A Bachelor of Social Science degree can be earned at the University of Adelaide , University of Waikato ( Hamilton, New Zealand ), University of Sydney , University of New South Wales , University of Hong Kong , University of Manchester , Lincoln University, New Zealand , National University of Malaysia and University of Queensland .

References [ edit ] ^ "Social science: History, Disciplines, Future Development, & Facts" .

Britannica . April 27, 2023.

^ Little, William (November 6, 2014). "1".

Introduction to Sociology – 1st Canadian Edition . BCampus.

^ Timans, Rob; Wouters, Paul; Heilbron, Johan (April 2019). "Mixed methods research: what it is and what it could be".

Theory and Society .

48 (2): 193– 216.

doi : 10.1007/s11186-019-09345-5 .

hdl : 1887/78033 .

^ Zhou, Hongyu; Guns, Raf; Engels, Tim C. E. (2022).

"Are social sciences becoming more interdisciplinary? Evidence from publications 1960–2014" .

Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology .

73 (9): 1201– 1221.

doi : 10.1002/asi.24627 .

hdl : 10067/1862090151162165141 .

ISSN 2330-1643 .

^ Bhattacherjee, Anol (2012).

Social Science Research: Principles, Methods, and Practices . University of South Florida.

^ Kuper, Adam (1996).

The Social Science Encyclopedia . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-415-10829-4 .

^ a b c d e f g Kuper, A., and Kuper, J. (1985).

The Social Science Encyclopaedia .

^ a b Social sciences, Columbian Cyclopedia . (1897). Buffalo: Garretson, Cox & Company. p. 227.

^ Peck, H.T., Peabody, S.H., and Richardson, C.F. (1897).

The International Cyclopedia, A Compendium of Human Knowledge . Rev. with large additions. New York: Dodd, Mead and Company.

^ Lalevée, Thomas (May 30, 2023).

"Three Versions of Social Science in Late Eighteenth-Century France" .

Modern Intellectual History .

20 (4): 1023– 1043.

doi : 10.1017/S1479244323000100 .

^ According to Comte, the social physics field was similar to that of natural sciences .

^ Weber, Max (2017).

Methodology of Social Sciences . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781315124445 .

ISBN 978-1-315-12444-5 .

^ Tucker, William T. (1965). "Max Weber's 'Verstehen' ".

The Sociological Quarterly .

6 (2): 157– 165.

doi : 10.1111/j.1533-8525.1965.tb01649.x .

JSTOR 4105245 .

^ Yadav, Yogendra (1986). "Political 'Science': Positivist Method and Philosophic Critiques".

The Indian Journal of Political Science .

47 (4): 502– 517.

JSTOR 41855267 .

^ Cf.

Rinzivillo, Guglielmo (2010), Angeli, Franco (ed.), La scienza e l'oggetto. Autocritica del sapere strategico , Milan , pp. 51–, ISBN 978-88-568-2487-2 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Vessuri, Hebe (January 2002). "Ethical Challenges for the Social Sciences on the Threshold of the 21st Century".

Current Sociology .

50 (1): 135– 150.

doi : 10.1177/0011392102050001010 .

^ Turner, Stephen (1987). "Review of The History of Statistics: The Measurement of Uncertainty Before 1900".

American Journal of Sociology .

92 (6): 1510– 1512.

doi : 10.1086/228675 .

JSTOR 2779847 .

^ a b Lazear, E.P. (2000). "Economic Imperialism".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

115 : 99– 146.

doi : 10.1162/003355300554683 .

^ Bloom, Allan (2012).

The Closing of the American Mind . Simon and Schuster. p. 357.

ISBN 978-1-4516-8320-2 .

^ "The 12 Branches of Social Sciences (explained) | 2025" . March 20, 2024 . Retrieved February 26, 2025 .

^ Wallerstein, I. (2003).

"Anthropology, Sociology, and Other Dubious Disciplines" (PDF) .

Current Anthropology .

44 (4): 453– 65.

doi : 10.1086/375868 .

^ Lowie, Robert (1924).

Primitive Religion . Routledge and Sons.

; Tylor, Edward (1920) [1871].

Primitive Culture . New York: J.P. Putnam's Sons.

^ Nanda, Serena ; Warms, Richard (2008), "Chapter One", Culture Counts , Wadsworth ^ Rosaldo, Renato (1993), Culture and Truth: The remaking of social analysis , Beacon Press ; Inda, John Xavier; Rosaldo, Renato (2007), The Anthropology of Globalization , Wiley-Blackwell ^ "economics – Britannica Online Encyclopedia" .

^ Becker, Gary S.

(1976).

The Economic Approach to Human Behavior . University of Chicago Press.

^ "An overview of education" .

teachersmind.com .

^ "What is geography?" .

AAG Career Guide: Jobs in Geography and Related Geographical Sciences . Association of American Geographers. Archived from the original on October 6, 2006 . Retrieved October 9, 2006 .

^ Hayes-Bohanan, James.

"What is Environmental Geography, Anyway?" . Retrieved October 9, 2006 .

^ "About NEH" . National Endowment for the Humanities.

^ "Research-Doctorate Programs in the United States: Continuity and Change" .

^ See the SSHA website ^ Robertson, Geoffrey (2006).

Crimes Against Humanity . Penguin. p. 90.

ISBN 978-0-14-102463-9 .

^ Hart, H.L.A.

(1961).

The Concept of Law . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-876122-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Dworkin, Ronald (1986).

Law's Empire . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-51836-0 .

^ Raz, Joseph (1979).

The Authority of Law . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-956268-8 .

^ Austin, John (1831).

The Providence of Jurisprudence Determined .

^ see Etymonline Dictionary ^ see Merriam-Webster's Dictionary ^ Anonymous (March 2, 2022).

"What is Linguistics? | linguistics" .

linguistics.ucdavis.edu . Retrieved July 13, 2024 .

^ Justin Wintle, Makers of modern culture , Routledge, 2002, p. 467.

^ David Lodge, Nigel Wood, Modern Criticism and Theory: A Reader , Pearson Education, 2008, p. 42.

^ Thomas, Margaret. 2011. Fifty Key Thinkers on Language and Linguistics. Routledge: London and New York. p. 145 ff.

^ Chapman, S. and C. Routledge. 2005. Key Thinkers in Linguistics and the Philosophy of Language. Edinburgh University Press. p.241 ff.

^ Ebenstein, Alan (2002). Introduction to Political Thinkers. Boston, Massachusetts: Wadsworth.

^ Steinmetz, Jay (2019).

"Chapter 7: International Relations" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Hindmoor, Andrew (2006).

Rational Choice . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-4039-3422-2 .

^ Frequently asked questions about APA Retrieved on November 28th, 2023.

^ "The mission of the APA [American Psychological Association] is to advance the creation, communication and application of psychological knowledge to benefit society and improve people's lives"; APA (2010).

About APA .

Archived 2 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 20 October 2010.

^ Peter E. Nathan & James Langenbucher, "Diagnosis and Classification", in Weiner (ed.), Handbook of Psychology (2003), Volume 8: Clinical Psychology .

^ Online Etymology Dictionary. (2001).

"Psychology" Archived 18 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Pinel, John (2010).

Biopsychology . New York: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-205-83256-9 .

^ Brain, Christine. (2002).

Advanced psychology: applications, issues and perspectives.

Cheltenham: Nelson Thornes.

ISBN 0-17-490058-9 ^ "Psychology Subfields" .

American Psychological Association . 2013 . Retrieved January 17, 2024 .

^ Hill, Jonathan (2002).

"Biological, psychological and social processes in the conduct disorders" .

Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry .

43 (1): 133– 164.

doi : 10.1111/1469-7610.00007 .

ISSN 1469-7610 .

PMID 11848334 .

^ Mitchell, Jason P. (June 2009).

"Social psychology as a natural kind" .

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

13 (6): 246– 251.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2009.03.008 .

ISSN 1364-6613 .

PMC 2935896 .

PMID 19427258 .

^ Witt, Jon (2018).

SOC 218 . McGraw-Hill. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-259-70272-3 .

^ The Oxford English dictionary. 15: Ser - soosy (2. ed., reprint. (with corr.) ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Pr. 1991. pp.

914– 916.

ISBN 978-0-19-861227-8 .

^ The Oxford English dictionary. 8: Interval - looie (2. ed., reprint. (with corr.) ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Pr. 1991. p. 1114.

ISBN 978-0-19-861220-9 .

^ A Dictionary of Sociology , Article: Comte, Auguste ^ a b Witt, Jon (2018).

SOC 2018 . McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-1-259-70272-3 .

^ Gianfranco Poggi (2000).

Durkheim.

Oxford: Oxford University Press. Chapter 1.

^ Habermas, Jürgen, The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity : Modernity's Consciousness of Time , Polity Press (1990), paperback, ISBN 978-0-7456-0830-3 , p. 2.

^ Sakamoto, Arthur; Powers, Daniel A. (2005), Poston, Dudley L.; Micklin, Michael (eds.), "Demography of Social Stratification" , Handbook of Population , Boston, MA: Springer US, pp.

383– 416, doi : 10.1007/0-387-23106-4_14 , ISBN 978-0-387-23106-8 , retrieved April 9, 2025 ^ Giddens, Anthony, Duneier, Mitchell, Applebaum, Richard. 2007.

Introduction to Sociology. Sixth Edition.

New York: W.W. Norton and Company. Chapter 1.

^ Lorber, Judith (1994).

Paradoxes of Gender . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-06497-1 .

^ Laube, Heather; Hess, Bess B. (2001).

"The Founding of SWS" .

Sociologists for Women in Society . Retrieved February 5, 2018 .

^ "All About the Sociology of Gender" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved June 14, 2024 .

^ Vuong, Quan-Hoang (2019).

The Vietnamese Social Sciences at a Fork in the Road . De Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3-11-068608-1 .

^ "What is Archaeology" .

Society for American Archaeology . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ "Area studies | Social Research, Interdisciplinary Analysis & Global Perspectivesca" .

Britannica . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ "Behavioral science | Definition, Examples, & Facts" .

Britannica . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ Amaral, Ines (2017), "Computational Social Sciences" , in Schintler, Laurie A.; McNeely, Connie L. (eds.), Encyclopedia of Big Data , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

1– 3, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-32001-4_41-1 , ISBN 978-3-319-32001-4 , retrieved January 18, 2024 ^ "Demography | Population Trends, Migration & Age Structure" .

Britannica . January 11, 2024 . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ "Development Studies • Centre for Samoan Studies" .

Centre for Samoan Studies . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ "Environmental social sciences - Latest research and news | Nature" .

www.nature.com . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ "Environmental Studies | Course Catalogue" .

www.wesleyancollege.edu . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ McConnell-Ginet, Sally (2012). "Linguistics and Gender Studies".

Philosophy of Linguistics . pp.

503– 530.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-444-51747-0.50015-9 .

ISBN 978-0-444-51747-0 .

^ "Information science | Definition & Facts" .

Britannica . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ "International Studies" .

CONVERGE | Natural Hazards Center . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ Secretariat, Treasury Board of Canada (October 27, 2015).

"Law Management" .

Canada . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ Kowarski, Ilana (June 21, 2021).

"Library Science and How to Become a Librarian" .

^ "Primary Functions of Management | Principles of Management" .

courses.lumenlearning.com . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ Albrecht, Maria Gomez; Green, Mark; Hoffman, Linda (January 25, 2023).

Principles of Marketing . OpenStax.

ISBN 978-1-951693-88-6 .

^ "8.1: What is Political Economy?" .

Social Sci LibreTexts . February 22, 2022 . Retrieved January 18, 2024 .

^ Zaki Badawi, A (2002).

Dictionary of the Social Sciences – Oxford Reference .

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780195123715.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-512371-5 .

^ Josephson-Storm, Jason (2017).

The Myth of Disenchantment: Magic, Modernity, and the Birth of the Human Sciences . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

101– 14.

ISBN 978-0-226-40336-6 .

^ A.H. Halsey (2004), A history of sociology in Britain: science, literature, and society , p. 34 ^ Geoffrey Duncan Mitchell (1970), A new dictionary of sociology , p. 201 ^ Willcox, Walter (1938) The Founder of Statistics .

^ Eykhoff, Pieter System Identification: Parameter and State Estimation , Wiley & Sons, (1974).

ISBN 978-0-471-24980-1 ^ Administration for Children and Families (2010) The Program Manager's Guide to Evaluation . Chapter 2: What is program evaluation?

.

^ Shackman, Gene (February 11, 2018), What Is Program Evaluation: A Beginner's Guide (Presentation Slides), The Global Social Change Research Project, SSRN 3060080 ^ Bourdieu, Pierre (1992). "Double Bind et Conversion".

Pour Une Anthropologie Réflexive . Paris: Le Seuil.

^ Giddens, Anthony (1987).

Social Theory and Modern Sociology . Polity Press.

^ Alejandro, Audrey (2021).

"Reflexive discourse analysis: A methodology for the practice of reflexivity" .

European Journal of International Relations .

27 (1): 171.

doi : 10.1177/1354066120969789 .

^ Alejandro, Audrey (2021).

"Reflexive discourse analysis: A methodology for the practice of reflexivity" .

European Journal of International Relations .

27 (1): 154.

doi : 10.1177/1354066120969789 .

^ Peterson's (Firm : 2006– ). (2007). Peterson's graduate programs in the humanities, arts, & social sciences, 2007. Lawrenceville, New Jersey: Peterson's.

^ a b c Alejandro, Audrey (2018).

Western Dominance in International Relations?

. Routledge. p. 60.

doi : 10.4324/9781315170480 .

ISBN 978-1-315-17048-0 .

^ Trindade, Hélgio (June 2005). "Social sciences in Brazil in perspective: foundation, consolidation and diversification".

Social Science Information .

44 ( 2– 3): 283– 357.

doi : 10.1177/0539018405053291 .

^ Jatobá, Daniel (2013). "Los Desarrollos Académicos de Las Relaciones Internacionales EnBrasil: Elementos Sociológicos, Institucionales Y Epistemológicos".

Relaciones Internacionales .

22 (22): 27– 47.

doi : 10.15366/relacionesinternacionales2013.22.002 .

hdl : 10486/677456 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Michie, Jonathan, ed.

Reader's Guide to the Social Sciences (2 vol. 2001) 1970 pages annotating the major topics in the late 20th century in all the social sciences.

20th and 21st centuries sources [ edit ] Neil J. Smelser and Paul B. Baltes (2001).

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences , Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Byrne, D.S. (1998).

Complexity theory and the social sciences: an introduction . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-16296-8 Kuper, A., and Kuper, J. (1985).

The Social Science Encyclopedia . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. (ed., a limited preview of the 1996 version is available) Lave, C.A., and March, J.G. (1993).

An introduction to models in the social sciences . Lanham, Md: University Press of America.

Perry, John and Erna Perry.

Contemporary Society: An Introduction to Social Science (12th Edition, 2008), college textbook Potter, D. (1988).

Society and the social sciences: An introduction . London: Routledge [u.a.].

David L. Sills and Robert K. Merton (1968).

International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences .

Seligman, Edwin R.A. and Alvin Johnson (1934).

Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences.

(13 vol.) Ward, L.F. (1924).

Dynamic sociology, or applied social science: As based upon statical sociology and the less complex sciences . New York: D. Appleton.

Leavitt, F.M., and Brown, E. (1920).

Elementary social science . New York: Macmillan.

Bogardus, E.S. (1913).

Introduction to the social sciences: A textbook outline . Los Angeles: Ralston Press.

Small, A.W. (1910).

The meaning of social science . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

19th century sources [ edit ] Andrews, S.P. (1888).

The science of society . Boston, Mass: Sarah E. Holmes.

Denslow, V.B. (1882).

Modern thinkers principally upon social science: What they think, and why . Chicago: Belford, Clarke & Co.

Harris, William Torrey (1879).

Method of Study in Social Science : A Lecture Delivered Before the St. Louis Social Science Association, March 4, 1879. St. Louis: G.I. Jones and Co, 1879.

Hamilton, R.S. (1873).

Present status of social science. A review, historical and critical, of the progress of thought in social philosophy . New York: H.L. Hinton.

Carey, H.C. (1867).

Principles of social science . Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott & Co. [etc.].

Volume I , Volume II , Volume III .

Calvert, G.H. (1856).

Introduction to social science: A discourse in three parts . New York: Redfield.

General sources [ edit ] Backhouse, Roger E., and Philippe Fontaine, eds.

A historiography of the modern social sciences (Cambridge University Press, 2014).

Backhouse, Roger E.; Fontaine, Philippe, eds. (2010).

The History of the Social Sciences Since 1945 . Cambridge University Press.

; covers the conceptual, institutional, and wider histories of economics, political science, sociology, social anthropology, psychology, and human geography.

Delanty, G. (1997).

Social science: Beyond constructivism and realism . Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.

Hargittai, E. (2009).

Research Confidential: Solutions to Problems Most Social Scientists Pretend They Never Have . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .

ISBN 978-0472026531 .

Heim, K. M. (1987). Social Scientific Information Needs for Numeric Data: The Evolution of the International Data Archive Infrastructure.

Collection Management , 9(1), 1–53.

Hunt, E.F.; Colander, D.C. (2008).

Social science: An introduction to the study of society . Boston: Peason/Allyn and Bacon.

ISBN 978-0-205-52406-8 .

Carey, H.C.

; McKean, K. (1883).

Manual of social science; Being a condensation of the Principles of social science . Philadelphia: Baird.

Galavotti, M.C.

(2003).

Observation and experiment in the natural and social sciences . Boston studies in the philosophy of science. Vol. 232. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.

ISBN 978-1-4020-1251-8 .

Gorton, W.A. (2006).

Karl Popper and the social sciences . SUNY series in the philosophy of the social sciences. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Harris, F.R. (1973).

Social science and national policy . New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books.

ISBN 978-1-4128-3445-2 .

distributed by Dutton Krimerman, L.I. (1969).

The nature and scope of social science: A critical anthology . New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

ISBN 978-0-390-52678-6 .

Rule, J.B. (1997).

Theory and progress in social science . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-57365-8 .

Shionoya, Y. (1997).

Schumpeter and the idea of social science: A metatheoretical study. Historical perspectives on modern economics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Singleton, Royce, A.; Straits, Bruce C. (1988).

Approaches to Social Research .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-514794-0 . Archived from the original on March 3, 2007.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Thomas, D. (1979).

Naturalism and social science: a post-empiricist philosophy of social science . CUP Archive.

ISBN 978-0-521-29660-1 .

Trigg, R. (2001).

Understanding social science: A philosophical introduction to the social sciences . Malden, Mass: Blackwell Publishers.

Weber, M.

(1906) [1904].

The Relations of the Rural Community to Other Branches of Social Science, Congress of Arts and Science: Universal Exposition . St. Louis: Houghton, Mifflin and Company.

Creswell, John W.

Educational research: planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative and qualitative research .

ISBN 978-1-299-95719-0 .

OCLC 859836343 .

Academic resources [ edit ] The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , ISSN 1552-3349 (electronic) ISSN 0002-7162 (paper), Sage Publications Efferson, Charles; Richerson, Peter J. (March 16, 2007). "A prolegomenon to nonlinear empiricism in the human behavioral sciences".

Biology & Philosophy .

22 (1): 1– 33.

doi : 10.1007/s10539-005-9013-7 .

Opponents and critics [ edit ] George H. Smith (2014).

Intellectuals and Libertarianism: Thomas Sowell and Robert Nisbet Phil Hutchinson, Rupert Read and Wes Sharrock (2008).

There's No Such Thing as a Social Science .

ISBN 978-0-7546-4776-8 Sabia, D.R., and Wallulis, J. (1983).

Changing social science: Critical theory and other critical perspectives . Albany: State University of New York Press.

External links [ edit ] Social science at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Institute for Comparative Research in Human and Social Sciences (ICR) (JAPAN) Centre for Social Work Research International Conference on Social Sciences International Social Science Council Introduction to Hutchinson et al., There's No Such Thing as a Social Science Intute: Social Sciences (UK) Social Science Research Society Social Science Virtual Library Social Science Virtual Library: Canaktanweb (Turkish) Social Sciences And Humanities UC Berkeley Experimental Social Science Laboratory The Dialectic of Social Science by Paul A. Baran American Academy Commission on the Humanities and Social Sciences The Social Sciences Library v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Spain Latvia Korea Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wms7n
Cached time: 20250817063629
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.533 seconds
Real time usage: 1.829 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9719/1000000
Revision size: 87904/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 285666/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16856/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 41/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 368850/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.995/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17059456/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1502.829      1 -total
 37.52%  563.851      2 Template:Reflist
 16.35%  245.784     42 Template:Cite_book
  9.00%  135.324     18 Template:Lang
  7.80%  117.271     18 Template:Cite_journal
  7.56%  113.545     12 Template:Citation_needed
  7.12%  106.937     13 Template:Fix
  6.85%  102.941     24 Template:Cite_web
  6.15%   92.467      1 Template:Science
  6.04%   90.718      1 Template:Sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26781:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817063629 and revision id 1298902361. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_science&oldid=1298902361 " Categories : Social sciences Academic disciplines Branches of science Administrative theory Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 errors: missing periodical Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2022 Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing undetermined-language text Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles needing additional references from December 2023 All articles needing additional references CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles containing German-language text Use Oxford spelling from August 2016 This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 13:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social science 135 languages Add topic

