Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Ḥāl in Sufism Toggle Ḥāl in Sufism subsection 2.1 Important aḥwāl 2.1.1 Ḥāl of murāqaba (watching) 2.1.2 Ḥāl of qurb (nearness) 2.1.3 Ḥāl of wajd (ecstasy) 2.1.4 Ḥāl of sukr (intoxication) 2.1.5 Ḥāl of wudd (intimacy) 2.2 Other aḥwāl 3 Distinction from maqām 4 Ḥāl outside Sufism Toggle Ḥāl outside Sufism subsection 4.1 Ḥāl in the Persian arts 5 Resources Toggle the table of contents Hal (Sufism) 8 languages العربية Башҡортса فارسی Français Italiano മലയാളം Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sufi concept This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article uses texts from within a religion or faith system without referring to secondary sources that critically analyse them.

Please help improve this article .

( December 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Hal" Sufism – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A ḥāl [ 1 ] ( Arabic : حَال , meaning "state" or "condition", sometimes anglicized as haal ; plural أَحْوَال aḥwāl , sometimes anglicized as ahwaal ) is a  special-purpose, temporary state of consciousness , generally understood to be the product of a Sufi's spiritual practices while on his way toward God.

Part of a series on Islam Sufism Ideas Abdal Al-Insān al-Kāmil Baqaa Dervish Dhawq Fakir Fana Hal Haqiqa Ihsan Irfan Ishq Karamat Kashf Lataif Manzil Ma'rifa Maqam Murid Murshid Nafs Nūr Qalandar Qayyum Qutb Silsila Sufi cosmology Sufi metaphysics Sufi philosophy Sufi poetry Sufi psychology Salik Tazkiah Wali Yaqeen Practices Anasheed Dhikr Haḍra Muraqabah Qawwali Sama Whirling Ziyarat Sufi orders Alians Ba 'Alawi Bektashi Qadiri Chishti Naqshbandi Shadhili Suhrawardi Rifaʽi Khalwati Rahmani Badawi Burhani Tijani Darqawi Idrisi Senusi Bayrami Jelveti Maizbhandari Malamati Mouridi Sülaymaniyya Salihiyya Azeemia Kubrawi Mevlevi Shattari Uwaisi Hurufi Ni'matullāhī Nuqtavi Qalandari Safavi Zahabiya Akbari Galibi Haqqani Anjuman Inayati Issawiyya Jerrahi Madari Mahdavi Noorbakshi Zahedi Zikri List of sufis Notable early Notable modern Singers Topics in Sufism Tawhid Sharia Tariqa Haqiqa Ma'rifa Art History Sufi music Persecution Ziyarat Islam portal v t e Part of a series on Sunni Islam Beliefs God Prophets and Messengers Holy books Succession to Muhammad Angels Judgement Day Predestination Sahaba Five Pillars Declaration of Faith Prayer Charity Fasting Pilgrimage Rashidun Caliphs Abu Bakr Umar Uthman Ali Others Hasan ibn Ali Mu'awiya I Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz Schools of law Hanafi Maliki Shafi'i Hanbali Others Farahi Zahiri Awza'i Thawri Laythi Jariri Schools of theology Ash'arism and Maturidism ( Ahl al-Ra'y ) Atharism ( Ahl al-Hadith ) In terms of Ihsan : Sufis (Ahl al-Wijdan wa al-Kashf ) Contemporary movements Barelvi movement Deobandi movement Salafism Wahhabism Ahl-i Hadith Modernism Neo-traditionalism Holy sites Mecca Medina Jerusalem Lists Literature Kutub al-Sittah History Persecution Islam portal v t e Part of a series on the Alevis Alevism Beliefs God in Islam Haqq–Muhammad–Ali Muhammad Muhammad-Ali Zahir Batin Sharia Tariqa Ma'rifa Haqiqa Wahdat al-wujud Wahdat al-mawjud Baqaa Fana Hal Kashf Keramat Al-Insān al-Kāmil Lataif Four Doors Manzil Nûr Salik Practices Zakat Ziyarat Taqiyya Ashura Hıdırellez Nowruz Saya Mawlid Music Fasting Müsahiplik Buyruks Twelve Imams Ali Hasan Husayn al-Abidin al-Baqir al-Sadiq al-Kazim ar-Rida al-Taqi al-Naqi al-Askari al-Mahdi Leadership Nabi Dede Murshid Rehber Baba Cem Cemevi Important figures Ahi Evran Haji Bektash Veli Sarı Saltık Demir Baba Teke Arabati Baba Teḱe Pir Sultan Abdal Kul Nesîmî Sheikh Bedreddin Börklüce Mustafa Torlak Kemal Baba Ishak Seyid Riza History Babak Khorramdin Maziar Babai revolt Celali rebellions Ottoman persecution of Alevis Baba Zünnun Rebellion Kalender Çelebi rebellion Nur Ali Halife rebellion Şahkulu rebellion Battle of Chaldiran Abaza rebellion Koçgiri rebellion Dersim massacre Maraş massacre Çorum massacre Sivas massacre Gazi Quarter riots 2025 massacres of Syrian Alawites Islam portal v t e Overview [ edit ] A ḥāl is by nature transient and one should not attempt to prolong it. It results from psychological or spiritual influences which affect the man during his progress towards God. Related concepts are ecstasy ( wajd ) , annihilation ( istilam ) , happiness ( bast ) , despondency ( qabd ) , awakening ( sahû ) , intoxication ( sukr ) , etc. They arise like flashes on the horizon, blinding flashes of lightning which disappear immediately. However, these stages are necessary for the liberating experience of Man; thanks to them he may distinguish the contingent from the consciousness anything, except that which is destined to endure. According to Ibn Arabi , Fanaa ( al-fanâ ) (extinction) is the apex of the aḥwāl .

Ḥāl in Sufism [ edit ] Since aḥwāl are considered in Sufism to be gifts from God, there is nothing on the part of human beings that can be done to ensure that they are granted, for man is merely the receiver. Yet, unlike material gifts exchanged among men, man cannot do anything to avoid experiencing these special states.

[ 2 ] No prerequisites have been determined for man to receive any particular ḥāl since it has been noted that even the unreligious occasionally experience states that have been granted by God. The explanation given for this phenomenon follows from the idea that there is an overabundance of divine grace and, thus, it must necessarily come into contact with nonbelievers at times. Likewise, those that are in the early stages of their spirituality may experience aḥwāl just as much as the more advanced Sufis.

[ 2 ] When enduring a particular ḥāl , such as that of ecstasy, one must note that only those who have already experienced that state can truly comprehend what it is like. As well, for the one experiencing a state of ecstasy to be understood, only those that are in a similar state will understand what is being said.

[ 3 ] This also applies to one's work, since someone who is viewing a piece of art or reading a particular passage must be in the same ḥāl as the creator was at the time of work's creation. Failing to do this will only result in a lack of understanding between the creator and his audience.

[ 4 ] It is generally thought that aḥwāl are only experienced intermittently for a short time, but others such as Abd al-Karīm ibn Hawāzin Qushayri argue that each state is continuous, and that there is a necessary succession from one state to the other. For him, once a state has been granted by God, man maintains that state, or condition, until he has been given a new state that is spiritually higher than the previous.

[ 5 ] Others would argue that his definition of a state actually pertains to a station or spiritual stage ( maqām ) which is a completely separate notion in Sufism as, in contrast to a ḥāl , it is usually not granted by God but only achieved on the basis of individual merit and efforts. His reason for making this claim, however, comes from a hadith given by Muhammad (Peace and Blessings Be Upon Him, as well as an explanation of that hadith from Abu Ali ad-Daqqaq. The passage is written as follows: My heart becomes shrouded, so that I ask God Most High for pardon seventy times a day. In regard to this hadith, I hears Abu 'Ali ad-Daqqaq, God's mercy upon him, say: “The prophet (God’s mercy and blessings upon him) was continually rising in his states. When he rose from one condition (ḥāla) to a higher one, he might glance at the condition he has risen beyond, and he would count it as a covering or shroud in relationship to what he had attained. His states were continually being intensified." [ 5 ] Given this passage from Muhammad, it would appear that Qushayrī is correct in making his claim, but many Sufis still consider each state to come and go like a flash of lightning. Still others would claim that while most aḥwāl are short-lived, the more advanced aḥwāl can remain with man for a longer period of time.

Important aḥwāl [ edit ] Ḥāl of murāqaba (watching) [ edit ] This ḥāl is one in which its receiver can experience a feeling of joy or of fear depending on which aspect of God has been revealed to him.

[ 6 ] Ḥāl of qurb (nearness) [ edit ] Experiencing this ḥāl causes one to lose consciousness of his acts, and to concentrate only on the acts of God. The spirits of Awliaa' Allah (Friends of God) are able to give their qurb and suhbat to the seekers of God either while living or having left this world. Their attention towards the salik (seeker) or student causes the state of estacsy (wajd), but if someone gets control it's better and more fruitful.

[ 6 ] Ḥāl of wajd (ecstasy) [ edit ] A state that is described by its opposites, as the one experiencing it can feel either fear or love, sorrow or joy, or contentment or restlessness.

[ 6 ] Ḥāl of sukr (intoxication) [ edit ] Followed by a ḥāl of ṣahw (sobriety), this state is characterized by an association with God that inhibits man from being fully aware of his surroundings.

[ 6 ] Ḥāl of wudd (intimacy) [ edit ] A state that includes a feeling of awe coupled with content from the divine presence that fills the receiver's heart.

[ 6 ] Other aḥwāl [ edit ] Additional aḥwāl found in Sufism include: grief, expansion, vexation, contraction, or need.

[ 7 ] Distinction from maqām [ edit ] Generally in Sufism there is a clear distinction between the various aḥwāl given by God and the Sufi term for a stage, maqām . The main difference between the two terms is the idea that a ḥāl is a gift from God, and cannot be sought after, whereas a maqām is only attained through rigorous spiritual practice. In this way, a maqām is something that can be pursued and whose attainment relies heavily on the actions of man.

[ 8 ] As well, once one has achieved a particular station, they remain in that station until they have moved onto a higher one; thus making it more permanent than the different aḥwāl that man can experience.

[ 7 ] Ḥāl outside Sufism [ edit ] Outside the realm of Sufism, the term ḥāl is used more generally in Arabic and Persian to describe any positive experience of one's soul that transcends reality. In other words, it could be thought of as a state in which man has an unexplained feeling.

[ 9 ] In this sense such states are not necessarily linked with a divine experience, or encounter, and they are always desired states.

Ḥāl in the Persian arts [ edit ] As the Persian use of a ḥāl simply constitutes a leaving of one's normal consciousness, it maintains a great importance when speaking of Persian art, both musically and visually. In fact, it has become so common in among Persian artists that it is now used synonymously with an artist's ability to achieve authenticity ( eṣālat ). It is therefore possible for one to make the statement that an artist ‘has ḥāl ’, ‘plays with ḥāl ’, or even that he is ‘experiencing his own ḥāl .’ [ 4 ] Especially in Persian music ḥāl is significant because musicians tend to follow the notion that the harmonies and melodies found in their works are able to bring a listener from one state to another. Reaching certain states also allows the musician himself to perform a piece exactly as it was originally written, either by him or someone else.

[ 10 ] This idea is heavily based on the Sufi use of the term, though it does not follow it strictly.

Resources [ edit ] ^ "ḥāl" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ a b Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (1972).

Suffi Essays . Albany: State U of New York P. p. 73.

ISBN 978-1-871031-41-6 .

^ Sells, Michael A., ed. (1996).

. Early Islamic Mysticism: Sufi, Qur'an, Mir'raj, Poetic and Theological . Mahwah: Paulist. p. 226.

ISBN 0-8091-3619-8 .

^ a b During, Jean.

"Ḥāl" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Retrieved 29 Mar 2011 .

^ a b Sells, Michael A., ed. (1996).

. Early Islamic Mysticism: Sufi, Qur'an, Mir'raj, Poetic and Theological . Mahwah: Paulist. p. 104.

ISBN 0-8091-3619-8 .

^ a b c d e Doniger, Wendy, ed. (1999).

Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions . Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster. pp.

406 .

ISBN 978-0-87779-044-0 .

^ a b Qushayrī, ʻAbd al-Karīm ibn Hawāzin (2007).

Al-Qushayrī's Epistle on Sufism: Al-Risala al- . Reading, U.K.: Garnet. p. 78.

ISBN 978-1-85964-185-9 .

^ Gülen, M. Fethullah (2006).

Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism: Emerald Hills of the Heart, Vol. 1 . Somerset: The Light. p. 21.

ISBN 978-1-932099-23-2 .

^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (1972).

Suffi Essays . Albany: State U of New York P. p. 74.

ISBN 978-1-871031-41-6 .

^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (1972).

"The Influence of Sufism on Traditional Persian Music" (PDF) .

Studies in Comparative Religion .

6 (4) . Retrieved 29 Mar 2011 .

Theophanies and Lights in the Thought of Ibn 'Arabi v t e Sufism terminology Sufis Abdal Ahl al-Khutwa Al-Insān al-Kāmil Bash Hezzab Dervish Fakir Hafiz Hezzab Imam Khatib Majzoob Marabout Mudaqiq [ ar ] Muqaddam Muqarrab Murshid Mutahaqiq [ ar ] Murid Nass al-Houdhour Pir Qalandar Qāriʾ Qutb Rabbani Salik Sheikh Siddiq Sufis ranks Talibe The Seven ranks [ ar ] Wali Wasil Concepts Aayane [ ar ] Aayane Thabita [ ar ] Aql Baqaa Dhawq Fana Ghaflah Hal Hijab Huwa Ihsan Ishq Ismul Azam Lataif-e-Sitta Maqam Nafs Qalb Ran Rūḥ Sadr Yaqeen Awrad Dhikr Djamaa [ ar ] Djoua [ ar ] Dua Ibara [ ar ] Ichara [ ar ] Latifa Lazimi Muhasabah Muraqabah Raising hands in Dua Sabr Sahar [ ar ] Salat al-Fatih Salawat Samt [ ar ] Shuhud [ ar ] Shukr Sufism pillars Tafakur Tahara [ ar ] Tahlia [ ar ] Takhlia [ ar ] Tawajud [ ar ] Tawakkul Tawassul Tazkiah Uzla [ ar ] Wajd Wazifa Zarruqiyya Wird Zuhd Waridates Barakah Basirah Bast [ ar ] Djadba [ ar ] Fath [ ar ] Haqiqa Hidayah Ilham Irfan Ishrak Karamat Kashf Khatir Ma'rifa Nūr Qabdh [ ar ] Rabita [ ar ] Ru'ya Secret Tajalli Thawab Uns [ ar ] Walayah Warid Misconducts Antinomianism Rahbaniya Shath Taqabbur Zandaqa Ceremonies Ashura Bay'ah Hadra Hizb Rateb Idjaza Mawlid Mawsim Salka Sbooa [ fr ] Sebiba Silsila Sufi orders Tariqa Tweeza Wezeea Ziyarat Arts Ashewiq [ ar ] Madih nabawi Nasheed Naʽat Qawwali Sama Sufi cosmology Sufism history Sufi literature Sufi metaphysics Sufi music Sufis persecution Sufi philosophy Sufi poetry Sufi psychology Sufi whirling Places Daara Dargah Datuk Keramat Eidgah Gonbad Gongbei Jama masjid Jama'at Khana Khalwa Khalawi Khanqah Külliye Kuttab Madrasa Maqam Maqbara Mausoleum Mazar Mosque Musalla Qubba Rauza Ribat Surau Takya Turbah Türbe Zawiya Objects Ammama Balgha Burnous Djellaba Gandoura Jellabiya Khirqa Misbaha Miswak Prayer rug Qashabiya Tagelmust Taqiyah Tarboosh Turban v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Portals : Religion Islam Education Psychology Authority control databases İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hal_(Sufism)&oldid=1285854548 " Category : Sufi philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from December 2010 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing more viewpoints from December 2010 Articles needing additional references from April 2007 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 06:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hal (Sufism) 8 languages Add topic

