Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Mystical traditions and philosophy 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Azoth 8 languages Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Italiano Latina Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Idealized substance in alchemy This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards .

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( March 2017 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Azoth" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fourth woodcut illustration from Basil Valentine 's Azoth (1613) Sixth woodcut from the series in Basil Valentine 's Azoth Azoth is a universal remedy or potent solvent sought after in the realm of alchemy , akin to alkahest —a distinct alchemical substance. The quest for Azoth was the crux of numerous alchemical endeavors, symbolized by the Caduceus . Initially coined to denote an esoteric formula pursued by alchemists, akin to the Philosopher's Stone , the term Azoth later evolved into a poetic expression for the element mercury .

[ citation needed ] The etymology of 'Azoth' traces to Medieval Latin as a modification of 'azoc,' ultimately derived from the Arabic al-za'buq (الزئبق), meaning 'the mercury.' [ 1 ] The scientific community does not recognize the existence of this substance. The myth of Azoth may stem from misinterpreted observations of solvents like mercury, capable of dissolving gold. Additionally, the myth might have been fueled by the occult inclinations nurtured by alchemists, who rooted and steered their chemical explorations in superstitions and dogmas.

[ citation needed ] Description [ edit ] Azoth was believed to be the essential agent of transformation in alchemy. It is the name given by ancient alchemists to mercury, which they believed to be the animating spirit hidden in all matter that makes transmutation possible. The word comes from the Arabic al-zā'būq which means "mercury". The word occurs in the writings of many early alchemists, such as Zosimos , Olympiodorus , and Jābir ibn Hayyān (Geber).

[ citation needed ] Mystical traditions and philosophy [ edit ] Azoth has also been linked to various mystical and spiritual practices beyond alchemy. In the context of Renaissance magic , it was often associated with the idea of spiritual enlightenment and the purification of the soul. Some mystical traditions regarded Azoth as a metaphor for the internal transformation required to achieve a higher state of consciousness. It was thought to embody the process of turning base human traits into divine virtues, akin to the transformation of base metals into gold. This spiritual interpretation of Azoth influenced numerous esoteric and hermetic schools of thought, contributing to its lasting legacy in Western mystical traditions. Additionally, Azoth's connection to mercury and its fluid, transformative properties also made it a symbol of adaptability and change in broader philosophical contexts.

[ citation needed ] In the Kabbalah , Azoth is related to the Ein Soph or 'the Endless One'.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Anima mundi Panacea (medicine) Prima materia Viriditas References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of Azoth" . Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 22 July 2013 .

Crowley, Aleister (June 1986).

777 And Other Qabalistic Writings of Aleister Crowley . York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1977.

ISBN 0-87728-670-1 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Azoth .

Interpretation of Azoth of the Philosophers (by Dennis William Hauck) What is the Azoth?

and The Azoth Ritual at Azothalchemy.org v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Azoth&oldid=1275057503 " Categories : Alchemical substances Mythological medicines and drugs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from March 2017 All articles needing rewrite Articles needing additional references from June 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 February 2025, at 20:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Azoth 8 languages Add topic

