Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nature of geophysics 2 Branches of geophysics 3 History of geophysics 4 General geophysics concepts Toggle General geophysics concepts subsection 4.1 Gravity 4.2 Heat flow 4.3 Electricity 4.3.1 Atmospheric electricity 4.3.2 Electricity in Earth 4.4 Electromagnetic waves 4.5 Fluid dynamics 4.6 Magnetism 4.6.1 Geomagnetism subfields 4.6.2 Earth's magnetic field 4.6.2.1 Description 4.6.2.2 Sources 4.6.2.3 Short-term changes 4.6.2.4 Long term behavior 4.6.3 Magnetostratigraphy 4.6.4 Rock magnetism 4.6.5 Tectonic applications 4.6.6 Magnetic survey 4.7 Radioactivity 4.8 Mineral physics 4.9 Vibration 5 Closely allied sciences Toggle Closely allied sciences subsection 5.1 Atmospheric sciences 5.2 Geology 5.3 Engineering 5.4 Water on the Earth 6 Society Toggle Society subsection 6.1 Influential persons 6.2 Organizations 6.3 Publications 7 Geophysics lists 8 See also 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Outline of geophysics Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Topics in the physics of the Earth and its vicinity Seismic velocities and boundaries in the interior of the Earth sampled by seismic waves.

The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to geophysics: Geophysics – the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods. The term geophysics sometimes refers only to the geological applications: Earth's shape ; its gravitational and magnetic fields ; its internal structure and composition ; its dynamics and their surface expression in plate tectonics ,  the generation of magmas , volcanism and rock formation. However, modern geophysics organizations have a broader definition that includes the hydrological cycle including snow and ice ; fluid dynamics of the oceans and the atmosphere ; electricity and magnetism in the ionosphere and magnetosphere and solar-terrestrial relations; and analogous problems associated with the Moon and other planets .

Nature of geophysics [ edit ] Geophysics can be described as all of the following: An academic discipline – branch of knowledge that is taught and researched at the college or university level. Disciplines are defined (in part), and recognized by the academic journals in which research is published, and the learned societies and academic departments or faculties to which their practitioners belong.

A scientific field (a branch of science ) – widely recognized category of specialized expertise within science, and typically embodies its own terminology and nomenclature. Such a field will usually be represented by one or more scientific journals, where peer-reviewed research is published. There are several geophysics-related scientific journals.

A natural science – one that seeks to elucidate the rules that govern the natural world using empirical and scientific methods .

A physical science – one that studies non-living systems.

An earth science – one that studies the planet Earth and its surroundings.

A biological science – one that studies the effect of organisms on their physical environment.

An interdisciplinary field – one that overlaps atmospheric sciences , geology , glaciology , hydrology , oceanography and physics .

Branches of geophysics [ edit ] Biogeophysics – study of how plants, microbial activity and other organisms alter geologic materials and affect geophysical signatures.

Exploration geophysics – the use of surface methods to detect concentrations of ore minerals and hydrocarbons .

Geophysical fluid dynamics – study of naturally occurring, large-scale flows on Earth and other planets .

Geodesy – measurement and representation of the Earth, including its gravitational field.

Geodynamics – study of modes of transport deformation within the Earth: rock deformation, mantle convection , heat flow , and lithosphere dynamics.

Geomagnetism – study of the Earth's magnetic field , including its origin, telluric currents driven by the magnetic field, the Van Allen belts , and the interaction between the magnetosphere and the solar wind .

Mathematical geophysics – development and applications of mathematical methods and techniques for the solution of geophysical problems.

Mineral physics – science of materials that compose the interior of planets, particularly the Earth.

Near-surface geophysics – the use of geophysical methods to investigate small-scale features in the shallow (tens of meters) subsurface.

Paleomagnetism – measurement of the orientation of the Earth's magnetic field over the geologic past.

Planetary Science – science of studying planets, celestial bodies, and planetary systems and their properties and processes.

Seismology – study of the structure and composition of the Earth through seismic waves , and of surface deformations during earthquakes and seismic hazards .

Tectonophysics – study of the physical processes that cause and result from plate tectonics.

History of geophysics [ edit ] History of geophysics History of geomagnetism Timeline of the development of tectonophysics Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis General geophysics concepts [ edit ] Gravity [ edit ] Gravity of Earth Bouguer anomaly Isostatic gravity anomaly Geoid Geopotential Gravity anomaly Undulation of the geoid Heat flow [ edit ] Geothermal gradient Internal heating Electricity [ edit ] Atmospheric electricity [ edit ] Atmospheric electricity Lightning Sprite (lightning) Electricity in Earth [ edit ] Electrical resistivity tomography Induced polarization Seismoelectrical method Spectral induced polarisation Spontaneous potential Telluric current Electromagnetic waves [ edit ] Alfvén wave Dawn chorus (electromagnetic) Hiss (electromagnetic) Magnetotellurics Seismo-electromagnetics Transient electromagnetics Whistler (radio) Fluid dynamics [ edit ] Geophysical fluid dynamics Isostasy Post-glacial rebound Mantle convection Geodynamo Magnetism [ edit ] Geomagnetism subfields [ edit ] Environmental magnetism Magnetostratigraphy Paleomagnetism Rock magnetism Earth's magnetic field [ edit ] Main article: Earth's magnetic field Description [ edit ] Geomagnetic pole Magnetic declination Magnetic inclination North Magnetic Pole South Magnetic Pole Sources [ edit ] Geodynamo Magnetic anomaly Magnetosphere Short-term changes [ edit ] Secular variation Geomagnetic secular variation Geomagnetic jerk Long term behavior [ edit ] Apparent polar wander Geomagnetic excursion Geomagnetic pole Geomagnetic reversal Geomagnetic secular variation Polar wander True polar wander Magnetostratigraphy [ edit ] Archaeomagnetic dating Polarity chron Magnetostratigraphy Superchron (currently redirected to Geomagnetic reversal#Moyero Reversed Superchron) Rock magnetism [ edit ] Rock magnetism Magnetic mineralogy Natural remanent magnetization Saturation isothermal remanence Thermoremanent magnetization Viscous remanent magnetization Tectonic applications [ edit ] Plate reconstruction Magnetic survey [ edit ] Aeromagnetic survey Geophysical survey Magnetic survey (archaeology) Magnetometer Radioactivity [ edit ] Age of the Earth Geochronology Radiometric dating Mineral physics [ edit ] Mineral physics Creep Elasticity Melting Rheology Thermal expansion Viscosity Vibration [ edit ] Seismology Earthquake – a motion that causes seismic waves .

Aftershock – follows larger earthquake.

Blind thrust – along a thrust fault that does not show on the Earth's surface.

Foreshock – precedes larger earthquake.

Harmonic tremor – long-duration, with distinct frequencies, associated with a volcanic eruption.

Interplate – at the boundary between two tectonic plates .

Intraplate – in the interior of a tectonic plate.

Megathrust – at subduction zones Remotely triggered earthquakes – after main shock but outside the aftershock zone.

Slow – over a period of hours to months.

Submarine – under a body of water.

Supershear – rupture propagates faster than seismic shear wave velocity.

Tsunami – triggers a tsunami .

Seismic waves P S Surface Love Raleigh Reflection seismology Seismic refraction Seismic tomography Structure of the Earth Closely allied sciences [ edit ] Atmospheric sciences [ edit ] Atmospheric sciences Aeronomy – the study of the physical structure and chemistry of the atmosphere.

Meteorology – the study of weather processes and forecasting.

Climatology – the study of weather conditions averaged over a period of time.

Geology [ edit ] Geology Mineralogy – the study of chemistry , crystal structure , and physical (including optical ) properties of minerals .

Petrophysics – The study of the origin, structure, and composition of rocks.

Volcanology – the study of volcanoes , volcanic features ( hot springs , geysers , fumaroles ), volcanic rock, and heat flow related to volcanoes.

Engineering [ edit ] Geophysical engineering – the application of geophysics to the engineering design of facilities including roads, tunnels, and mines.

Water on the Earth [ edit ] Glaciology – the study of ice and natural phenomena that involve ice, particularly glaciers .

Hydrology – the study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets.

Physical oceanography – the study of physical conditions and physical processes within the ocean, especially the motions and physical properties of ocean waters.

Society [ edit ] Influential persons [ edit ] List of geophysicists Organizations [ edit ] American Geophysical Union Canadian Geophysical Union Environmental and Engineering Geophysical Society European Association of Geoscientists and Engineers European Geosciences Union International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics Royal Astronomical Society Society of Exploration Geophysicists Seismological Society of America Publications [ edit ] Geophysics journals Important publications in geophysics (physics) Geophysics lists [ edit ] Main category: Geophysics lists See also [ edit ] Geophysics portal Earth sciences portal Physics portal Outline of geology Outline of physics External links [ edit ] Geophysics at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences v t e Geophysics Overview Outline Geophysicists Subfields Geodynamics Geophysical survey Geomagnetism Geomathematics Geophysical fluid dynamics Mineral physics Near-surface geophysics Paleomagnetism Seismology Tectonophysics Physical phenomena Chandler wobble Coriolis effect Earth's energy budget Earth's magnetic field Geodynamo Geothermal gradient Gravity of Earth Mantle convection Precession of the equinoxes Seismic wave Tide Related disciplines Geodesy Geophysics portal Category Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐vq4lm
Cached time: 20250812084747
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.247 seconds
Real time usage: 0.360 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 752/1000000
Revision size: 11920/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 23292/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 584/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 20883/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.142/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2607931/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  271.340      1 -total
 32.03%   86.899      2 Template:Navbox
 26.76%   72.611      1 Template:Outline_footer
 25.22%   68.431      1 Template:Sisterlinks
 21.85%   59.285      1 Template:Short_description
 12.70%   34.465      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.34%   22.630      1 Template:Portal
  7.03%   19.079      1 Template:Geophysics_navbox
  5.97%   16.193      1 Template:Main
  5.96%   16.171      3 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:33462592:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812084747 and revision id 1243520220. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_geophysics&oldid=1243520220 " Categories : Outlines of sciences Outlines Geophysics Geophysics lists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 1 September 2024, at 22:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outline of geophysics Add languages Add topic

