Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Timing and duration 2 Prediction and visibility 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Orbital pass 2 languages فارسی 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Event during which a spacecraft can be viewed from a specified ground location Visible pass of the International Space Station and Space Shuttle Atlantis over Tampa, Florida, on mission STS-132 , May 18, 2010 (five-minute exposure) An orbital pass (or simply pass ) is the period in which a spacecraft is above the local horizon , and thus available for line-of-sight communication with a given ground station , receiver , or relay satellite, or for visual sighting. The beginning of a pass is termed acquisition of signal (AOS); the end of a pass is termed loss of signal (LOS).

[ 1 ] The point at which a spacecraft comes closest to a ground observer is the time of closest approach (TCA).

[ 1 ] Timing and duration [ edit ] The timing and duration of passes depends on the characteristics of the orbit a satellite occupies, as well as the ground topography and any occulting objects on the ground (such as buildings), or in space (for planetary probes, or for spacecraft using relay satellites).

[ 2 ] The longest duration ground pass will be experienced by an observer directly on the ground track of the satellite.

[ 3 ] Path loss is greatest toward the start and end of a ground pass, [ 4 ] as is Doppler shifting for Earth-orbiting satellites.

[ 5 ] Satellites in geosynchronous orbit may be continuously visible from a single ground station, whereas satellites in low Earth orbit only offer short-duration ground passes [ 3 ] (although longer contacts may be made via relay satellite networks such as TDRSS ).

Satellite constellations , such as those of satellite navigation systems, may be designed so that a minimum subset of the constellation is always visible from any point on the Earth, thereby providing continuous coverage .

[ 2 ] Prediction and visibility [ edit ] Main article: List of satellite pass predictors A number of web-based and mobile applications produce predictions of passes for known satellites.

[ 6 ] In order to be observed with the naked eye , a spacecraft must reflect sunlight towards the observer; thus, naked-eye observations are generally restricted to twilight hours, during which the spacecraft is in sunlight but the observer is not. A satellite flare occurs when sunlight is reflected by flat surfaces on the spacecraft. The International Space Station , the largest artificial satellite of Earth, has a maximum apparent magnitude of –5.9 , [ 7 ] brighter than the planet Venus .

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Ground track , the path on the surface of the Earth directly below a satellite Satellite revisit period , the time elapsed between observations of the same point on Earth by a satellite Satellite watching , as a hobby References [ edit ] ^ a b "AOS, TCA, and LOS" . Northern Lights Software Associates . Retrieved 17 November 2015 .

^ a b Wood, Lloyd (July 2006).

Introduction to satellite constellations: Orbital types, uses and related facts (PDF) .

ISU Summer Session . Retrieved 17 November 2015 .

^ a b Del Re, Encrico; Pierucci, Laura, eds. (6 December 2012).

Satellite Personal Communications for Future-generation Systems . Springer. p. 19.

ISBN 978-1447101314 . Retrieved 17 November 2015 .

^ Richharia, Madhavendra (2014).

Mobile Satellite Communications: Principles and Trends (Second ed.). Wiley. pp.

106– 107.

ISBN 978-1118810064 . Retrieved 17 November 2015 .

^ Montenbruck, Oliver; Eberhard, Gill (2012).

Satellite Orbits: Models, Methods, and Applications . Springer. p. 229.

ISBN 978-3642583513 . Retrieved 17 November 2015 .

^ Dickinson, David (July 11, 2013).

"How to Spot and Track Satellites" .

Universe Today . Retrieved 17 November 2015 .

^ "ISS Information - Heavens-above.com" . Heavens-above . Retrieved 2007-12-22 .

^ "HORIZONS Web Interface" .

Solar System Dynamics .

Jet Propulsion Laboratory . Retrieved 13 July 2016 .

v t e Spaceflight General Astrodynamics History Timeline Space Race Records Accidents and incidents Space launch Space policy Australia China European Space Agency European Union India Japan North Korea South Korea Russia Soviet Union United States Space law Outer Space Treaty Rescue Agreement Space Liability Convention Registration Convention Moon Treaty Space warfare Space command Space force Militarisation of space Private spaceflight Billionaire space race Applications Astronomy Earth observation Archaeology Imagery and mapping Reconnaissance Weather and environment monitoring Communications satellite Internet Radio Telephone Television Satellite navigation Commercial use of space Space launch market competition Space architecture Space exploration Space research Space technology Space weather Human spaceflight General Astronaut commercial Life-support system Animals in space Bioastronautics Space suit Extravehicular activity Overview effect Weightlessness Space toilet Space tourism Space colonization Space diving Programs Vostok Mercury Voskhod Gemini Soyuz Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz Space Shuttle Mir Shuttle–Mir International Space Station Shenzhou Tiangong New Shepard Artemis Health issues Effect of spaceflight on the human body Space adaptation syndrome Health threat from cosmic rays Space psychology Psychological and sociological effects Space and survival Space medicine Space nursing Space sexology Spacecraft Launch vehicle Rocket Space capsule Orbital module Reentry capsule Service module Spaceplane Robotic spacecraft Satellite Space probe Lander Rover Self-replicating spacecraft Space telescope Spacecraft propulsion Rocket engine Electric propulsion Solar sail Gravity assist Destinations Sub-orbital Orbital Geocentric Geosynchronous Interplanetary Interstellar Intergalactic Space launch Direct ascent Escape velocity Expendable and reusable launch systems Launch pad Non-rocket spacelaunch Spaceport Ground segment Flight controller Ground station Pass Mission control center Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Orbital_pass&oldid=1085812601 " Categories : Astrodynamics Spacecraft communication Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 May 2022, at 15:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Orbital pass 2 languages Add topic

