Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Extent 2 Islands in the channel Toggle Islands in the channel subsection 2.1 Comoros 2.2 France 2.3 Mozambique 3 History 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Mozambique Channel 81 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Malagasy მარგალური Монгол Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 18°S 41°E ﻿ / ﻿ 18°S 41°E ﻿ / -18; 41 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian Ocean strait Mozambique Channel Location of Mozambique Channel Mozambique Channel Coordinates 18°S 41°E ﻿ / ﻿ 18°S 41°E ﻿ / -18; 41 Type Arm Part of Indian Ocean Basin countries Madagascar and Mozambique Max. length 1,600 km (990 mi) Max. width 1,000 km (620 mi) Min. width 419 km (260 mi) Surface area 700,000 km 2 (270,000 sq mi) Max. depth 3,292 m (10,801 ft) The Mozambique Channel ( French : Canal du Mozambique , Malagasy : Lakandranon'i Mozambika , Portuguese : Canal de Moçambique ) is an arm of the Indian Ocean located between the Southeast African countries of Madagascar and Mozambique . The channel is about 1,700 km (900 nmi; 1,100 mi) long and 419 km (226 nmi; 260 mi) across at its narrowest point, and reaches a depth of 3,292 m (10,801 ft) about 230 km (124 nmi; 143 mi) off the coast of Mozambique. A warm current , the Mozambique Current , flows in a southward direction in the channel, leading into the Agulhas Current off the east coast of Southern Africa .

[ 1 ] Extent [ edit ] The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) defines the limits of the Mozambique Channel as follows: [ 2 ] On the North.

A line from the estuary of the River Rovuma ( 10°28′S 40°26′E ﻿ / ﻿ 10.467°S 40.433°E ﻿ / -10.467; 40.433 ) to Ras Habu, the northernmost point of Ile Grande Comore , the northernmost of the Comore (Comoro) Islands , to Cap d'Ambre (Cape Amber), the northern extremity of Madagascar ( 11°57′S 49°17′E ﻿ / ﻿ 11.950°S 49.283°E ﻿ / -11.950; 49.283 ).

On the East.

The west coast of Madagascar.

On the South.

A line from Cap Sainte-Marie , the southern extremity of Madagascar to Ponto do Ouro on the mainland ( 26°53′S 32°56′E ﻿ / ﻿ 26.883°S 32.933°E ﻿ / -26.883; 32.933 ).

On the West.

The coast of Southern Africa .

Islands in the channel [ edit ] Comoros [ edit ] Grande Comore Mohéli Anjouan France [ edit ] Region of France : Mayotte (claimed by Comoros ) Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean , district of French Southern and Antarctic Lands : Glorioso Islands (claimed by Madagascar and Comoros ) Juan de Nova Island (claimed by Madagascar ) Europa Island (claimed by Madagascar ) Bassas da India (claimed by Madagascar ) Mozambique [ edit ] Primeiras and Segundas Archipelago Ilha do Fogo History [ edit ] On 15 November 1939, under the command of Captain Patrick (Paddy) Dove , the British Coastal Tanker Africa Shell was sailing through the Mozambique Channel en-passage from Quelimane to Lourenço Marques . During the morning, at a point 10 nautical miles (19 km; 12 mi) south-southwest from the lighthouse at Cape Zavora , she was spotted by the German Pocket Battleship Admiral Graf Spee , under the command of Captain Hans Langsdorff , and which was embarked upon a raiding sortie .

Graf Spee ordered the Africa Shell to stop by the firing of a shot across her bow . Having stopped the Africa Shell, a cutter with a boarding party was despatched from Graf Spee and boarded the tanker, the officer in charge addressing Captain Dove in perfect English with the sentence, "Good morning, captain. Sorry; fortunes of war" .

[ 3 ] The boarding party ordered the ship's crew into their lifeboats before stripping the Africa Shell of all foodstuffs including a small amount of wine. The crew were ordered to row for shore, except for Captain Dove who was taken prisoner on board the Graf Spee . Dove was incensed by the interception of his ship, and complained personally to Langsdorff, citing that the Africa Shell was within Portuguese territorial waters and that the action was in clear violation of international law.

[ 4 ] [ 3 ] [ 5 ] The boarding party set scuttling charges and made their way back to the Graf Spee . The detonation of the charges sank the Africa Shell .

In 1942, the Mozambique Channel was a World War II clashpoint during the Battle of Madagascar .

France is present through Mayotte and the Scattered Islands, and maintains a military presence via Réunion, with naval assets patrolling fairly regularly. These islets provide exclusive economic zones (EEZs), rich in fisheries resources and potentially hydrocarbons. For France, the real challenge is to preserve its sovereignty over Mayotte, vis-à-vis the Comoros, and especially over the Scattered Islands, in the face of Malagasy threats. The Malagasy are legally contesting the French presence, believing that these islets were dependencies of Madagascar and that once independence was achieved, they should have reverted to Madagascar, not to France.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Mozambique Channel" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. 2015 . Retrieved 27 September 2015 .

^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 October 2011 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 .

^ a b "Motor Vessel AFRICA SHELL built by George Brown & Co. (Marine) Ltd in 1939 for Shell Company of East Africa Ltd. - Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co. Ltd., London, Tanker" .

clydeships.co.uk .

^ "MV Africa Shell (1939)" .

Wrecksite . Retrieved 29 December 2020 .

^ "I Was There! - Our Ships were Sunk by the 'Graf Spee' - The War Illustrated" .

thewarillustrated.info . Archived from the original on 14 May 2011.

^ "Commerce mondial, hydrocarbures, pêche: pourquoi le canal du Mozambique est «une zone stratégique»" .

Radio France International . 23 April 2025 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Japanese Submarines at Madagascar and the Mozambique Channel Beach, Chandler B., ed. (1914).

"Mozambique Channel" .

The New Student's Reference Work . Chicago: F. E. Compton and Co.

v t e African seas Oceans and seas Alboran Sea Atlantic Ocean Indian Ocean Levantine Sea Mediterranean Sea Red Sea Southern Ocean Gulfs and bays Abu Qir Bay Acheïl Dakhlet Al Hoceima Bay Algiers Bay Algoa Bay Ambas Bay Ana Chaves Bay Angra de Cintra Antongil Bay Antsiranana Bay Arab's Gulf Baía Almeida Baía da Condúcia Baía da Corimba Baía de Mocambo Baía de Mossuril Baía de Namibe Baia de Porto Amboim Baía de Santa Marta Baía de Sucujaque Baía de Tombua Baía do Ambriz Baía do Bengo Baía do Dande Baía do Govuro Baía do Lúrio Baía do Nzeto Baía do Suto Baie de Gorée Baie de Sangareya Bandombaai Bay of Anfile Bay of Arguin Bay of Arzew Bay of Aseb Bay of Beylul Bay of Edd Bay of Hawakil Bay of Langarano Bay of Saint-Augustin Bay of Tangier Benguela Bay Bera’esoli Betty’s Bay Bight of Benin Bight of Biafra Bocock’s Bay Bombetoka Bay Bootbaai Bosluisbaai Cabinda Bay Cape Cross Bay Cape Negro Bay Chake-Chake Bay Chameis Bay Chwaka Bay Conception Bay Cuio Bay Dakhlet Nouadhibou Dalwakteah Bay Deurloopbaai Doringbaai Dungonab Bay Durissa Bay Elands Bay Enseada das Pombas Enseada de São Braz Enseada do Catumbo Enseada do Chalungo Enseada do Quicombo Enseada do Quitungo Enseada dos Três Irmãos Equimina Bay False Bay Farta Bay Fernao Veloso Bay Foul Bay Frederik se Baai Ghoubbet-el-Kharab Grosse Bucht Gulf of Aden Gulf of 'Agig Gulf of Gabès Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Hammamet Gulf of Sidra Gulf of Suez Gulf of Tadjoura Gulf of Tunis Gulf of Zula Hafun Bay South Hann Bay Harrison Cove Henties Bay Hirghīgo Bahir Selat’ē Horingbaai Hottentotsbaai Hurdiyo Hydra Bay Inhambane Bay Jammer Bucht John Owen Bay Kalawy Bay Kiwaiyu Bay Lambert Bay Lamu Bay Langbaai Loango Bay Lobito Bay Luanda Bay Lüderitz Bay McDougall Bay Manza Bay Maputo Bay Markusbaai Memba Bay Menai Bay Meob Bay Mietjie Frans se Baai Moraha Bahir Selat’ē Mossel Bay Möwebaai Noopbaai Oran Gulf Pemba Bay Pipas Bay Plaatjieskraalbaai Platbaai Plettenbergbaai Pointe-Noire Bay Porto Alexandre, Angola Prinzen Bucht Río de Oro Bay Rock Bay Roode Bay Rooiwalbaai Saint Francis Bay Saint Francis Bay (Eastern Cape) St Helena Bay Saint Sebastian Bay Saldanha Bay Sandwich Harbour Sierra Bay Skoonbergbaai Skurfbaai Slangbaai Sodwana Bay Sofala Bay Somnaasbaai Spencer Bay Spoegrivierbaai Struisbaai Swartstraat Table Bay Thysbaai Tietiesbaai Ungama Bay Walker Bay Walvis Bay (bay) Yawri Bay Yof Bay Straits Bab-el-Mandeb Bab Iskender Canal de Bolama Canal de Bolola Canal de Caió Canal de São Vicente Canal do Meio Guardafui Channel Mafia Channel Massawa Channel Mozambique Channel‎ Pemba Channel Shubuk Channel Strait of Gibraltar Strait of Sicily Straits of Tiran Tigres Strait Zanzibar Channel Historical seas Aethiopian Sea Erythraean Sea Sea of Zanj Africa portal Oceans portal v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF National France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mozambique_Channel&oldid=1302143203 " Categories : Mozambique Channel Channels of the Indian Ocean Straits of Africa Borders of Mozambique Borders of Madagascar International straits Borders of the Comoros Borders of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2021 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Malagasy-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 16:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mozambique Channel 81 languages Add topic

