Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 Notes 3 External links Toggle the table of contents List of optical illusions 2 languages العربية 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources .

This is a list of visual illusions .

Name Example Notes Afterimage illusion An afterimage or ghost image is a visual illusion involving an image continuing to appear in one's vision after the exposure to the original image has ceased.

Afterimage on empty shape (also known as color dove illusion ) This type of illusion is designed to exploit graphical similarities.

Ambiguous image These are images that can form two separate pictures. For example, the image shown forms a rabbit and a duck.

Ambigram A calligraphic design that has multiple or symmetric interpretations.

Ames room illusion An Ames room is a distorted room that is used to create a visual illusion.

Ames trapezoid window illusion A window is formed in the shape of a trapezium. It is often hung and spun around to provide the illusion that the window rotates through less than 180 degrees.

Asahi illusion A flower-like figure with petals is arranged in a circle, which are dark on the outside and lighter in transitions toward the middle. The inner part of the background is perceived as significantly brighter than the outer background.

Autokinetic effect The autokinetic effect , or autokinesis, occurs when a stationary image appears to move.

Autostereogram An autostereogram is a single-image stereogram (SIS), designed to create the visual illusion of a three-dimensional (3D) scene from a two-dimensional image in the human brain. An ASCII stereogram is an image that is formed using characters on a keyboard.

Magic Eye is an autostereogram book series.

Barberpole illusion The barber pole illusion is a visual illusion that reveals biases in the processing of visual motion in the human brain.

Benham's top When a disk that has lines or colours on it is spun, it can form arcs of colour.

Beta movement Movement that appears to occur when fixed pictures turn on and off.

Bezold Effect An apparent change of tone of a colour due to the alteration of the colour of the background.

Blivet Also known as "poiuyt" or "devil's fork", this illusion is an impossible image because in reality the shape cannot exist.

Café wall illusion This illusion is a pattern in which the mortar or grout between different coloured bricks or tiles on a wall appear to form non-parallel, straight lines, despite the lines being parallel (and straight). Its name comes from a café wall that produced the illusion.

Catoptric cistula A catoptric cistula is a box with insides made of mirrors so as to distort images of objects put into the box.

Checker shadow illusion The checker shadow illusion shows that when a shadow is cast onto a checked board, the colours of squares A and B in the photos appear to be different, when in fact they are the same.

Chubb illusion The Chubb illusion is an optical illusion or error in visual perception in which the apparent contrast of an object varies substantially to most viewers depending on its relative contrast to the field on which it is displayed.

Chromostereopsis Chromostereopsis is a visual illusion whereby the impression of depth is conveyed in two-dimensional color images, usually of red–blue or red–green colors.

Color constancy Colour constancy is an example of subjective constancy and a feature of the human color perception system which ensures that the perceived color of objects remains relatively constant under varying illumination conditions. A green apple for instance looks green to us at midday, when the main illumination is white sunlight, and also at sunset, when the main illumination is red.

Color phi phenomenon The color phi phenomenon is a perceptual illusion in which a disembodied perception of motion is produced by a succession of still images.

Contingent perceptual aftereffect Convergence micropsia Cornsweet illusion An illusion where two colours can obviously be seen to be different when placed directly beside each other; however, when the two colours are separated by a thick black line, they appear to be of the same hue.

Crater illusion A type of multistable illusion where an image of a concave object, rotated so that the light source is below, may sometimes appear convex, and vice versa. This phenomenon is because light sources tend to shine from above the subject.

Delboeuf illusion An optical illusion of relative size perception. The two black circles are exactly the same size; however, the one on the left seems larger.

Disappearing Model A trompe-l'œil body painting by Joanne Gair .

The dress An optical illusion resulting from the brain's attempt to discount coloured tinting from daylight and other sources.

[ 1 ] The dress was a viral phenomenon, which was either seen as blue and black or as white and gold. Its true colours were eventually confirmed to be blue and black.

[ 2 ] Ebbinghaus illusion The Ebbinghaus illusion , or Titchener circles, is an optical illusion of relative size perception. The two orange circles are exactly the same size; however, the one on the right appears larger.

Ehrenstein illusion The Ehrenstein illusion is an optical illusion studied by the German psychologist Walter Ehrenstein in which the sides of a square placed inside a pattern of concentric circles take an apparent curved shape.

Fata Morgana (mirage) Visible in a narrow band right above the horizon, Fata Morgana mirages significantly distort the object or objects on which they are based, often such that the object is completely unrecognizable. A Fata Morgana may be seen on land or at sea, in polar regions, or in deserts. It may involve almost any kind of distant object, including boats, islands, and the coastline.

Fechner color Figure-ground (perception) Filling-in Flash lag illusion Forced perspective Application used in film and architecture to create the illusion of larger, more distant objects.

Fraser spiral illusion The Fraser spiral illusion , or false spiral, or the twisted cord illusion, was first described by the British psychologist Sir James Fraser in 1908. The overlapping black arc segments appear to form a spiral; however, the arcs are a series of concentric circles.

Gravity hill Grid illusion Any kind of grid that deceives a person's vision. The two most common types of grid illusions are the Hermann grid illusion (1870) and the scintillating grid illusion (1994). The first is characterized by "ghostlike" grey blobs perceived at the intersections of a white (or light-colored) grid on a black background. The grey blobs disappear when looking directly at an intersection. The second is constructed by superimposing white discs on the intersections of orthogonal gray bars on a black background. Dark dots seem to appear and disappear rapidly at random intersections, hence the label "scintillating". When a person keeps their eyes directly on a single intersection, the dark dot does not appear. The dark dots disappear if one is too close to or too far from the image.

Hering illusion The Hering illusion (1861): When two straight and parallel lines are presented in front of radial background (like the spokes of a bicycle), the lines appear as if they were bowed outwards.

Hollow-Face illusion The Hollow-Face illusion is an optical illusion in which the perception of a concave mask of a face appears as a normal convex face.

Horizon dip Horizon dip , also known as a "sea dip": The horizon appears to rise from a dip in the middle distance.

Hybrid image A Hybrid image is an optical illusion developed at MIT in which an image can be interpreted in one of two different ways depending on viewing distance.

Illusory contours Illusory contours or subjective contours are a form of visual illusion where contours are perceived without a luminance or color change across the contour.

Impossible object Irradiation illusion Isometric illusion An isometric illusion (also called an ambiguous figure or inside/outside illusion ) is a type of optical illusion, specifically one due to multistable perception .

Jastrow illusion The Jastrow illusion is an optical illusion discovered by the American psychologist Joseph Jastrow in 1889.

Kanizsa triangle The Kanizsa triangle is an optical illusion first described by the Italian psychologist Gaetano Kanizsa in 1955. It is a triangle formed of illusory contours.

Kinetic Depth Effect The Kinetic depth effect is the phenomenon whereby the three-dimensional structural form of a silhouette can be perceived when the object is moving. In the absence of other visual depth cues, this might be the only perception mechanism available to infer the object's shape. Additionally the direction of motion can reverse due to the existence of multiple 3D visual solutions.

Leaning tower illusion The Leaning tower illusion is an optical illusion that presents two identical images of the Leaning Tower of Pisa side by side.

Lilac chaser Lilac chaser is a visual illusion , also known as the Pac-Man illusion .

Liquid crystal shutter glasses Lunar terminator illusion Lunar terminator illusion is an optical illusion where the apparent source of sunlight illuminating the moon does not corresponding with the actual position of the sun.

Mach bands Mach bands is an optical illusion named after the physicist Ernst Mach .

McCollough effect The McCollough effect (1965) is a phenomenon of human visual perception in which colorless gratings appear colored contingent on the orientation of the gratings. It is an aftereffect requiring a period of induction to produce it.

Missing square puzzle The missing square puzzle is an optical illusion used in mathematics classes to help students reason about geometrical figures.

Moon illusion The Moon illusion is an optical illusion in which the Moon appears larger near the horizon than it does while higher up in the sky .

Motion aftereffect Motion illusion Müller-Lyer illusion The Müller-Lyer illusion is an optical illusion consisting of a stylized arrow.

Multistable perception Necker cube The Necker cube is an optical illusion first published in 1832 by Swiss crystallographer Louis Albert Necker .

Numerosity adaptation effect Orbison illusion The Orbison illusion is an optical illusion that was first described by the psychologist William Orbison in 1939.

Oppel-Kundt illusion The Oppel-Kundt illusion is an optical illusion named after German physicists Johann Joseph Oppel [ de ] (first mentioned this phenomenon in 1860) and August Kundt (first performed a systematic study of the illusion in 1863).

Pareidolia Pareidolia is the tendency for perception to impose a meaningful interpretation on a nebulous stimulus, usually visual, so that one detects an object, pattern, or meaning where there is none. Pareidolia is a specific but common type of apophenia (the tendency to perceive meaningful connections between unrelated things or ideas) Penrose stairs The Penrose stairs were created by Lionel Penrose and his son Roger Penrose .

[ 3 ] A variation on the Penrose triangle , it is a two-dimensional depiction of a staircase in which the stairs make four 90-degree turns as they ascend or descend yet form a continuous loop, so that a person could climb them forever and never get any higher.

Penrose triangle The Penrose triangle was first created by the Swedish artist Oscar Reutersvärd in 1934. The mathematician Roger Penrose independently devised and popularised it in the 1950s, describing it as "impossibility in its purest form".

Pepper's ghost Perceived visual angle Peripheral drift illusion A motion illusion (1979/1999) generated by the presentation of a sawtooth luminance grating in the visual periphery.

Phantogram Phantograms , also known as Phantaglyphs, Op-Ups, free-standing anaglyphs, levitated images, and book anaglyphs, are a form of optical illusion.

Phi phenomenon Poggendorff illusion The Poggendorff illusion (1860) involves the misperception of the position of one segment of a transverse line that has been interrupted by the contour of an intervening structure (here a rectangle).

Ponzo illusion In the Ponzo illusion (1911) two identical lines across a pair of converging lines, similar to railway tracks, are drawn. The upper line looks longer because we interpret the converging sides according to linear perspective as parallel lines receding into the distance. In this context, we interpret the upper line as though it were farther away, so we see it as longer – a farther object would have to be longer than a nearer one for both to produce retinal images of the same size.

Pulfrich effect The Pulfrich effect is the effect that covering one eye with transparent but darkened glass can cause purely lateral motion to appear to have a depth component even though in reality it doesn't; even a completely flat scene such as one shown on a television screen can appear to exhibit some three-dimensional motion, but this is an illusion because darkening the scene for one eye causes the photoreceptors in that eye to respond more slowly.

Rubin vase Rubin vase (1915): an ambiguous or bi-stable (i.e., reversing) two-dimensional form.

Sander illusion In Sander's parallelogram (1926) the diagonal line bisecting the larger, left-hand parallelogram  appears to be considerably longer than the diagonal line bisecting the smaller, right-hand parallelogram, but is in fact the same length.

Silencing Silencing is an illusion in which a set of objects that change in luminance, hue, size, or shape appear to stop changing when they move.

Size–weight illusion The size–weight illusion is also known as the Charpentier illusion or Charpentier–Koseleff illusion.

Stepping feet illusion The stepping feet illusion is influenced by the contrast between moving objects and their background.

Stroboscopic effect Swept-plane display Ternus illusion The Ternus illusion (1926/1938) is based upon apparent motion.

Thaumatrope A thaumatrope is a toy that was popular in Victorian times.

Trompe-l'œil Troxler's fading Troxler's fading : When one fixates on a particular point for even a short period of time, an unchanging stimulus away from the fixation point will fade away and disappear.

Vanishing puzzle A vanishing puzzle is a mechanical optical illusion showing different numbers of a certain object when parts of the puzzle are moved around.

[ 4 ] Vertical–horizontal illusion The Vertical-horizontal illusion is the tendency for observers to overestimate the length of a vertical line relative to a horizontal line of the same length.

Vista paradox Visual tilt effects Wagon-wheel effect White's illusion Wundt illusion The two red vertical lines are both straight, but they may look as if they are bowed inwards to some observers. The distortion is induced by the crooked lines on the background Zoetrope Zöllner illusion The Zöllner illusion is a classic optical illusion named after its discoverer, German astrophysicist Johann Karl Friedrich Zöllner.

See also [ edit ] Adaptation (eye) Alice in Wonderland syndrome Auditory illusion Camouflage Contingent perceptual aftereffect Contour rivalry Depth perception Emmert's law Entoptic phenomenon Gestalt psychology Infinity pool Kinetic depth effect Mirage Multistable perception Op Art Notes [ edit ] ^ "The Science of Why No One Agrees on the Colour of This Dress" .

Wired . 2015-02-27.

Archived from the original on 28 February 2015 . Retrieved 27 February 2015 .

^ "Optical illusion: Dress color debate goes global" .

BBC News . BBC.

Archived from the original on 2019-07-13 . Retrieved 28 February 2015 .

^ Penrose, LS; Penrose, R. (1958). "Impossible objects: A special type of optical illusion".

British Journal of Psychology .

49 (1): 31– 33.

doi : 10.1111/j.2044-8295.1958.tb00634.x .

PMID 13536303 .

^ The Guardian, Vanishing Leprechaun, Disappearing Dwarf and Swinging Sixties Pin-up Girls – puzzles in pictures External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Optical illusion .

Optical Illusion Examples by Great Optical Illusions Optical Illusions & Visual Phenomena by Michael Bach Optical Illusions Database by Mighty Optical Illusions Optical illusions and perception paradoxes by Archimedes Lab https://web.archive.org/web/20100419004856/http://ilusaodeotica.com/ hundreds of optical illusions Project LITE Atlas of Visual Phenomena Archived 2010-03-29 at the Wayback Machine Akiyoshi's illusion pages Professor Akiyoshi KITAOKA's anomalous motion illusions Spiral Or Not?

by Enrique Zeleny, Wolfram Demonstrations Project Magical Optical Illusions by Rangki Hunch Optical Illusions by Hunch Optical Illusions by Ooh, My Brain!

v t e Optical illusions ( list ) Illusions Afterimage Ambigram Ambiguous image Ames room Autostereogram Barberpole Bezold Café wall Checker shadow Chubb Cornsweet Delboeuf Ebbinghaus Ehrenstein Flash lag Fraser spiral Gravity hill Grid Hering Impossible trident Irradiation Jastrow Lilac chaser Mach bands McCollough Müller-Lyer Necker cube Oppel-Kundt Orbison Penrose stairs Penrose triangle Peripheral drift Poggendorff Ponzo Rubin vase Sander Schroeder stairs Shepard tables Spinning dancer Ternus Vertical–horizontal White's Wundt Zöllner Popular culture Op art Trompe-l'œil Spectropia (1864 book) Ascending and Descending (1960 drawing) Waterfall (1961 drawing) The dress (2015 photograph) Related Accidental viewpoint Auditory illusions Illusions Tactile illusions Temporal illusion NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐gjj9r
Cached time: 20250812022227
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.387 seconds
Real time usage: 0.528 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1004/1000000
Revision size: 23496/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 22327/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 652/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 23091/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.187/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4274537/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  330.964      1 -total
 31.84%  105.387      1 Template:Reflist
 22.46%   74.330      1 Template:Cite_magazine
 22.04%   72.936      1 Template:Optical_illusions
 21.43%   70.926      1 Template:Navbox
 19.41%   64.244      1 Template:Short_description
 10.92%   36.127      2 Template:Pagetype
 10.03%   33.207      1 Template:Commons
  9.45%   31.283      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.87%   29.352      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:27170600:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812022227 and revision id 1305378223. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_optical_illusions&oldid=1305378223 " Categories : Optical illusions Optical phenomena Psychology lists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Dynamic lists Commons link is locally defined Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 18:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of optical illusions 2 languages Add topic

