Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Role in the climate system 2 Variability 3 Altitude of typical cloud cover 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cloud cover 42 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Català Čeština Chi-Chewa Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Къарачай-малкъар Қазақша Latina Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fraction of the sky obscured by clouds when observed from a particular location Total cloud cover fraction averaged over the years 1981-2010 from the CHELSA-BIOCLIM+ data set [ 1 ] Satellite image based largely on observations from NASA 's Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) on July 11, 2005, of Earth's cloud cover.

Cloud cover (also known as cloudiness , cloudage , or cloud amount ) refers to the fraction of the sky obscured by clouds on average when observed from a particular location.

[ 2 ] Okta is the usual unit for measurement of the cloud cover. The cloud cover is correlated to the sunshine duration as the least cloudy locales are the sunniest ones while the cloudiest areas are the least sunny places, as clouds can block sunlight, especially at sunrise and sunset where sunlight is already limited.

Partial cloud cover over the North Atlantic Ocean.

Complete cloud coverage over France The global cloud cover averages around 67-68%, though it ranges from 56% to 73% depending on the minimum optical depth considered (lower when optical depth is large, and higher when it is low, such that subvisible cirrus clouds are counted).

[ 3 ] Average cloud cover is around 72% over the oceans, with low seasonal variation, and about 55% above land, with significant seasonal variation.

[ 4 ] Role in the climate system [ edit ] Clouds play multiple critical roles in the climate system and diurnal cycle . In particular, being bright objects in the visible part of the solar spectrum , they efficiently reflect light to space and thus contribute to the cooling of the planet, as well as trapping remaining heat at night [ 5 ] . Cloud cover thus plays an important role in the energetic balance of the atmosphere and a variation of it is a factor and consequence of and to the climate change expected by recent studies.

[ 6 ] Variability [ edit ] The average cloud cover of the Earth, 2005-2013. Colors range from blue (no clouds) to white (totally cloudy).

[ 7 ] ( click for more detail ) Cloud cover values only vary by 3% from year-to-year averages, whereas the local, day-to-day variability in cloud amounts typically rises to 30% over the globe. Land is generally covered by 10-15% less cloud than the oceans, because the seas are covered with water, allowing for more evaporation .

[ 3 ] Lastly, there is a latitudinal variation in the cloud cover. Areas around 10-15% below the global mean can be found around 20°N and 20°S, due to an absence of equatorial effects and strong winds reducing cloud formation.

[ specify ] On the other hand, in the storm regions of the Southern Hemisphere midlatitudes were found to have with 15–25% more cloudiness than the global mean at 60°S.

[ 3 ] On average, about 67% of the entire Earth is cloud-covered at any moment.

[ 8 ] On a continental scale, it can be noticed based upon a long-term satellite recording of cloudiness data that on a year-mean basis, Europe , North America , South America and Asia are dominated by cloudy skies due to the westerlies , monsoon or other effects. On the other hand, Africa , the Middle East and Australia are dominated by clear skies due to their continentality and aridity .

[ 9 ] On a regional scale, some exceptionally humid areas of Earth experience cloudy conditions virtually all time such as South America's Amazon Rainforest while some highly arid areas experience clear-sky conditions virtually all the time such as Africa's Sahara Desert .

[ 9 ] Altitude of typical cloud cover [ edit ] Although clouds can exist within a wide range of altitudes, typical cloud cover has a base at approximately 4,000m and extends up to an altitude of about 5,000m.

[ 10 ] Clouds height can vary depending on latitude; with cloud cover in polar latitudes being slightly lower and in tropical regions the cloud cover may extend up to 8,000m. The type of cloud is also a factor, with low cumulus clouds sitting at 300–1,500m while high cirrus clouds at 5,500-6,500m.

Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e References [ edit ] ^ Brun, P., Zimmermann, N.E., Hari, C., Pellissier, L., Karger, D.N. (preprint): Global climate-related predictors at kilometre resolution for the past and future. Earth Syst. Sci. Data Discuss.

https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-2022-212 ^ Huschke, Ralph E. (1970) [1959]. "Cloud cover".

Glossary of Meteorology (2nd ed.). Boston: American Meteorological Society . Retrieved 2013-08-24 .

^ a b c Stubenrauch, C. J.; Rossow, W. B.; Kinne, S.; Ackerman, S.; Cesana, G.; Chepfer, H; Di Girolamo, L.; Getzewich, B.; Guignard, A.; Heidinger, A.; Maddux, B. C.; Menzel, W.P; Minnis, P.; Pearl, C.; Platnick, S.; Poulsen, C.; Reidi, J.; Sun-Mack, S; Walther, A.; Winker, D.; Zeng, S.; Zhao, G. (2013).

"Assessment of global cloud datasets from satellites: Project and Database initiated by GEWEX Radiation Panel" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society .

94 (7): 1031– 1049.

Bibcode : 2013BAMS...94.1031S .

doi : 10.1175/BAMS-D-12-00117.1 .

S2CID 12145499 .

^ King, Michael D.; Platnick, Steven; Menzel, W. Paul; Ackerman, Steven A.; Hubanks, Paul A. (2013).

"Spatial and Temporal Distribution of Clouds Observed by MODIS Onboard the Terra and Aqua Satellites" .

IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing .

51 (7). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE): 3826– 3852.

Bibcode : 2013ITGRS..51.3826K .

doi : 10.1109/tgrs.2012.2227333 .

hdl : 2060/20120010368 .

ISSN 0196-2892 .

^ WMO.

"Luminance" .

International Cloud Atlas . Retrieved 2025-06-10 .

^ IPCC Third Assessment Report Chapter 7. Physical Climate Processes and Feedbacks (Atmospheric Processes and Feedbacks 7.2) (Report). International Panel on Climate Change. Archived from the original on August 5, 2013 . Retrieved August 24, 2013 .

It has extensive coverage of cloud-climate interactions ^ "Cloud Fraction" .

NASA Earth Observatory . Webmaster Paul Przyborski; NASA Official Robert Levy. 2018-10-31.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "Cloudy Earth" .

NASA Earth Observatory . 2020-07-07 . Retrieved 2022-01-29 .

^ a b https://images.slideplayer.com/17/5328401/slides/slide_4.jpg [ bare URL image file ] ^ "Met Office introduction to clouds" (PDF) .

Met Office (UK) . 2012.

McIntosh, D. H. (1972) Meteorological Glossary , Her Majesty's Stationery Office, Met. O. 842, A.P. 897, 319 p.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cloud cover .

NSDL.arm.gov , Glossary of Atmospheric Terms , From the National Science Digital Library's Atmospheric Visualization Collection .

Earthobersvatory.nasa.gov , Monthly maps of global cloud cover from NASA's Earth Observatory International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP) , NASA's data products on their satellite observations NASA composite satellite image .

Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cloud_cover&oldid=1294920636 " Categories : Clouds Atmospheric dynamics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from March 2022 Articles with image file bare URLs for citations Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing more detailed references Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 16:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cloud cover 42 languages Add topic

