Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 CHNX analysis 3 Quantitative analysis 4 Qualitative analysis 5 Analysis of results 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Elemental analysis 21 languages Afrikaans العربية Català Чӑвашла Dansk Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский Simple English Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of analytical chemistry Modern simultaneous CHNS combustion analyzer Elemental analysis is a process where a sample of some material (e.g., soil, waste or drinking water, bodily fluids, minerals , chemical compounds ) is analyzed for its elemental and sometimes isotopic composition.

[ citation needed ] Elemental analysis can be qualitative (determining what elements are present), and it can be quantitative (determining how much of each is present). Elemental analysis falls within the ambit of analytical chemistry , the instruments involved in deciphering the chemical nature of our world.

History [ edit ] The Kaliapparat for elementary analysis in the Liebig Museum in Giessen, Germany .

Antoine Lavoisier is regarded as the inventor of elemental analysis as a quantitative, experimental tool to assess the chemical composition of a compound. At the time, elemental analysis was based on the gravimetric determination of specific absorbent materials before and after selective adsorption of the combustion gases.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Today fully automated systems based on thermal conductivity or infrared spectroscopy detection of the combustion gases, or other spectroscopic methods are used.

CHNX analysis [ edit ] For organic chemists, elemental analysis or "EA" almost always refers to CHNX analysis—the determination of the mass fractions of carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen , and heteroatoms (X) (halogens, sulfur) of a sample.

[ citation needed ] This information is important to help determine the structure of an unknown compound, as well as to help ascertain the structure and purity of a synthesized compound.  In present-day organic chemistry, spectroscopic techniques ( NMR , both 1 H and 13 C), mass spectrometry and chromatographic procedures have replaced EA as the primary technique for structural determination. However, it still gives very useful complementary information.

Elemental Analyzer System The most common form of elemental analysis, CHNS analysis, is accomplished by combustion analysis . Modern elemental analyzers are also capable of simultaneous determination of sulfur along with CHN in the same measurement run.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Quantitative analysis [ edit ] Quantitative analysis determines the mass of each element or compound present.

[ 7 ] Other quantitative methods include gravimetry , optical atomic spectroscopy , and neutron activation analysis .

Gravimetry is where the sample is dissolved, the element of interest is precipitated and its mass measured, or the element of interest is volatilized, and the mass loss is measured.

Optical atomic spectroscopy includes flame atomic absorption , graphite furnace atomic absorption , and inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy , which probe the outer electronic structure of atoms.

Neutron activation analysis involves the activation of a sample matrix through the process of neutron capture . The resulting radioactive target nuclei of the sample begin to decay, emitting gamma rays of specific energies that identify the radioisotopes present in the sample. The concentration of each analyte can be determined by comparison to an irradiated standard with known concentrations of each analyte.

[ 8 ] Qualitative analysis [ edit ] To qualitatively determine which elements exist in a sample, the methods are mass spectrometric atomic spectroscopy , such as inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry , which probes the mass of atoms; other spectroscopy, which probes the inner electronic structure of atoms such as X-ray fluorescence , particle-induced X-ray emission , X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy , and Auger electron spectroscopy ;  and chemical methods such as the sodium fusion test and Schöniger oxidation .

Analysis of results [ edit ] The analysis of results is performed by determining the ratio of elements from within the sample and working out a chemical formula that fits with those results.  This process is useful as it helps determine if a sample sent is the desired compound and confirms the purity of a compound.  The accepted deviation of elemental analysis results from the calculated is 0.3%.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Dumas method of molecular weight determination References [ edit ] ^ Pregl, Fritz (1917).

Quantitative Micro-Analysis of Organic Substances . Berlin: Springer.

ISBN 978-3-86444-914-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "Fritz Pregl - Nobel Lecture: Quantitative Micro-Analysis of Organic Substances" .

www.nobelprize.org . Retrieved 2016-07-04 .

^ "Aarhus University: Elemental Analysis Facility" . 3 July 2016. Archived from the original on 15 July 2015 . Retrieved 3 July 2016 .

^ sciences, Faculté des.

"G.G. Hatch Stable Isotope Laboratory - Techniques - Quantitative Analysis" .

www.isotope.uottawa.ca . Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2016-07-04 .

^ Sahu, Ramesh Chandra; Patel, Rajkishore; Ray, Bankim Chandra (2011-08-01). "Removal of hydrogen sulfide using red mud at ambient conditions".

Fuel Processing Technology .

92 (8): 1587– 1592.

Bibcode : 2011FuPrT..92.1587S .

doi : 10.1016/j.fuproc.2011.04.002 .

^ Käldström, Mats; Meine, Niklas; Farès, Christophe; Rinaldi, Roberto; Schüth, Ferdi (2012).

"Fractionation of 'water-soluble lignocellulose' into C5/C6 sugars and sulfur-free lignins" (PDF) .

Green Chemistry .

16 (5). RSCPublishing: 2454– 2462.

doi : 10.1039/C4GC00168K .

S2CID 52969790 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-02-25.

^ From Columbia Encyclopedia on answers.com: http://www.answers.com/library/Columbia+Encyclopedia-cid-2284496 [ permanent dead link ] : chemical analysis ^ "Neutron Activation Analysis" . Analytical Chemistry Group. Archived from the original on 2 January 2018 . Retrieved 28 November 2012 .

^ "CHN Elemental Microanalysis" .

www.ucl.ac.ke . Archived from the original on 2017-10-09 . Retrieved 2017-11-03 .

v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elemental_analysis&oldid=1296987813 " Categories : Elemental analysis Analytical chemistry Materials science Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 14:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elemental analysis 21 languages Add topic

