Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early proponents 2 Immigration restrictions 3 Efforts to shape American families Toggle Efforts to shape American families subsection 3.1 Anti-miscegenation laws 3.2 Unfit v. fit individuals 3.3 Concerns over hereditary genes 3.4 Better Baby Contests 3.5 Fitter Families 4 Compulsory sterilization 5 African Americans Toggle African Americans subsection 5.1 Black support for eugenics (Progressive Era) 5.2 Eugenics during the civil rights era 5.3 Sterilization of women 5.4 Media attention 6 Latinas Toggle Latinas subsection 6.1 Puerto Rico 6.2 California 7 Native American women 8 Influence on Nazi Germany 9 Late 20th century Toggle Late 20th century subsection 9.1 Genetic engineering 9.2 Disability-selective abortion 9.3 Banning sterilization 9.3.1 Sterilization in U.S. prisons 10 21st century 11 See also 12 References 13 Notes 14 Sources 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Eugenics in the United States 8 languages العربية Čeština Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Race improvement" as historically sought in the US This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( February 2025 ) The main sign reads: "Eugenic and Health Exhibit"; charts concern the heritability of illiteracy and the relatively higher birth rate of immigrants Part of a series on Eugenics in the United States States States California Minnesota North Carolina Oregon Law Court cases Buck v. Bell Skinner v. Oklahoma Madrigal v. Quilligan Poe v. Lynchburg Training School & Hospital Stump v. Sparkman Doe ex. rel. Tarlow v. District of Columbia History Institutions American Birth Control League American Eugenics Society Eugenics Record Office Race Betterment Foundation Human Betterment Foundation Society for Biodemography and Social Biology Pioneer Fund Human Betterment League Heredity Commission AASPIM General Jukes family Average Young American Male (1921) The Relf Sisters Oneida stirpiculture Selective Reproduction of Slaves Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924 Literature Books The Kallikak Family Eugenics manifesto The Bell Curve The Passing of the Great Race The Rising Tide of Color Journals Annals of Eugenics Proponents Academics Harry H. Laughlin Joseph DeJarnette David Starr Jordan Edwin Katzen-Ellenbogen Charles Goethe Charles Benedict Davenport Gertrude Crotty Davenport Frederick Osborn Madison Grant Politicians Guy W. Bailey Wallace H. Kuralt. Sr.

Related Scientific racism Social degeneration theory Social purity movement Feeble-minded Racial nationalism " Race suicide " Sterilization of Latinas Sterilization of Native American women United States portal Category Index v t e This article is part of a series on Eugenics Historical trajectory Ancient Jus trium liberorum Lex Papia Poppaea Jewish views on incest Incest in the Bible British eugenics Malthusian League Eugenic feminism Nazi eugenics " Racial hygiene " Law for the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Offspring Hereditary Health Court Lebensborn Romani Holocaust Aktion T4 Doctors' Trial US eugenics Slave breeding in the US Eugenics Survey of Vermont Oneida stirpiculture Immigration Act of 1924 US birth control movement Sterilization law in the United States Buck v. Bell Doe ex. rel. Tarlow v. District of Columbia Madrigal v. Quilligan Poe v. Lynchburg Training School & Hospital Skinner v. Oklahoma Stump v. Sparkman Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924 Canadian eugenics The Famous Five Sexual Sterilization Act French Eugenics Japanese eugenics Hispanic eugenics Mexican eugenics Swedish sterilization program (1906–1975) Peruvian sterilization program (1990–2000) Population planning in Singapore Neo-eugenics He Jiankui genome editing incident Human genetic enhancement Religious response to assisted reproductive technology Pre-war academic proponents Bell Brigham Burbank Carrell Davenport Darwin (Leonhard) DeCourcy Ward von Ehrenfels Elderton Evang Fisher Galton Gates Goldscheid Grant Gruber Günther Guyer Haldane Herseni Holmes Hrdlička Jennings Jordan Kang Key Kraepelin Lenz Lewis London Magnussen Manuilă Mittmann Moreira Munro Nordau Osborn Pan Pearson (Karl) Perkins Pérez Ploetz Quetelet Rainer Relgis Ross Schallmayer Scharffenberg Serebrovsky Sergi Slater Southard Stoddard Taussig Terman Tesla Thorndike Vacher de Lapouge Verschuer Yerkes Post-war academic remnants Agar Bell (Julia) Blacker Carl Carter Cattell Coleman Darlington Fleischman Garrett Glad Hardin Haldane Hanania Herndon Huxley Ingle Itzkoff José Figueredo Kallmann Kirkconnell Koch Laski Lederberg Lorenz Ludovici Lundman Lynn MacEachran Magnussen Miller Muller Murray Nijenhuis Nyborg Osborn Pearson (Roger) Pendell Pitt-Rivers Popenoe Rostand Savulescu Shapiro Shockley Verschuer Vining Jr.

Weiss Pamphlets and manifestos Hereditary Genius (1869) Degeneration (1892–1893) Gallia (1895) " The Blood of the Nation " (1901/1910) Anticipations (1901) The Training of the Human Plant (1907) Essays in Eugenics (1909) Heredity in Relation to Eugenics (1911) Mankind at the Crossroads (1923) Daedalus (1924) La raza cósmica (1925) Marriage and Morals (1929) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection (1930) " Charter for Rationalists " (1932) Man, the Unknown (1935) After Us (1936) " Eugenics manifesto " (1939) New Bottles for New Wine (1950) The Marching Morons (1951) The Dance with the Devil (1958) Civilized Man's Eight Deadly Sins (1973) Beyondism (1987) Dysgenics (1996) Eugenics: A Reassessment (2001) Jewish Eugenics (2011) Selective Breeding and the Birth of Philosophy (2023) Organizations Without significant post-war activity ABCL Alberta Eugenics Board AASPIM AES Carnegie Institution for Science Carrel Foundation CSHL Co-operative Women's Guild EBNC ERO Fabian Society Galton Laboratory German Society for Racial Hygiene Heredity Commission HBF Human Betterment League Immigration Restriction League INED IAAEE International Eugenics Conference IFEO Kaiser Wilhelm Institute Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry PAA Progressive League Race Betterment Foundation RHA Rockefeller Foundation State Institute for Racial Biology With significant post-war activity Annals of Eugenics (1954) CIS The Eugenics Review (1968) FREED HDF J. Soc. Political Econ. Stud.

LCI Mankind Quarterly OpenPsych Project Prevention Repository for Germinal Choice Ulster Institute for Social Research Related Demographic engineering Dysgenics Fujimorism Genetic discrimination History of eugenics Idiocracy Pedigree chart Political views of Bertrand Russell Political views of H. G. Wells Raymond Cattell bibliography Ronald Fisher bibliography Selective breeding History of Science portal v t e Eugenics , the set of beliefs and practices which aims at improving the genetic quality of the human population , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] played a significant role in the history and culture of the United States from the late 19th century into the mid-20th century.

[ 3 ] The cause became increasingly promoted by intellectuals of the Progressive Era .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] While its American practice was ostensibly about improving genetic quality, it has been argued that eugenics was more about preserving the position of the dominant groups in the population. Scholarly research has determined that people who found themselves targets of the eugenics movement were those who were seen as unfit for society—the poor, the disabled, the mentally ill, and specific communities of color—and a disproportionate number of those who fell victim to eugenicists' sterilization initiatives were women who were identified as African American, Asian American, or Native American.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] As a result, the United States' eugenics movement is now generally associated with racist and nativist elements, as the movement was to some extent a reaction to demographic and population changes, as well as concerns over the economy and social well-being, rather than scientific genetics.

[ 8 ] [ 7 ] Early proponents The American eugenics movement was rooted in the biological determinist ideas of Sir Francis Galton , which originated in the 1880s. In 1883, Galton first used the word eugenics to describe scientifically, the biological improvement of genes in human races and the concept of being "well-born".

[ 9 ] He believed that differences in a person's ability were acquired primarily through genetics and that eugenics could be implemented through selective breeding in order for the human race to improve in its overall quality, therefore allowing for humans to direct their own evolution.

[ 10 ] In the US, eugenics was largely supported after the discovery of Mendel's law led to a widespread interest in the idea of breeding for specific traits.

[ 11 ] Galton studied the upper classes of Britain, and arrived at the conclusion that their social positions could be attributed to a superior genetic makeup.

[ 12 ] American eugenicists tended to believe in the genetic superiority of Nordic , Germanic , and Anglo-Saxon peoples, supported strict immigration and anti-miscegenation laws , and supported the forcible sterilization of the poor, disabled and "immoral." [ 13 ] Eugenics supporters hold signs criticizing various "genetically inferior" groups.

Wall Street , New York, c.

1915 .

The American eugenics movement received extensive funding from various corporate foundations including the Carnegie Institution , Rockefeller Foundation , and the Harriman railroad fortune.

[ 14 ] In 1906, J.H. Kellogg provided funding to help found the Race Betterment Foundation in Battle Creek, Michigan .

[ 12 ] The Eugenics Record Office (ERO) was founded in Cold Spring Harbor, New York in 1911 by the renowned biologist Charles B. Davenport , using money from both the Harriman railroad fortune and the Carnegie Institution.

[ 15 ] As late as the 1920s, the ERO was one of the leading organizations in the American eugenics movement.

[ 12 ] [ 16 ] In years to come, the ERO and the American Eugenics Society collected a mass of family pedigrees and provided training for eugenics field workers who were sent to analyze individuals at various institutions, such as mental hospitals and orphanage institutions, across the United States.

[ 17 ] Eugenicists such as Davenport, the psychologist Henry H. Goddard , Harry H. Laughlin , and the conservationist Madison Grant (all of whom were well-respected during their time) began to lobby for various solutions to the problem of the "unfit." [ 15 ] Davenport favored immigration restriction and sterilization as primary methods; Goddard favored segregation in his The Kallikak Family ; Grant favored all of the above and more, even entertaining the idea of extermination.

[ 18 ] By 1910, there was a large and dynamic network of scientists, reformers, and professionals engaged in national eugenics projects and actively promoting eugenic legislation. The American Breeder's Association , the first eugenic body in the U.S., expanded in 1906 to include a specific eugenics committee under the direction of Charles B. Davenport.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The ABA was formed specifically to "investigate and report on heredity in the human race, and emphasize the value of superior blood and the menace to society of inferior blood." [ 21 ] Membership included Alexander Graham Bell, [ 22 ] Stanford president David Starr Jordan and Luther Burbank .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The American Association for the Study and Prevention of Infant Mortality was one of the first organizations to begin investigating infant mortality rates in terms of eugenics.

[ 25 ] They promoted government intervention in attempts to promote the health of future citizens.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Several feminist reformers advocated an agenda of eugenic legal reform. The National Federation of Women's Clubs, the Woman's Christian Temperance Union , and the National League of Women Voters were among the variety of state and local feminist organizations that at some point lobbied for eugenic reforms.

[ 28 ] One of the most prominent feminists to champion the eugenic agenda was Margaret Sanger , the leader of the American birth control movement and founder of the parent organization to Planned Parenthood . Sanger saw birth control as a means to prevent unwanted children from being born into a disadvantaged life, and incorporated the language of eugenics to advance the movement.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Sanger also advocated for discouraging reproduction among people who believed to have hereditary mental illnesses or serious physical disabilities.

[ 31 ] In these cases, she approved of the use of sterilization.

[ 29 ] In Sanger's opinion, it was individual women (if able-bodied) and not the state who should determine whether or not to have a child.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] However, Sanger was also a racist and an early proponent of racial eugenics , and supported a bill to approve forced sterilization of African Americans .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] U.S. eugenics poster advocating for the removal of genetic "defectives" such as the insane, "feeble-minded" and criminals, and supporting the selective breeding of "high-grade" individuals, c.

1926 In the Deep South , women's associations played an important role in rallying support for eugenic legal reform. Eugenicists recognized the political and social influence of southern clubwomen in their communities, and used them to help implement eugenics across the region.

[ 36 ] Between 1915 and 1920, federated women's clubs in every state of the Deep South had a critical role in establishing public eugenic institutions that were segregated by sex.

[ 37 ] For example, the Legislative Committee of the Florida State Federation of Women's Clubs successfully lobbied to establish a eugenic institution for the individuals with intellectual disabilities that was segregated by sex.

[ 38 ] Their aim was to separate mentally retarded men and women in order to prevent them from breeding more "feebleminded" individuals.

Public acceptance in the U.S. led to various state legislatures working to establish eugenic initiatives. Beginning with Connecticut in 1896, many states enacted marriage laws with eugenic criteria, prohibiting anyone who was "epileptic, imbecile or feeble-minded " [ 39 ] from marrying.

[ 40 ] The first state to introduce a compulsory sterilization bill was Michigan in 1897 – although the proposed law failed to garner enough votes by legislators to be adopted, it did set the stage for other sterilization bills.

[ 41 ] Eight years later, Pennsylvania 's state legislators passed a sterilization bill that was vetoed by the governor.

[ 42 ] Indiana became the first state to enact sterilization legislation in 1907, [ 43 ] followed closely by Washington , California , and Connecticut in 1909.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Sterilization rates across the country were relatively low (California being the sole exception) until the 1927 Supreme Court case Buck v. Bell , which upheld under the U.S. Constitution the forced sterilization of patients at a Virginia home for those who were seen as mentally retarded .

[ 47 ] Immigration restrictions In the late 19th century, many scientists, who were concerned about the population leaning too far away from the favored "Anglo-Saxon superiority" due to a rise in immigration from Europe, partnered with other interest groups to implement immigration laws that could be justified on the basis of genetics.

[ 48 ] After the 1890 U.S. census, people began to believe that immigrants who were of Nordic or Anglo-Saxon ancestry were greatly favored over Southern and Eastern Europeans, specifically Jews (a diasporic , Middle Eastern people),  who were seen by some eugenicists, such as Harry Laughlin , to be genetically inferior.

[ 48 ] During the early 20th century as the United States and Canada began to receive higher numbers of immigrants, influential eugenicists such as Lothrop Stoddard and Laughlin (who was appointed as an expert witness for the House Committee on Immigration and Naturalization in 1920) presented arguments that these immigrants would pollute the national gene pool if their numbers went unrestricted.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] In 1921, a temporary measure was passed to slowdown the open door on immigration. The Immigration Restriction League was the first American entity to be closely associated with eugenics and was founded in 1894 by three recent Harvard graduates. The overall goal of the League was to prevent what they perceived as inferior races from diluting "the superior American racial stock" (those who were of the upper-class Anglo-Saxon heritage), and they began working to have stricter anti-immigration  laws in the United States.

[ 51 ] The League lobbied for a literacy test for immigrants as they attempted to enter the United States, based on the belief that literacy rates were low among "inferior races".

[ 48 ] Eugenicists believed that immigrants were often degenerate , had low IQs, and were afflicted with shiftlessness, alcoholism and insubordination. According to Eugenicists, all of these problems were transmitted through genes. Literacy test bills were vetoed by presidents in 1897, 1913 and 1915; eventually, President Wilson's second veto was overruled by Congress in 1917.

[ 52 ] With the passage of the Immigration Act of 1924 , eugenicists for the first time played an important role in the Congressional debate as expert advisers on the threat of "inferior stock" from eastern and southern Europe.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] The new act, inspired by the eugenic belief in the racial superiority of "old stock" white Americans as members of the " Nordic race " (a form of white supremacy ), strengthened the position of existing laws prohibiting race-mixing.

[ 55 ] Whereas Anglo-Saxon and Nordic people were seen as the most desirable immigrants, the Chinese and Japanese were seen as the least desirable and were largely banned from entering the U.S as a result of the immigration act.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] In addition to the immigration act, eugenic considerations also lay behind the adoption of incest laws in much of the U.S. and were used to justify many anti-miscegenation laws .

[ 57 ] Efforts to shape American families Anti-miscegenation laws Further information: Anti-miscegenation laws in the United States Anti-miscegenation laws prohibited interracial marriages.

[ 57 ] The first anti-miscegenation law was passed in Virginia in 1661.

[ 58 ] This law not only prohibited marriage between individuals of different races, but it also prohibited ministers from marrying interracial couples.

[ 58 ] Despite a rising number of interracial relationships, more states passed anti-miscegenation laws, over the course of the 17th and 18th centuries.

[ 59 ] At the beginning of the twentieth century, at least twenty-eight states had anti-miscegenation legislation.

[ 58 ] During this time period, the one-drop rule emerged, which stated that anyone with a single drop of African blood was considered “black.” [ 60 ] Anti-miscegenation laws in the United States made it a crime for individuals to wed someone categorized as belonging to a different race.

[ 61 ] These laws were part of a broader policy of racial segregation in the United States to minimize contact between people of different ethnicities. Race laws and practices in the United States were explicitly used as models by the Nazi regime when it developed the Nuremberg Laws , stripping Jewish citizens of their citizenship.

[ 62 ] This rule is reflected in Virginia’s Racial Integrity Act of 1924.

[ 63 ] This law prohibited miscegenation and defined a white person as having “no trace whatever of any blood other than Caucasian; but persons who have one-sixteenth or less of the blood of the American Indian and have no other non-Caucasic blood shall be deemed to be white persons.” [ 63 ] This law and other anti-miscegenation legislature were not overturned until 1967 with the Loving v. Commonwealth of Virginia decision.

[ 64 ] In 1958, Mildred Jeter, a black woman, and Richard Loving, a white man, were residents of Virginia but were married in Washington, DC. Upon returning to Virginia, they were arrested and charged with violating the anti-miscegenation legislature.

[ 58 ] The case was eventually brought to the United States Supreme Court. In a unanimous decision, the Supreme Court ruled that this legislature violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

[ 64 ] Unfit v. fit individuals Both class and race factored into the eugenic definitions of "fit" and "unfit." By using intelligence testing, American eugenicists asserted that social mobility was indicative of one's genetic fitness.

[ 65 ] This reaffirmed the existing class and racial hierarchies and explained why the upper-to-middle class was predominantly white. Middle-to-upper class status was a marker of "superior strains." [ 38 ] In contrast, eugenicists believed poverty to be a characteristic of genetic inferiority, which meant that those deemed "unfit" were predominantly of the lower classes.

[ 38 ] [ 66 ] Because class status designated some more fit than others, eugenicists treated upper and lower-class women differently. Positive eugenicists, who promoted procreation among the fittest in society, encouraged middle-class women to bear more children. Between 1900 and 1960, eugenicists appealed to middle class white women to become more "family minded," and to help better the race.

[ 67 ] To this end, eugenicists often denied middle and upper-class women sterilization and birth control .

[ 68 ] However, since poverty was associated with prostitution and "mental idiocy," women of the lower classes were the first to be deemed "unfit" and "promiscuous." [ 38 ] Concerns over hereditary genes In the 19th century, based on a view of Lamarckism , it was believed that the damage done to people by diseases could be inherited and therefore, through eugenics, these diseases could be eradicated. This belief was carried into the 20th century as public health measures were taken to improve health with the hope that such measures would result in better health of future generations.

[ citation needed ] A 1911 Carnegie Institute report explored eighteen methods for removing defective genetic attributes; the eighth method was euthanasia .

[ 14 ] Though the most commonly suggested method of euthanasia was to set up local gas chambers , [ 14 ] many in the eugenics movement did not believe that Americans were ready to implement a large-scale euthanasia program, so many doctors came up with alternative ways of subtly implementing eugenic euthanasia in various medical institutions.

[ 14 ] For example, a mental institution in Lincoln, Illinois fed its incoming patients milk infected with tuberculosis (reasoning that genetically fit individuals would be resistant), resulting in 30–40% annual death rates.

[ 14 ] Other doctors practiced euthanasia through various forms of lethal neglect.

[ 14 ] In the 1930s, there was a wave of portrayals of eugenic "mercy killings" in American film, newspapers, and magazines. In 1931, the Illinois Homeopathic Medicine Association began lobbying for the right to euthanize "imbeciles" and other defectives.

[ 69 ] A few years later, in 1938, the Euthanasia Society of America was founded.

[ 70 ] However, despite this, euthanasia saw marginal support in the U.S., motivating people to turn to forced segregation and sterilization programs as a means for keeping the "unfit" from reproducing.

[ 14 ] Better Baby Contests Mary deGormo, a former teacher, was the first person to combine ideas about health and intelligence standards with competitions at state fairs, in the form of baby contests.

[ 71 ] She developed the first such contest, the "Scientific Baby Contest" for the Louisiana State Fair in Shreveport, in 1908.

[ 72 ] She saw these contests as a contribution to the "social efficiency" movement, which was advocating for the standardization of all aspects of American life as a means of increasing efficiency.

[ 25 ] DeGarmo was assisted by Doctor Jacob Bodenheimer, a pediatrician who helped her develop grading sheets for contestants, which combined physical measurements with standardized measurements of intelligence.

[ 73 ] Contestants preparing for the Better Baby Contest at the 1931 Indiana State Fair .

The contest spread to other U.S. states in the early 20th century. In Indiana, for example, Ada Estelle Schweitzer , a eugenics advocate and director of the Indiana State Board of Health's Division of Child and Infant Hygiene, organized and supervised the state's Better Baby contests at the Indiana State Fair from 1920 to 1932. It was among the fair's most popular events. During the contest's first year at the fair, a total of 78 babies were examined; in 1925 the total reached 885. Contestants peaked at 1,301 infants in 1930, and the following year the number of entrants was capped at 1,200. Although the specific consequences of the contests were difficult to assess, statistics helped to support Schweitzer's claims that the contests helped reduce infant mortality.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] The contest intended to educate the public about raising healthy children at a time when approximately 10% of children died in their first year of life.

[ 76 ] However, its exclusionary practices reinforced social class and racial discrimination. In Indiana, for example, the contestants were limited to white infants; African-American and immigrant children were barred from the competition for ribbons and cash prizes. In addition, the scoring was biased toward white , middle-class babies.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] The contest procedure included recording each child's health history, as well as evaluations of each contestant's physical and mental health and overall development using medical professionals. Using a process similar to the one introduced at the Louisiana State Fair, and contest guidelines that the AMA and U.S. Children's Bureau recommended, scoring for each contestant began with 1,000 points. Deductions were made for defects, including a child's measurements below a designated average. The contestant with the most points was declared the winner.

[ 79 ] [ 75 ] [ 80 ] Standardization through scientific judgment was a topic that was very serious in the eyes of the scientific community, but has often been downplayed as just a popular fad or trend. Nevertheless, a lot of time, effort, and money was put into these contests and their scientific backing, which would influence cultural ideas as well as local and state government practices.

[ 81 ] The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People promoted eugenics by hosting "Better Baby" contests and the proceeds would go to its anti-lynching campaign.

[ 82 ] Fitter Families Winning family of a Fitter Family contest stand outside of the Eugenics Building [ 83 ] (where contestants register) at the Kansas Free Fair, in Topeka, Kansas .

First appearing in 1920 at the Kansas Free Fair, "Fitter Families for Future Firesides" competitions continued all the way up to World War II . Mary T. Watts and Florence Brown Sherbon, [ 84 ] [ 85 ] both initiators of the Better Baby Contests in Iowa, took the idea of positive eugenics for babies and combined it with a determinist concept of biology to come up with fitter family competitions.

[ 86 ] There were several different categories that families were judged in: size of the family, overall attractiveness, and health of the family, all of which helped to determine the likelihood of having healthy children. These competitions were simply a continuation of the Better Baby contests that promoted certain physical and mental qualities.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] At the time, it was believed that certain behavioral qualities were inherited from one's parents. This led to the addition of several judging categories including: generosity , self-sacrificing , and quality of familial bonds. Additionally, there were negative features that were judged: selfishness , jealousy , suspiciousness, high-temperedness, and cruelty .

Feeblemindedness , alcoholism , and paralysis were few among other traits that were included as physical traits to be judged when looking at family lineage.

[ 89 ] Doctors and specialists from the community would offer their time to judge these competitions, which were originally sponsored by the Red Cross.

[ 89 ] The winners of these competitions were given a Bronze Medal as well as champion cups called "Capper Medals." The cups were named after then-Governor and Senator, Arthur Capper and he would present them to "Grade A individuals".

[ 90 ] The perks of entering into the contests were that the competitions provided a way for families to get a free health check-up by a doctor as well as some of the pride and prestige that came from winning the competitions.

[ 89 ] By 1925, the Eugenics Records Office was distributing standardized forms for judging eugenically fit families, which were used in contests in several U.S. states.

[ 91 ] Compulsory sterilization See also: Compulsory sterilization § United States A depiction of "defectives" from the 1915 book Mental defectives in Virginia .

In 1907, Indiana passed the first eugenics-based compulsory sterilization law in the world. Thirty U.S. states would soon follow their lead.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Although the law was overturned by the Indiana Supreme Court in 1921, [ 94 ] in the 1927 case Buck v. Bell , the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924 , allowing for the compulsory sterilization of patients of state mental institutions.

[ 95 ] The number of sterilizations performed per year increased until another Supreme Court case, Skinner v. Oklahoma , 1942, which ruled that under the 14th Amendment's Equal Protection Clause, laws that permitted the compulsory sterilization of criminals were unconstitutional if these laws treated similar crimes differently.

[ 96 ] Although Skinner determined that the right to procreate was a fundamental right under the constitution, the case did not denounce sterilization laws, because its analysis was based on the equal protection of criminal defendants specifically, therefore leaving those seen as "social undesirables"—the poor, the disabled, and various ethnic groups—as targets of compulsory sterilization.

[ 6 ] Therefore, though compulsory sterilization is now considered an abuse of human rights, Buck v. Bell has never been overturned, and Virginia specifically did not repeal its sterilization law until 1974.

[ 97 ] Men and women were compulsorily sterilized for different reasons. Men were sterilized to treat their aggression and to eliminate their criminal behavior, while women were sterilized to control the results of their sexuality.

[ 98 ] Since women bore children, eugenicists held women more accountable than men for the reproduction of the less "desirable" members of society.

[ 98 ] Eugenicists therefore predominantly targeted women in their efforts to regulate the birth rate, to "protect" white racial health, and weed out the "defectives" of society.

[ 98 ] The most significant era of eugenic sterilization was between 1907 and 1963, when over 64,000 individuals were forcibly sterilized under eugenic legislation in the United States.

[ 99 ] Beginning around 1930, there was a steady increase in the percentage of women sterilized, and in a few states only young women were sterilized. A 1937 Fortune magazine poll found that 2/3 of respondents supported eugenic sterilization of "mental defectives", 63% supported sterilization of criminals, and only 15% opposed both.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] From 1930 to the 1960s, sterilizations were performed on many more institutionalized women than men.

[ 102 ] By 1961, 61 percent of the 62,162 total eugenic sterilizations in the United States were performed on women.

[ 102 ] A favorable report on the results of sterilization in California , the state that conducted the most sterilizations (20,000 of the 60,000 that occurred between 1909 and 1960), [ 23 ] was published in 1929 in book form by the biologist Paul Popenoe and was widely cited by the Nazi government as evidence that wide-reaching sterilization programs were feasible and humane.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] After World War II, eugenics and eugenic organizations began to revise their standards of reproductive fitness to reflect contemporary social concerns of the later half of the 20th century, notably concerns over welfare, Mexican immigration, overpopulation, civil rights, and sexual revolution, and gave way to what has been termed neo-eugenics.

[ 105 ] Neo-eugenicists like Clarence Gamble , an affluent researcher at Harvard Medical school and a founder of public birth control clinics, revived the eugenics movement in the United States through sterilization. Supporters of this revival of eugenic sterilizations believed that they would bring an end to social issues such as poverty and mental illness while also saving taxpayer money and boost the economy.

[ 106 ] Whereas eugenic sterilization programs before World War II were mostly conducted on prisoners or patients in mental hospitals, after the war, compulsory sterilizations were targeted at poor people and minorities.

[ 106 ] As a result of these new sterilization initiatives, though most scholars agree that there were over 64,000 known cases of eugenic sterilization in the U.S. by 1963, no one knows for certain how many compulsory sterilizations occurred between the late 1960s to 1970s, though it is estimated that at least 80,000 may have been conducted.

[ 107 ] A large number of those who were targets of coerced sterilizations in the later half of the century were African American, Hispanic, and Native American women.

African Americans Black support for eugenics (Progressive Era) William Edward Burghardt Du Bois in 1918 Early proponents of the eugenics movement included not only influential white Americans but also several proponent African-American intellectuals such as W. E. B. Du Bois , Thomas Wyatt Turner , and many academics at Tuskegee University , Howard University , and Hampton University .

[ 82 ] However, unlike many white eugenicists, these black intellectuals believed the best African Americans were as good as the best White Americans, and "The Talented Tenth" of all races should mix.

[ 82 ] Indeed, Du Bois believed "only fit blacks should procreate to eradicate the race's heritage of moral iniquity." [ 108 ] With the support of leaders like Du Bois, efforts were made in the early 20th century to  offer birth control to the country's black population; one of the most visible initiatives was Margaret Sanger's 1939 proposal, The Negro Project .

[ 15 ] That year, Sanger, Florence Rose , her assistant, and Mary Woodward Reinhardt, then secretary of the new Birth Control Federation of America (BCFA), drafted a report on "Birth Control and the Negro." [ 15 ] In this report, they stated that African Americans were the group with "the greatest economic, health and social problems," were largely illiterate and "still breed carelessly and disastrously," a line taken from W.E.B. DuBois' article in the June 1932 Birth Control Review.

[ 15 ] The Project often sought after prominent African-American leaders to spread knowledge regarding birth control and the perceived positive effects it would have on the African-American community, such as poverty and the lack of education.

[ 109 ] Sanger particularly sought out black ministers from the South to serve as leaders in the Project in the hopes of countering any ideas that the project was a strategic attempt to eradicate the black population.

[ 15 ] However, despite Sanger's best efforts, white medical scientists took control over the initiative, and with the Negro Project receiving praise from white leaders and eugenicists, many of Sanger's opponents, both during the creation of the Project and years after, saw her work as an attempt to terminate African Americans.

[ 15 ] [ 109 ] Eugenics during the civil rights era Federal funding for birth control went alongside family planning initiatives that were a part of state welfare programs. These initiatives, in addition to advocating the use of the Pill, supported sterilization as a means of curbing the number of people receiving welfare and control the reproduction of 'unfit' women.

[ 105 ] The 1950s and 1960s were the height of the sterilization abuse that African-American women as a group experienced at the hands of the white medical establishment.

[ 48 ] During this period, the sterilization of African-American women largely took place in the South and assumed two forms: the sterilization of poor unwed black mothers, and "Mississippi appendectomies." [ 105 ] Under these "Mississippi appendectomies," women who went to the hospital to give birth, or for some other medical treatment, often found themselves incapable of having more children upon leaving the hospital due to unnecessary hysterectomies performed on them by southern medical students.

[ 48 ] [ 110 ] By the 1970s, the coerced sterilization of women of color spread from the South to the rest of the country through federal family planning and under the guise of voluntary contraceptive surgery as physicians began to require their patients to sign consent forms to surgeries they did not want or understand.

[ 105 ] Sterilization of women Though it is unknown the exact number of African American women who were sterilized throughout the country in the 20th century, records from a few states offer some estimates. In the state of North Carolina, which was seen as having the most aggressive eugenics program out of the 32 states that had one, [ 111 ] during the 45-year reign of the North Carolina Eugenics Board , from 1929 to 1974, a disproportionate number of those who were targeted for forced or coerced sterilization were black and female, with almost all being poor.

[ 112 ] Of the 7,600 women who were sterilized by the state between the years of 1933 and 1973, about 5,000 were African American.

[ 6 ] In light of this history, North Carolina became the first state to offer compensation to surviving victims of compulsory sterilization.

[ 112 ] Additionally, whereas African Americans made up just over 1% of California's population, they accounted for at least 4% of the total number of sterilization operations conducted by the state between 1909 and 1979.

[ 113 ] Overall, according to one 1989 study, 31.6% of African American women without a high school diploma were sterilized while only 14.5% of white women of the same educational status were sterilized.

[ 6 ] Media attention In 1972, U.S. Senate committee testimony brought to light that at least 2,000 involuntary sterilizations had been performed on poor black women without their consent or knowledge.

[ 114 ] An investigation revealed that the surgeries were all performed in the South, and were all performed on black women with multiple children who were receiving welfare.

[ 114 ] Testimony revealed that many of these women were threatened with an end to their welfare benefits unless they consented to sterilization.

[ 114 ] These surgeries were instances of sterilization abuse, a term applied to any sterilization performed without the consent or knowledge of the recipient, or in which the recipient is pressured into accepting the surgery. Because the funds used to carry out the surgeries came from the U.S. Office of Economic Opportunity , the sterilization abuse raised suspicions, especially among members of the black community, that "federal programs were underwriting eugenicists who wanted to impose their views about population quality on minorities and poor women." [ 115 ] Despite this investigation, it was not until 1973 that the issue of sterilization abuse was brought to media attention. On June 14, 1973, two black girls, Minnie Lee and Mary Alice Relf , ages fourteen and twelve, respectively, were sterilized without their knowledge in Alabama by the Montgomery Community Action Committee, an OEO-financed organization.

[ 105 ] [ 113 ] The summer of that year, the Relf girls sued the government agencies and individuals responsible for their sterilization.

[ 105 ] As the case was being pursued, it was discovered that the girls' mother, who could not read, unwittingly approved the operations, signing an 'X' on the release forms; Mrs. Relf had believed that she was signing a form authorizing her daughters to receive Depo-Provera injections, a form of birth control.

[ 105 ] In light of the 1974 case of Relf v. Weinberger , named after Minnie Lee and Mary Alice's older sister, Katie, who had narrowly escaped also being sterilized, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) were ordered to establish new guidelines for its government sterilization policy.

[ 105 ] By 1979, the new guidelines finally addressed the concern over informed consent, determined that minors under the age of 21 and those with severe mental impairments who could not give consent would not be sterilized, and articulated the provision that doctors could no longer claim that a woman's refusal to be sterilized would result in her being denied welfare benefits.

[ 105 ] Latinas Main article: Sterilization of Latinas The 20th century demarcated a time in which compulsory sterilization heavily navigated its way into primarily Latino communities, against Latina women . Locations such as Puerto Rico and Los Angeles, California were found to have had large amounts of their female population coerced into sterilization procedures without quality and necessary informed consent nor full awareness of the procedure.

Puerto Rico Between the span of the 1930s to the 1970s, nearly one-third of the female population in Puerto Rico was sterilized; at the time, this was the highest rate of sterilization in the world.

[ 116 ] Some viewed sterilization as a means of rectifying the country's poverty and unemployment rates. Following legalization of the procedure in 1937 a U.S. government endorsed initiative saw health department officials advocating for sterilization in rural parts of the island. Sterilized women were also encouraged to join the workforce, in particular the textile and clothing related industries. The procedure was so common that it was often referred to solely as "la operación", garnering a documentary referenced by the same name.

[ 116 ] This intentional targeting of Latino communities exemplifies the strategic placement of racial eugenics in modern history. This targeting is also inclusive of those with disabilities and those from marginalized populations, which Puerto Rico is not the only example of this trend.

Eugenics did not serve as the only reason for the disproportionate rates of sterilization in the Puerto Rican community.

Contraceptive trials were inducted in the 1950s towards Puerto Rican women.

John Rock and Gregory Pincus were the two men spearheading the human trials of oral contraceptives . In 1954, the decision was made to conduct the clinical experiment in Puerto Rico, citing the island's large network of birth control clinics and lack of anti-birth control laws, which was in contrast to the United States' thorough cultural and religious opposition to the reproductive service.

[ 117 ] The decision to conduct the trials in this community was also motivated by the structural implications of supremacy and colonialism. Rock and Pincus monopolized off of the primarily poor and uneducated background of these women, countering that if they "could follow the Pill regimen, then women anywhere in the world could too." [ 117 ] These women were purposely ill-informed of the oral contraceptives presence; the researchers only reported that the drug, which was administered at a much higher dosage than what birth control is prescribed at today, was to prevent pregnancy, not that it was tied to a clinical trial in order to jump start oral contraceptive access in America through FDA approval.

California In California, by the year 1964, a total of 20,108 people were sterilized, making that the largest amount in all of the United States.

[ 118 ] Individuals sterilized were disproportionately Mexican, Mexican-American , and Chicana women. Andrea Estrada, a UC Santa Barbara affiliate, said: Beginning in 1909 and continuing for 70 years, California led the country in the number of sterilization procedures performed on men and women, often without their full knowledge and consent. Approximately 20,000 sterilizations took place in state institutions, comprising one-third of the total number performed in the 32 states where such action was legal.

[ 119 ] In 1966, the case of Nancy Hernandez was the first to reach national public attention and resulted in protests on women's rights and reproductive rights across the country. Her story was published in Rebecca Kluchin's book, Fit to be Tied: Sterilization and Reproductive Rights in America, 1950-1980 .

[ 120 ] Cases such as Madrigal v. Quilligan , a class action suit regarding forced or coerced postpartum sterilization of Latina women following cesarean sections, helped bring to light the widespread abuse of sterilization supported by federal funds. The case's plaintiffs were 10 sterilized women of Los Angeles County Hospital who elected to come forward with their stories. Although a grim reality, No más bebés is a documentary that offers an emotional and candid storytelling of the Madrigal v. Quilligan case on behalf of Latina women whom were direct recipients of the coerced sterilization of the Los Angeles' hospital. The judge's ruling sided with the County Hospital, but an aftermath of the case resulted in the accessibility of multiple language informed consent forms.

These stories, among many others, serve as backbones for not only the reproductive justice movement that we see today, but a better understanding and recognition of the Chicana feminism movement in contrast to white feminism's perception of reproductive rights .

Native American women Main article: Sterilization of Native American women An estimated 40% of Native American women (60,000–70,000 women) and 10% of Native American men in the United States underwent sterilization in the 1970s.

[ 121 ] A General Accounting Office (GAO) report in 1976 found that 3,406 Native American women, 3,000 of which were of childbearing age, [ 122 ] were sterilized by the Indian Health Service (IHS) in Arizona, Oklahoma, New Mexico, and South Dakota from 1973 to 1976.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] The GAO report did not conclude any instances of coerced sterilization, but called for the reform of IHS and contract doctors' processes of obtaining informed consent for sterilization procedures.

[ 123 ] The IHS informed consent processes examined by the GAO did not comply with a 1974 ruling of the U.S. District Court that "any individual contemplating sterilization should be advised orally at the outset that at no time could federal benefits be withdrawn because of failure to agree to sterilization." [ 124 ] In examining individual cases and testimonies of Native American women, scholars have found that IHS and contract physicians recommended sterilization to Native American women as the appropriate form of birth control, failing to present potential alternatives and to explain the irreversible nature of sterilization, and threatened that refusal of the procedure would result in the women losing their children and/or federal benefits.

[ 121 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Scholars also identified language barriers in informed consent processes as the absence of interpreters for Native American women hindered them from fully understanding the sterilization procedure and its implications, in some cases.

[ 124 ] Scholars have cited physicians' individual paternalism and beliefs about the population control of poor communities and welfare recipients and the opportunity for financial gain as possible motivations for performing sterilizations on Native American women.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] Native American women and activists mobilized in the 1970s across the United States to combat the coerced sterilization of Native American women and advocate for their reproductive rights, alongside tribal sovereignty, in the Red Power movement .

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] Some of the most prominent activist organizations established in this decade and active in the Red Power movement and the resistance against coerced sterilization were the American Indian Movement (AIM), United Native Americans, Women of all Red Nations (WARN), the International Indian Treaty Council (IITC), and Indian Women United for Justice, founded by Constance Redbird Pinkerton Uri, a Cherokee-Choctaw physician.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] Some Native American activists have deemed the coerced sterilization of Native American women a "modern form of genocide," [ 123 ] and view these sterilizations as a violation of the rights of tribes as sovereign nations.

[ 123 ] Others argue that the sterilization of Native American women is interconnected with colonialist and capitalist motives of corporations and the federal government to acquire land and natural resources, including oil, natural gas, and coal, currently located on Native American reservations.

[ 124 ] [ 122 ] Scholars and Native American activists have situated the forced sterilizations of Native American women within broader histories of colonialism, violations of Native American tribal sovereignty by the federal government, including a long history of the removal of children from Native American women and families, and population control efforts in the United States.

[ 121 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] The 1970s brought new federal legislation enacted by the United States government which addressed issues of informed consent, sterilization, and the treatment of Native American children. The U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare released new regulations in 1979 on informed consent processes for sterilization procedures, including a longer waiting period of 30 days before the procedure, the presentation of alternative methods of birth control to the patient, and clear verbal affirmation that the patient's access to federal benefits or welfare programs would not be revoked if the procedure were refused.

[ 123 ] The Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 officially recognized the significance and value of the extended family in Native American culture, adopting "minimum federal standards for the removal of Indian children to foster or adoptive homes," [ 124 ] and the central importance of the sovereign tribal governments in decision-making processes surrounding the welfare of Native children.

[ 124 ] Influence on Nazi Germany See also: Nazi eugenics Although the eugenics movement in Germany started in the 1890s, it was later partly influenced by the United States.

California eugenicists began producing literature promoting eugenics and sterilization and sending it overseas to German scientists and medical professionals.

[ 14 ] By 1933, California had subjected more people to forceful sterilization than all other U.S. states combined. The forced sterilization program engineered by the Nazis was partly inspired by California's.

[ 126 ] The Rockefeller Foundation helped develop and fund various German eugenics programs, [ 127 ] including the one that Josef Mengele worked in before he went to Auschwitz .

[ 14 ] Upon returning from Germany in 1934, where more than 5,000 people per month were being forcibly sterilized, the California eugenics leader C. M. Goethe bragged to a colleague: You will be interested to know that your work has played a powerful part in shaping the opinions of the group of intellectuals who are behind Hitler in this epoch-making program. Everywhere I sensed that their opinions have been tremendously stimulated by American thought ... I want you, my dear friend, to carry this thought with you for the rest of your life, that you have really jolted into action a great government of 60 million people.

[ 128 ] Eugenics researcher Harry H. Laughlin often bragged that his Model Eugenic Sterilization laws had been implemented in the 1935 Nuremberg racial hygiene laws .

[ 129 ] In 1936, Laughlin was invited to an award ceremony at Heidelberg University in Germany (scheduled on the anniversary of the 1934 purge of Jews from the Heidelberg faculty), to receive an honorary doctorate for his work on the "science of racial cleansing". Due to financial limitations, Laughlin was unable to attend the ceremony and had to pick it up from the Rockefeller Institute. Afterward, he proudly shared the award with his colleagues, remarking that he felt that it symbolized the "common understanding of German and American scientists of the nature of eugenics." [ 130 ] Henry Friedlander wrote that although the German and American eugenics movements were similar, the U.S. did not follow the same slippery slope as Nazi eugenics because American "federalism and political heterogeneity encouraged diversity even with a single movement." In contrast, the German eugenics movement was more centralized and had fewer diverse ideas.

[ 131 ] Unlike the American movement, one publication and one society, the German Society for Racial Hygiene , represented all German eugenicists in the early 20th century.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] After 1945 some historians began to try to portray the U.S. eugenics movement as distinct and distant from Nazi eugenics.

[ 133 ] Many of the defendants at the Nuremberg trials of 1945 to 1946 attempted to justify their human-rights abuses by claiming similarity between the Nazi eugenics programs and the US eugenics programs.

[ 134 ] Late 20th century Genetic engineering After the Second World War , the extreme version of eugenics practiced by the Nazis brought the movement into disrepute. However, aspects of the eugenics movement such as forced sterilization were still taking place, just not with as much public visibility as before.

[ 135 ] As technology developed, the field of genetic engineering emerged. Instead of sterilizing people to remove traits deemed to be "undesirable", genetic engineering "changes or removes genes to prevent disease or improve the body in some significant way." [ 121 ] Proponents of genetic engineering cite its ability to cure and prevent life-threatening diseases. Genetic engineering began in the 1970s when scientists began to clone and alter genes. From this, scientists were able to create life-saving health interventions such as human insulin, the first-ever genetically engineered drug.

[ 136 ] Because of this development, over the years scientists were able to create new drugs to treat devastating diseases. For example, in the early 1990s, a group of scientists were able to use a gene-drug to treat severe combined immunodeficiency in a young girl.

[ 137 ] However, genetic engineering also further allows for the practice of eliminating "undesirable traits" within humans and other organisms—for example, with current genetic tests, parents are able to test a fetus for any life-threatening diseases that may affect the child's life and then choose to abort the baby.

[ 121 ] Some fear that this could lead to ethnic cleansing, or alternative form of eugenics.

[ 138 ] The ethical implications of genetic engineering were heavily considered by scientists at the time, and the Asilomar Conference was held in 1975 to discuss these concerns and set reasonable, voluntary guidelines that researchers would follow while using DNA technologies.

[ 139 ] Disability-selective abortion Advancements in prenatal testing over the past several decades have contributed to an increase in disability-selective abortions, which refers to the termination of pregnancy after a diagnosis of a genetic anomaly before birth.

[ 140 ] In 2007, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) began to recommend that all women, regardless of age, should be offered diagnostic genetic testing before 20 weeks gestation.

[ 141 ] Today, prenatal screening for chromosomal abnormalities, including Down syndrome , Edwards syndrome , and Patau syndrome , is offered as routine healthcare. In the United States, it is estimated that anywhere from 61%-93% of fetuses with Down syndrome are terminated after a definitive prenatal diagnosis each year.

[ 142 ] Reasons to continue or terminate a pregnancy following a prenatal diagnosis of a genetic abnormality are complex, and often influenced by a combination of social, medical, and ethical considerations.

Defenders of disability-selective abortion suggest that its practice alleviates human suffering and helps parents make informed reproductive decisions.

[ 143 ] This position considers disability-selective abortion as healthcare, intended to prevent pathology and improve quality of life. Proponents also argue that access to disability-selective abortions is essential to protecting women’s bodily autonomy.

[ 143 ] In addition, some support disability-selective abortion on the basis of procreative beneficence – the principle of selecting the child with the best-expected life based on available genetic information.

[ 144 ] Opponents of disability-selective abortion argue that the normalization of its practice is inherently imbued with a condescending, eugenic attitude toward disability.

[ 145 ] They suggest that disability-selective abortions are enabled by the normal function view (NFV) of health, which pathologizes disability and assumes that disability is directly correlated with a reduction in health.

[ 146 ] [ a ] Banning sterilization The 1978 Federal Sterilization Regulations, created by the United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare , or HEW (now the United States Department of Health and Human Services ), outline a variety of prohibited sterilization practices that were often used previously to coerce or force women into sterilization.

[ 148 ] These were intended to prevent such eugenics and neo-eugenics as resulted in the involuntary sterilization of large groups of poor and minority women. Such practices include: not conveying to patients that sterilization is permanent and irreversible, in their own language (including the option to end the process or procedure at any time without conceding any future medical attention or federal benefits, the ability to ask any and all questions about the procedure and its ramifications, the requirement that the consent seeker describes the procedure fully including any and all possible discomforts and/or side-effects and any and all benefits of sterilization); failing to provide alternative information about methods of contraception, family planning, or pregnancy termination that are nonpermanent and/or irreversible (this includes abortion ); conditioning receiving welfare and/or Medicaid benefits by the individual or his/her children on the individuals "consenting" to permanent sterilization; tying elected abortion to compulsory sterilization (cannot receive a sought out abortion without "consenting" to sterilization); using hysterectomy as sterilization; and subjecting minors and the mentally incompetent to sterilization.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 82 ] The regulations also include an extension of the informed consent waiting period from 72 hours to 30 days (with a maximum of 180 days between informed consent and the sterilization procedure).

[ 149 ] [ 148 ] [ 82 ] However, several studies have indicated that the forms are often dense and complex and beyond the literacy aptitude of the average American, and those seeking publicly funded sterilization are more likely to possess below-average literacy skills.

[ 150 ] High levels of misinformation concerning sterilization still exist among individuals who have already undergone sterilization procedures, with permanence being one of the most common gray factors.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Additionally, federal enforcement of the requirements of the 1978 Federal Sterilization Regulation is inconsistent and some of the prohibited abuses continue to be pervasive, particularly in underfunded hospitals and lower income patient hospitals and care centers.

[ 149 ] [ 82 ] The compulsory sterilization of American men and women continues to this day. In 2013, it was reported that 148 female prisoners in two California prisons were sterilized between 2006 and 2010 in a supposedly voluntary program, but it was determined that the prisoners did not give consent to the procedures.

[ 152 ] Sterilization in U.S. prisons By 1979, California, driven by the eugenic thinking that prisoners were unfit to reproduce, sterilized approximately 20,000 people without their consent.

[ 153 ] This practice legally ended when eugenics laws were repealed in 1979 for California state hospitals and in 2010 for state prisons.

[ 154 ] However, the compulsory sterilization of American men and women continues to this day. Between 2005 and 2011, 148 female prisoners were sterilized in California prisons through tubal ligations without required state approvals.

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] [ 157 ] Former inmates claim that medical staff pressured women who had served multiple prison terms or would be likely to return to prison in the future to be sterilized.

[ 158 ] In September 2014, California enacted Bill SB1135 that bans sterilization in correctional facilities, unless the procedure is required to save an inmate's life.

[ 159 ] Additionally, in 2021, Gavin Newsom, Governor of California, signed a compensation agreement to pay these 148 victims $25,000 each.

Other states have sterilized prisoners in the recent past. In Tennessee, general sessions judge Sam Benningfield signed an order in 2017 allowing inmates to reduce their sentence by 30 days if they undergo voluntary sterilization.

[ 160 ] His goal was to break a “vicious cycle” of repeat drug offenders who were unemployed or could not pay for child support.

[ 161 ] While the order was only in place for two months, 38 men signed up to receive vasectomies and 32 women to receive Nexplanon implants, a birth control device.

[ 161 ] Benningfield claimed this 2017 order was not a eugenics program, writing in a statement that its purpose was to, “protect children and help people in their rehabilitation efforts.” [ 162 ] However, criminal justice researchers and news outlets continually compared it to previous prisoner sterilization programs based in eugenics and portrayed it as a continuation of the practice of eugenics. John Raphling, a senior researcher on criminal justice for the U.S. Human Rights Watch, told The Outline that Benningfield was “coercing poor people to have this procedure to prevent them from reproducing.” [ 162 ] Sterilization in immigration detention centers In 2020, forced sterilizations at a U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention center in Ocilla, Georgia amassed national attention.

[ 163 ] Over 50 people detained at the ICE facility, all lower-income immigrant women with minimal understanding of the English language, stated they were pushed to undergo or did undergo medically unnecessary gynecological surgeries including hysterectomies. A Senate briefing on this subject emphasized the “uniform absence of truly informed consent” due in part to language barriers and in part to lack of information provided.

[ 164 ] 21st century In recent decades, advancements in genetic technologies—particularly gene-editing tools like CRISPR—have sparked renewed ethical debates that echo the concerns of the early eugenics movement. While genome editing is still in the early days of research and development, the technology could one day be more developed and used to alter human genetics.

[ 165 ] While these technologies are primarily used for treating genetic disorders, scholars and bioethicists have raised concerns about the emergence of "liberal" or "consumer-based" eugenics, in which individuals may seek to enhance traits such as intelligence, physical ability, or appearance in their offspring.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] See also United States portal Elizabeth Tuttle Eugenics Board of North Carolina Eugenics in California Eugenics Survey of Vermont Franz Boas International Federation of Eugenics Organizations Poe v. Lynchburg Training School & Hospital (1981) Skinner v. Oklahoma (1942) Society for Biodemography and Social Biology Sterilization law in the United States Stump v. Sparkman (1978) The Kallikak Family References ^ "Eugenics" .

Unified Medical Language System (Psychological Index Terms) . National Library of Medicine. 26 September 2010. Archived from the original on 6 July 2009.

^ "Eugenics; Its Definition, Scope and Aims 1" .

Nature .

70 (1804): 82. May 1904.

Bibcode : 1904Natur..70...82.

.

doi : 10.1038/070082a0 .

S2CID 41155237 .

^ Susan Currell; Christina Cogdell (2006).

Popular Eugenics: National Efficiency and American Mass Culture in the 1930s . Ohio University Press. pp.

2– 3.

ISBN 978-0-8214-1691-4 .

^ Leonard, Thomas C. (2005).

Eugenics and Economics in the Progressive Era .

Journal of Economic Perspectives . Retrieved January 29, 2022.

^ Freeden, Michael (February 11, 2009).

Eugenics and Progressive Thought: a Study in Ideological Affinity .

Cambridge University Press . Retrieved January 29, 2022.

^ a b c d Newman, Carla (Spring 2018). "Bartering from the Bench: A Tennessee Judge Prevents Reproduction of Social Undesirables; Historic Analysis of Involuntary Sterilization of African American Women".

Georgetown Journal of Law & Modern Critical Race Perspectives .

10 – via Gale OneFile: LegalTrac.

^ a b Kluchin, Rebecca (2009).

Fit to Be Tied: Sterilization and Reproductive Rights in America, 1950–1980 . Rutgers University Press. pp. 10, 73, 91, 94, 98– 100, 102, 182– 183.

^ Mukherjee, Siddhartha (2016).

The Gene . Scribner. pp.

82– 83.

^ "Origins of Eugenics: From Sir Francis Galton to Virginia's Racial Integrity Act of 1924" .

University of Virginia: Historical Collections at the Claude Moore Health Sciences Library . Retrieved 25 October 2019 .

^ Galton, Francis (1869).

"Hereditary Genius" (PDF) . p. 64 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ Norrgard, Karen.

"Human Testing, the Eugenics Movement, and IRBs" .

Scitable by Nature Education . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ a b c Selden, 2005: p. 202.

^ Ordover, 2003: p. xii .

^ a b c d e f g h i Edwin Black (9 November 2003).

"Eugenics and the Nazis – the California connection" .

San Francisco Chronicle . Retrieved 2 February 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g "Eugenics Record Office" .

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ Bender, 2009: p. 192 .

^ "The Eugenics Record Office at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (1910-1939)" .

The Embryo Project Encyclopedia . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ Kevles, 1986: pp. 133–135.

^ "American Breeders Association" .

Controlling Hereditary: The American Eugenics Crusade: 1870-1940 . 7 March 2011. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "First U.S. national eugenics organization formed by American Breeders' Association" .

Eugenics Archive . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ Stansfield, W. D. (1 January 2005).

"The Bell Family Legacies" .

Journal of Heredity .

96 (1): 1– 3.

doi : 10.1093/jhered/esi007 .

PMID 15618310 .

^ "Eugenic Archives: Eugenics Record Office, board of scientific directors and functions" .

www.eugenicsarchive.org . Retrieved 11 June 2021 .

^ a b Stern, 2005: pp. 82–91, 84, 144.

^ Elof Axel Carlson (2001).

The Unfit: A history of a bad idea . CSHL Press. p. 193.

ISBN 978-0-87969-587-3 .

^ a b Selden, 2005: p. 206.

^ Cameron, M. E.; Hastings, William P. (October 1912). "Education, the Old and the New, School Management, the Experience of Half a Century".

American Journal of Nursing .

13 (1): 75.

doi : 10.1097/00000446-191213010-00022 .

hdl : 2027/uc1.$b262526 .

JSTOR 3404652 .

^ FAAN, Patricia D'Antonio, PhD, RN (9 August 2016).

Nursing History Review, Volume 25: Official Journal of the American Association for the History of Nursing . Springer Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0-8261-4457-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ziegler, Mary (2008). "Eugenic Feminism: Mental Hygiene, The Women's Movement, And The Campaign For Eugenic Legal Reform, 1900–1935".

Harvard Journal of Law & Gender .

31 (1): 211– 236.

^ a b "The Sanger-Hitler Equation" , Margaret Sanger Papers Project Newsletter , #32, Winter 2002/3.

New York University Department of History ^ Carole Ruth McCann.

Birth Control Politics in the United States, 1916–1945 . Cornell University Press. p. 100.

^ Sanger, Margaret (October 1921).

"The Eugenic Value of Birth Control Propaganda" .

The Public Writings and Speeches of Margaret Sanger . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ Sanger, Margaret (1919).

Birth Control and Racial Betterment (PDF) . Birth Control Review. p. 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 September 2015 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

We maintain that a woman possessing an adequate knowledge of her reproductive functions is the best judge of time and conditions under which her child should be brought into the world. We maintain that it is her right, regardless of all other considerations, to determine whether she shall bear children or not, and how many children she shall bear if she chooses to become a mother.

^ Sanger, Margaret (1920).

Woman and the New Race . Brentano. p.

100 .

^ Hawkins, Kristan.

"Remove statues of Margaret Sanger, Planned Parenthood founder tied to eugenics and racism" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved 9 May 2025 .

^ "Margaret Sanger's extreme brand of eugenics" .

America Magazine . 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 .

^ Larson, Edward J. (1996).

Sex, Race, and Science: Eugenics in the Deep South . Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 74.

ISBN 978-0-8018-5511-5 .

^ Larson, p. 75.

^ a b c d Kluchin, Rebecca M. (2009).

Fit to Be Tied: Sterilization and Reproductive Rights in America 1950–1980 . New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. pp.

17– 20.

^ "Public Health".

JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association .

XXVI (23): 1138. 6 June 1896.

doi : 10.1001/jama.1896.02430750040011 .

^ Lombardo, Paul A. (2010).

Three generations, no imbeciles : eugenics, the Supreme Court, and Buck v. Bell (Johns Hopkins pbk. ed.). Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-9824-2 .

^ "Michigan is the first US State to introduce Compulsory Sterilization Bill" .

Eugenics Archive . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "Pennsylvania passes legislation permitting eugenic sterilization, but is vetoed by governor Samuel W. Pennypacker on March 30, 1905" .

Eugenics Archive . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ The Indiana Supreme Court overturned the law in 1921 in Williams v. Smith , 131 NE 2 (Ind.), 1921, text at "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 October 2008 . Retrieved 22 May 2008 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Washington becomes the second state to enact a sexual sterilization law" .

Eugenics Archive . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ "California Passes its First Sterilization Law" .

Eugenics Archive . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ "Connecticut passes eugenic legislation" .

Eugenics Archive . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ "Buck v. Bell" .

Cornell Law School: Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ a b c d e Lombardo, Paul.

"Social Origins of Eugenics" .

Image Archive on the American Eugenics Movement . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ Contagious Diseases Among Immigrants: Hearings Before the Committee on Immigration and Naturalization, House of Representatives, Sixty Sixth Congress, Third Session. 9 February 1921 . United States. Congress. House Committee On Immigration And Naturalization. 1921.

By setting up a eugenical standard for admission demanding a high natural excellence of all immigrants regardless of nationality and past opportunities, we can enhance and improve the national stamina and ability of future Americans. At present, not inferior nationalities but inferior individual family stocks are tending to deteriorate our national characteristics. Our failure to sort immigrants on the basis of natural worth is a very serious national menace.

^ Statement of Mr. Harry H. Laughlin, Secretary of the Eugenics Research Association, Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island, N. Y.; Committee on Immigration and Naturalization, House of Representatives, Washington D.C., 16 April 1920.

^ "Eugenics in the United States" .

Lumen . Retrieved 10 October 2019 .

^ Bischoff, Henry (2002).

Immigration Issues . Greenwood. p. 156.

^ Watson, James D.; Berry, Andrew (2003).

DNA: The Secret of Life . Alfred A. Knopf. pp.

29–31 .

ISBN 978-0-375-41546-3 .

^ James D. Watson with Andres BerryJ (2003).

"DNA: The Secret Life" (PDF) .

Duchenne Active Crowd .

^ a b Lombardo, Paul; "Eugenics Laws Restricting Immigration," Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Eugenics Archive ^ Gould, Stephen J. (1981) The mismeasure of man . Norton: [ page needed ] ^ a b Lombardo, Paul; "Eugenic Laws Against Race-Mixing" , Eugenics Archive ^ a b c d Cruz, Bárbara C.; Berson, Michael J. (2001).

"The American Melting Pot? Miscegenation Laws in the United States" .

OAH Magazine of History .

15 (4): 80– 84.

doi : 10.1093/maghis/15.4.80 .

ISSN 0882-228X .

JSTOR 25163474 .

^ Provost, Nyla (27 July 2023).

"Mixing: A History of Anti-Miscegenation Laws in the United States" .

History in the Making .

16 (1).

^ Jordan, Winthrop D. (2014).

"Historical Origins of the One-Drop Racial Rule in the United States" .

Journal of Critical Mixed Race Studies .

1 (1).

doi : 10.5070/C811013867 .

^ "EugenicsArchive" .

eugenicsarchive.org .

^ Whitman, James Q. (2003).

Hitler's American model: The United States and the Making of Nazi Race Laws .

Princeton University Press . p. 2 and following.

ISBN 9780691172422 . Archived from the original on 25 July 2020.

^ a b "Virginia Health Bulletin: The New Virginia Law To Preserve Racial Integrity, March 1924 · Document Bank of Virginia" .

edu.lva.virginia.gov . Retrieved 17 April 2024 .

^ a b "Race, Sex, and the Freedom to Marry: Loving v. Virginia" .

Journal of American History .

102 (4): 1264– 1265. March 2016.

doi : 10.1093/jahist/jav728 .

ISSN 0021-8723 .

^ Dorr, Gregory (2008).

Segregation's Science . Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press. p. 10.

^ Castles, Katherine (November 2002).

"Quiet Eugenics: Sterilization in North Carolina's Institutions for the Mentally Retarded, 1945-1965" .

The Journal of Southern History .

68 (4): 862.

doi : 10.2307/3069776 .

JSTOR 3069776 .

^ Kline, Wendy (2005).

Building a Better Race: Gender, Sexuality, and Eugenics From the Turn of the Century to the Baby Boom . University of California Press. p.

4 .

ISBN 978-0-520-24674-4 .

^ Critchlow, Donald T. (1999).

Intended Consequences: Birth Control, Abortion, and the Federal Government in Modern America . New York: Oxford University Press. p.

15 .

ISBN 978-0-19-504657-1 .

^ Pernick, Martin (1999).

The Black Stork: Eugenics and the Death of "Defective" Babies in American Medicine and Motion Pictures since 1915 . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 161.

ISBN 978-0-19-513539-8 .

^ Pernick, 2009: p. 161 .

^ "Better Babies Contests in the United States (1908–1916) | The Embryo Project Encyclopedia" .

embryo.asu.edu . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ "Eugenics Archive Theme" .

www.eugenicsarchive.org . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ Selden 2005: p. 207.

^ Stern, Alexandra Minna (May 2002).

"Making Better Babies: Public Health and Race Betterment in Indiana, 1920–1935" .

American Journal of Public Health .

92 (5): 742– 752.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.92.5.742 .

PMC 3222231 .

PMID 11988439 .

^ a b Stern, Alexandra Minna (2007).

" 'We Cannot Make a Silk Purse Out of a Sow's Ear': Eugenics in the Hoosier Heartland" .

Indiana Magazine of History .

103 (1): 3– 38.

JSTOR 27792776 .

S2CID 152706523 .

^ Centers for Disease Control Prevention (CDC) (1 October 1999).

"Healthier mothers and babies" .

Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report .

48 (38): 849– 58.

PMID 10563522 .

^ Stern, "Making Better Babies, " pp. 742, 746–50.

^ Linda C. Gugin; James E. St. Clair, eds. (2015).

Indiana's 200: The People Who Shaped the Hoosier State . Indianapolis: Indiana Historical Society Press. pp.

300– 301.

ISBN 978-0-87195-387-2 .

^ Gugin and St. Clair, eds., "Indiana's 200," pp. 299–300.

^ Crnic, Meghan (March 2009). "Better babies: social engineering for 'a better nation, a better world' ".

Endeavour .

33 (1): 12– 17.

doi : 10.1016/j.endeavour.2008.11.001 .

PMID 19217162 .

^ Pernick, Martin S. (May 2002).

"Taking Better Baby Contests Seriously" .

American Journal of Public Health .

92 (5): 707– 708.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.92.5.707 .

PMC 1447148 .

PMID 11988430 .

^ a b c d e f Singleton, Marilyn M. (Winter 2014).

"The 'Science' of Eugenics: America's Moral Detour" (PDF) .

Journal of American Physicians and Surgeons .

19 (4): 122– 125.

S2CID 151938462 .

^ "A social register of fitter families and better babies" The Milwaukee Sentinel . 26 May 1929.

^ " "A social register of fitter families and better babies" The Milwaukee Sentinel . 26 May 1929" . Archived from the original on 30 April 2019 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 .

^ "Fitter family contests" eugenics archive.ca ^ "Fitter Family Contests." Eugenics Archive. Web. 2 March 2010.

[1] .

^ Boudreau 2005: [ page needed ] ^ "Eugenics Archive Theme" .

www.eugenicsarchive.org . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ a b c Selden, 2005: [ page needed ] ^ Selden, 2005: p. 211.

^ D. E. Bender (2011).

Rt-American Abyss Z . Cornell University Press. p. 207.

ISBN 978-0-8014-5713-5 .

^ Lombardo, 2011: p. ix .

^ Indiana Supreme Court Legal History Lecture Series, "Three Generations of Imbeciles are Enough:"Reflections on 100 Years of Eugenics in Indiana, at In.gov Archived 13 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Williams v. Smith , 131 NE 2 (Ind.), 1921, text at Archived 1 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Larson, Edward J. (1996) Sex, Race, and Science: Eugenics in the Deep South . pp.194-195. Baltimore; Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-5511-5 ; citing Buck v. Bell 274 U.S. 200, 205 (1927) ^ "Skinner v. Oklahoma" .

Cornell Law School: Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ Dorr, Gregory Michael.

"Encyclopedia Virginia: Buck v Bell" . Retrieved 3 May 2011 .

^ a b c Kluchin, Rebecca M. (2009).

Fit to Be Tied: Sterilization and Reproductive Rights in America 1950–1980 . New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. pp.

17– 20.

^ Lombardo, Paul; "Eugenic Sterilization Laws" , Eugenics Archive ^ Ladelle McWhorter (2009).

Racism and Sexual Oppression in Anglo-America: A Genealogy . Indiana University Press. p. 377.

ISBN 978-0-253-22063-9 .

^ Oklahoma City January 2 "sterilization of habitual criminals". The Montreal Gazette. January 3, 1934 ^ a b Kluchin, Rebecca M. (2009).

Fit to Be Tied: Sterilization and Reproductive Rights in America 1950–1980 . New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. pp.

17– 20.

^ J. Mitchell Miller (6 August 2009).

21st Century Criminology: A Reference Handbook, Volume 1 . p. 193.

ISBN 978-1-4129-6019-9 .

^ Tukufu Zuberi (2001).

Thicker than blood: how racial statistics lie . University of Minnesota Press. p. 69.

ISBN 978-0-8166-3909-0 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Kluchin, Rebecca (2009).

Fit to Be Tied: Sterilization and Reproductive Rights in America, 1950–1980 . Rutgers University Press. pp. 10, 73, 91, 94, 98– 100, 102, 182– 183.

^ a b Begos, Kevin (18 May 2011).

"The American eugenics movement after World War II (part 1 of 3)" .

INDY Week . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

^ Begos, Kevin (18 May 2011).

"The American eugenics movement after World War II (part 1 of 3)" .

INDY Week . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ Dorr, Gregory; Logan, Angela (2011). "Quality, not mere quantity counts: black eugenics and the NAACP baby contests". In Lombardo, Paul (ed.).

A Century of Eugenics in America: From the Indiana Experiment to the Human Genome Era . Indiana University Press. pp. 68–92.

ISBN 978-0-253-22269-5 .

^ a b "Opposition Claims About Margaret Sanger" Archived 8 March 2017 at archive.today (PDF).

Planned Parenthood . Katherine Dexter McCormick Library. 2004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 March 2017. Retrieved 8 March 2017.

^ "Unwanted Sterilization and Eugenics Programs in the United States" .

Independent Lens . Retrieved 6 April 2020 .

^ Severson, Kim (9 December 2011).

"Thousands Sterilized, a State Weighs Restitution" .

The New York Times .

^ a b "For eugenic sterilization victims, belated justice" .

MSNBC . 27 June 2014 . Retrieved 6 April 2020 .

^ a b Stern, Alexandra Minna (July 2005).

"STERILIZED in the Name of Public Health: Race, Immigration, and Reproductive Control in Modern California" .

American Journal of Public Health .

95 (7): 1128– 1138.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2004.041608 .

PMC 1449330 .

PMID 15983269 .

^ a b c Ward, Martha C. (1986).

Poor Women, Powerful Men: America's Great Experiment in Family Planning . Boulder: Westview Press. p.

95 .

^ Kluchin, Rebecca M. (2009).

Fit to Be Tied: Sterilization and Reproductive Rights in America 1950–1980 . New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. pp.

17– 20.

^ a b "The Dark History of Forced Sterilization of Latina Women" .

Panoramas . 30 October 2017 . Retrieved 7 April 2020 .

^ a b "The Puerto Rico Pill Trials" . American Experience.

www.pbs.org . Retrieved 7 April 2020 .

^ "California Eugenics" .

www.uvm.edu . Retrieved 7 April 2020 .

^ "The Politics of Female Biology and Reproduction" .

The UCSB Current . 6 April 2015 . Retrieved 7 April 2020 .

^ Kluchin, Rebecca M. (2011).

Fit to Be Tied . Rutgers University Press.

doi : 10.36019/9780813548319 .

ISBN 978-0-8135-4831-9 .

S2CID 243708220 .

^ a b c d e Amy, Jean-Jacques; Rowlands, Sam (4 March 2018).

"Legalised non-consensual sterilisation – eugenics put into practice before 1945, and the aftermath. Part 1: USA, Japan, Canada and Mexico" (PDF) .

The European Journal of Contraception & Reproductive Health Care .

23 (2): 121– 129.

doi : 10.1080/13625187.2018.1450973 .

PMID 29624082 .

S2CID 4603052 .

^ a b Smith, Andrea (2002). "Better Dead than Pregnant: The Colonization of Native Women's Reproductive Health". In Silliman, Jael; Bhattacharjee, Anannya (eds.).

Policing the National Body: Sex, Race, and Criminalization . Cambridge, Massachusetts: South End Press. pp.

123– 146.

ISBN 0-89608-660-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j O'Sullivan, Meg Devlin (November 2016). "Informing Red Power and Transforming the Second Wave: Native American women and the struggle against coerced sterilization in the 1970s".

Women's History Review .

25 (6): 965– 982.

doi : 10.1080/09612025.2015.1083229 .

S2CID 148386936 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Torpy, Sally J. (January 2000).

"Native American Women and Coerced Sterilization: On the Trail of Tears in the 1970s" .

American Indian Culture and Research Journal .

24 (2): 1– 22.

doi : 10.17953/aicr.24.2.7646013460646042 (inactive 17 July 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b c Rutecki, Gregory W. (March 2011). "Forced sterilization of Native Americans: later twentieth century cooperation with national eugenic policies?".

Ethics & Medicine .

27 (1): 33– 42.

S2CID 79990450 .

^ Timothy F. Murphy; Marc Lappé (1994).

Justice and the Human Genome Project . University of California Press. p.

18 .

ISBN 978-0-520-08363-9 .

^ Kühl, Stefan (16 December 2008).

The Nazi Connection: Eugenics, American Racism, and German National Socialism . Oxford University Press. p. 21.

ISBN 978-0-19-508260-9 .

The Foundation continued to support German eugenicists even after the National Socialists had gained control of German science.

^ Edwin Black (9 November 2003).

"Eugenics and the Nazis – the California connection" .

San Francisco Chronicle . Retrieved 2 February 2017 .

^ Jackson, John P.; Weidman, Nadine M. (2005).

Race, Racism, and Science: Social Impact and Interaction . Rutgers University Press. p. 123.

ISBN 978-0-8135-3736-8 .

^ Lombardo, 2008: pp. 211–213 .

^ a b Friedlander, Henry (2000).

The Origins of Nazi Genocide: From Euthanasia to the Final Solution . Univ of North Carolina Press. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-8078-4675-9 .

Although the German eugenics movement, led until the Weimar years by Alfred Ploetz and Wilhelm Schallmayer, did not differ radically from the American movement, it was more centralized. Unlike in the United States, where federalism and political heterogeneity encouraged diversity even with a single movement, in Germany one society, the German Society for Race Hygiene ( Deutsche Gesellschaft fue Rassenhygiene ), eventually represented all eugenicists, while one journal, the Archiv für Rassen- und Gsellschafts Biologie , founded by Ploetz in 1904, remained the primary scientific publication of German Eugenics.

^ Rubenfeld, Sheldon; Benedict, Susan (2014).

Human Subjects Research after the Holocaust . Springer. p. 13.

ISBN 978-3-319-05701-9 .

Considering America's strong interest in eugenics, it is reasonable to ask why America did not slide down the same slippery slope as Germany.

^ Kühl 2001: p. xiv .

^ Bashford, Alison; Levine, Philippa (3 August 2010).

The Oxford Handbook of the History of Eugenics .

Oxford University Press . p. 327.

ISBN 9780199706532 .

Archived from the original on 15 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2020 .

Eugenics was prominent at the Nuremberg trials ... much was made of the similarity between US and German eugenics by the defense, who argued that German eugenics differed little from that practiced in the United States ... .

^ Begos, Kevin (18 May 2011).

"The American eugenics movement after World War II (part 1 of 3)" .

INDY Week . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ "How did they make insulin from recombinant DNA?" .

www.nlm.nih.gov . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ Wyke, Alexandra (19 March 1994). "Engineering health".

The Economist . Vol. 330, no. 7855. pp.

13– 15.

ProQuest 224175700 .

^ "Take stock of research ethics in human genome editing" .

Nature .

549 (7672): 307. September 2017.

Bibcode : 2017Natur.549..307.

.

doi : 10.1038/549307a .

PMID 28933445 .

S2CID 47161780 .

^ Berg, P.; Baltimore, D.; Brenner, S.; Roblin, R. O.; Singer, M. F. (1 June 1975).

"Summary statement of the Asilomar conference on recombinant DNA molecules" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

72 (6): 1981– 1984.

Bibcode : 1975PNAS...72.1981B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.72.6.1981 .

PMC 432675 .

PMID 806076 .

^ Davis, Lennard J. (19 October 2016).

The Disability Studies Reader . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-317-39786-1 .

^ Graham, Lisa (1 September 2007).

"ACOG Releases Guidelines on Screening for Fetal Chromosomal Abnormalities" .

American Family Physician .

76 (5): 712– 716.

^ Natoli, Jaime L.; Ackerman, Deborah L.; McDermott, Suzanne; Edwards, Janice G. (December 2012).

"Prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome: a systematic review of termination rates (1995–2011)" .

Prenatal Diagnosis .

32 (2): 142– 153.

doi : 10.1002/pd.2910 .

ISSN 0197-3851 .

PMID 22418958 .

^ a b Davis, Lennard J. (2017).

The disability studies reader (5th ed.). New York (N.Y.): Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-93022-3 .

^ Savulescu, Julian (1 May 2007).

"In defence of Procreative Beneficence" .

Journal of Medical Ethics .

33 (5): 284– 288.

doi : 10.1136/jme.2006.018184 .

ISSN 0306-6800 .

PMC 2598126 .

PMID 17470506 .

^ Parens, Erik; Asch, Adrienne (1999).

"Special Supplement: The Disability Rights Critique of Prenatal Genetic Testing Reflections and Recommendations" .

The Hastings Center Report .

29 (5): S1 – S22 .

doi : 10.2307/3527746 .

ISSN 0093-0334 .

JSTOR 3527746 .

^ Barnes, Elizabeth (2020), Silvers, Anita; Shachar, Carmel; Cohen, I. Glenn; Stein, Michael Ashley (eds.), "Disability, Health, and Normal Function" , Disability, Health, Law, and Bioethics , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

5– 19, ISBN 978-1-108-48597-5 , retrieved 17 April 2024 ^ Buchanan, Allen E.; Brock, Dan W., eds. (2007).

From chance to choice: genetics and justice (8th printing ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-66977-1 .

^ a b c US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 42 Code of Federal Regulations. 441.250–259 (1978).

^ a b c Bowman, Cynthia Grant; Rosenbury, Laura A.; Tuerkheimer, Deborah; Yuracko, Kimberly A. (2010).

Feminist Jurisprudence Cases and Material . St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Company. pp.

413– 419.

ISBN 978-0-314-26463-3 .

^ a b Borrero, Sonya; Zite, Nikki; Creinin, Mitchell D. (2012).

"Federally Funded Sterilization: Time to Rethink Policy?" .

American Journal of Public Health .

102 (10): 1822– 1825.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.2012.300850 .

PMC 3490665 .

PMID 22897531 .

^ Borrero, Sonya; Abebe, Kaleab; Dehlendorf, Christine; Schwarz, Eleanor Bimla; Creinin, Mitchell D.; Nikolajski, Cara; Ibrahim, Said (January 2011).

"Racial variation in tubal sterilization rates: role of patient-level factors" .

Fertility and Sterility .

95 (1): 17– 22.

doi : 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.05.031 .

PMC 2970690 .

PMID 20579640 .

^ "Sterilization Abuse in State Prisons" News 07/23/2013 author Alex Stern ^ Johnson, Corey G. (7 July 2013).

"Female inmates sterilized in California prisons without approval" .

Reveal . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ La, Lynn (22 March 2023).

"More pain for California's forced sterilization patients" .

CalMatters . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ "California Sterilized More People Than Any U.S. State But Has Yet to Compensate Victims" .

Governing . 3 August 2017 . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ jlieditors (7 June 2021).

"The Long Scalpel of the Law: How United States Prisons Continue to Practice Eugenics Through Forced Sterilization" .

Minnesota Journal of Law & Inequality . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ "California Bans Sterilization of Female Inmates Without Consent" .

NBC News . 26 September 2014 . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ Johnson, Corey G. (7 July 2013).

"Female inmates sterilized in California prisons without approval" .

Reveal . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ "SB 1135" . CA Gov . Retrieved 17 September 2014 .

^ Hawkins, Derek (25 October 2021).

"Judge to inmates: Get sterilized and I'll shave off jail time" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ a b Hawkins, Derek (28 July 2017).

"Tennessee judge, under fire, pulls offer to trade shorter jail sentences for vasectomies" .

The Washington Post .

^ a b Beery, Zoë.

"America's long, shameful history of sterilizing prisoners" .

The Outline . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ "Not Just ICE: Forced Sterilization in the United States" .

Immigration and Human Rights Law Review | The Blog . Immigration and Human Rights Law Review. 28 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ "Number of Women Alleging Misconduct by ICE Gynecologist Nearly Triples" .

Merkley . 27 October 2020 . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ Joseph, Andrew (November 2022).

"Ethical Perspectives of Therapeutic Human Genome Editing From Multiple and Diverse Viewpoints: A Scoping Review" .

Cureus .

14 (11): e31927.

doi : 10.7759/cureus.31927 .

PMC 9793437 .

PMID 36582559 .

^ Baylis, Françoise (2021).

"Human Genome Editing: Our Future Belongs to All of Us" .

AMA Journal of Ethics .

23 (1): E64 – E70 . Retrieved 30 April 2025 .

^ Mukherjee, Siddhartha (August 2016).

"The Dark Side of CRISPR" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 30 April 2025 .

Notes ^ In addition, some refute disability-selective abortion with the Expressivist argument. The Expressivist argument posits that selecting out disability is wrong because it implies that the world would be a better place without people with disabilities, leaping from the presumption that it would be better if a disability could be cured to that it would be better if the person with a disability did not exist.

[ 147 ] Sources Bender, Daniel E. (2009).

American abyss: savagery and civilization in the age of industry .

Cornell University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8014-4598-9 .

Black, Edwin (9 November 2003).

"Eugenics and the Nazis – the California connection" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Boudreau, Erica Bicchieri (October 2005). " 'Yea, I have a Goodly Heritage': Health Versus Heredity in the Fitter Family Contests, 1920–1928".

Journal of Family History .

30 (4): 366– 387.

doi : 10.1177/0363199005276359 .

PMID 16304739 .

S2CID 2438862 .

Engs, Ruth C.

(2005).

The eugenics movement: an encyclopedia .

Greenwood Press .

ISBN 978-0-313-32791-9 .

Kevles, Daniel J.

(1986).

In the Name of Eugenics: genetics and the uses of human heredity .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-05763-0 .

Kühl, Stefan (2001).

The Nazi Connection: Eugenics, American Racism, and German National Socialism .

Oxford University Press US .

ISBN 978-0-19-514978-4 .

Larson, Edward J. (1996).

Sex, Race, and Science: Eugenics in the Deep South . Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-5511-5 .

Lombardo, Paul A.

(2008).

Three generations, no imbeciles: eugenics, the Supreme Court, and Buck v. Bell .

JHU Press .

ISBN 978-0-8018-9010-9 .

Lombardo, Paul A. (2011).

A Century of Eugenics in America: From the Indiana Experiment to the Human Genome Era .

Indiana University Press .

ISBN 978-0-253-22269-5 .

McWhorter, Ladelle (2009).

Racism and sexual oppression in Anglo-America: a genealogy . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0-253-22063-9 .

Murphy, Timothy F.; Lappé, Marc, eds. (1994).

Justice and the human genome project .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-08363-9 .

Ordover, Nancy (2003).

American eugenics: race, queer anatomy, and the science of nationalism .

University of Minnesota Press .

ISBN 978-0-8166-3559-7 .

Pernick, Martin S. (1999).

The Black Stork: Eugenics and the Death of "Defective" Babies in American Medicine and Motion Pictures Since 1915 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-513539-8 .

Pernick, Martin S. (May 2002).

"Taking Better Baby Contests Seriously" .

American Journal of Public Health .

92 (5): 707– 708.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.92.5.707 .

PMC 1447148 .

PMID 11988430 .

Selden, Steven (2005). "Transforming Better Babies into Fitter Families: Archival Resources and the History of the American Eugenics Movement, 1908–1930".

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

149 (2): 199– 225.

JSTOR 4598925 .

PMID 16208870 .

Stern, Alexandra (2005).

Eugenic nation: faults and frontiers of better breeding in modern America . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-24444-3 .

online review on H-Eugenics (November, 2007) "The Groundwork of Eugenics" .

The Hospital .

46 (1188): 198. 22 May 1909.

PMC 5200292 .

PMID 29815643 .

Further reading Allen, Garland E. (1987).

"The role of experts in scientific controversy" . In Engelhardt, Hugo Tristram; Caplan, Arthur L. (eds.).

Scientific controversies: case studies in the resolution and closure of disputes in science and technology . Cambridge University Press. pp.

169– 202.

ISBN 978-0-521-27560-6 .

Barkan, Elazar (1993).

The Retreat of Scientific Racism: Changing Concepts of Race in Britain and the United States Between the World Wars . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-45875-7 .

Bashford, Alison; Levine, Philippa, eds. (2010).

The Oxford Handbook of the History of Eugenics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-537314-1 .

Bauman, Zygmunt (2000).

Modernity and the Holocaust . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-8719-4 .

Black, Edwin (2004).

War against the weak: eugenics and America's campaign to create a master race . Thunder's Mouth Press.

ISBN 978-1-56858-321-1 .

Cuddy, Lois A.; Roche, Claire M., eds. (2003).

Evolution and eugenics in American literature and culture, 1880–1940: essays on ideological conflict and complicity . Bucknell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8387-5555-6 .

Currell, Susan (2006).

Popular eugenics: national efficiency and American mass culture in the 1930s . Ohio University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8214-1692-1 .

Dowbiggin, Ian Robert (1997).

Keeping America sane: psychiatry and eugenics in the United States and Canada, 1880–1940 . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-8398-1 .

Gould, Stephen Jay (1996).

The Mismeasure of Man (2nd, revised ed.). W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-31425-0 .

Haller, Mark H. (1963).

Eugenics: Hereditarian Attitudes in American Thought . Rutgers University Press.

Hansen, Randall and King, Desmond (eds.), Sterilized by the State: Eugenics, Race, and the Population Scare in Twentieth-Century North America.

New York: Cambridge University Press.

Hasian, Marouf Arif (1996).

The rhetoric of eugenics in Anglo-American thought . University of Georgia Press.

ISBN 978-0-8203-1771-7 .

Kline, Wendy (2005).

Building a Better Race: Gender, Sexuality, and Eugenics from the Turn of the Century to the Baby Boom . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-24674-4 .

Kohn, Marek (1995).

The Race Gallery: The Return of Racial Science . London: Jonathan Cape.

Lusane, Clarence (2002).

Hitler's black victims: the historical experiences of Afro-Germans, European Blacks, Africans, and African Americans in the Nazi era . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-93295-0 .

Maxwell, Anne (2010).

Picture Imperfect: Photography and Eugenics, 1870–1940 . Sussex Academic Press.

ISBN 978-1-84519-415-4 .

[ permanent dead link ] McCann, Carole Ruth (1999).

Birth control politics in the United States, 1916–1945 . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-8612-8 .

Mendelsohn, Everett (March–April 2000).

"The Eugenic Temptation: When ethics lag behind technology" .

Harvard Magazine .

Rafter, Nicole Hahn (1988).

White Trash: The Eugenic Family Studies, 1877–1919 . Northeastern University Press.

ISBN 978-1-55553-030-3 .

Reilly, Philip R. (1991).

The Surgical Solution: A History of Involuntary Sterilization in the United States . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-4096-8 .

Rosen, Christine (2004).

Preaching eugenics: religious leaders and the American eugenics movement . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-515679-9 .

Ross, Loretta (2000).

"Eugenics: African-American Case Study—Eugenics and Family Planning" .

Routledge International Encyclopedia of Women: Education: Health to Hypertension, Vol. 2 . Psychology Press. p. 638.

ISBN 978-0-415-92089-6 .

Schoen, Johanna (2005).

Choice and Coercion: Birth Control, Sterilization, and Abortion in Public Health and Welfare . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-8078-5585-0 .

Solinger, Rickie (2005).

Pregnancy and Power: A Short History of Reproductive Politics in America . New York: NYU Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-9828-7 .

Smith, J. David. (1993).

The Eugenic Assault on America: Scenes in Red, White and Black . George Mason University Press.

ISBN 978-0-913969-53-3 .

Spiro, Jonathan P. (2009).

Defending the Master Race: Conservation, Eugenics, and the Legacy of Madison Grant . University of Vermont Press.

ISBN 978-1-58465-715-6 .

Tucker, William H. (2007).

The funding of Scientific Racism: Wickliffe Draper and the Pioneer Fund . University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 978-0-252-07463-9 .

External links H-Eugenics , H-Net's network on the history of eugenics online , Reviews, announcements, and discussions among students and scholars.

The Color of Democracy: A Japanese Public Health Official's Reconnaissance Trip to the U.S. South Takeuchi-Demirci, Aiko.

Southern Spaces 18 March 2011.

"Eugenics" , Scope Note 28 , Bioethics Research Center, Georgetown University Plotz, David. "The Better Baby Business", The Washington Post , 13 March 2001. Web. 25 April 2010.

Plotz, David (14 March 2001).

"The Better Baby Business" .

Slate Magazine .

Eugenics: Compulsory Sterilization in 50 American States , Kaelber, Lutz (ed.) Eugenics in the United States and Britain, 1890–1930: a comparative analysis Eugenics in the United States "Buck v. Bell (1927)" by N. Antonios and C. Raup at the Embryo Project Encyclopedia Pernick, M S (November 1997).

"Eugenics and public health in American history" .

American Journal of Public Health .

87 (11): 1767– 1772.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.87.11.1767 .

PMC 1381159 .

PMID 9366633 .

Garver, KL; Garver, B (November 1991).

"Eugenics: past, present, and the future" .

American Journal of Human Genetics .

49 (5): 1109– 1118.

PMC 1683254 .

PMID 1928094 .

Authority control databases National United States Spain Israel Other Yale LUX v t e Eugenics in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands v t e Eugenics in the Americas Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Suriname Trinidad and Tobago United States Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Falkland Islands French Guiana Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saba Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Turks and Caicos Islands U.S. Virgin Islands North America Central America Caribbean South America Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eugenics_in_the_United_States&oldid=1304644758 " Categories : Eugenics in the United States Human reproduction in the United States Reproductive rights in the United States Social history of the United States Progressive Era in the United States Progressivism in the United States Racism in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2010 Webarchive template archiveis links CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia introduction cleanup from February 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from February 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Use dmy dates from March 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 08:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eugenics in the United States 8 languages Add topic

