Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Pratyakṣa 2.2 Anumāṇa 2.3 Apohavada and language 3 Works Toggle Works subsection 3.1 Pramāṇa-samuccaya 3.2 List of other known works 4 Tradition and influence 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Dignāga 24 languages العربية Български བོད་ཡིག Deutsch Español Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano Lietuvių മലയാളം 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский संस्कृतम् Slovenščina தமிழ் తెలుగు Тыва дыл Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian Buddhist philosopher and logician (c.480–c.540) Dignāga A statue of Dignāga in Kalmykia Personal life Born c.

470/480 CE Near Kanchi Died c.

530/540CE Education Nalanda Religious life Religion Buddhism School Mahayana Senior posting Students Dharmapala of Nalanda Part of a series on Eastern philosophy China Confucianism Classical Confucius Mencius Xun Zi Dong Zhongshu Zheng Xuan Wang Yun Neo-Confucianism Han Yu Zhou Dunyi Zhang Zai Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Shao Yong Zhu Xi Lu Jiuyuan Wang Shouren Liu Zongzhou Li Zhi Wang Fuzhi Huang Zongxi Gu Yanwu Dai Zhen New Confucianism Kang Youwei Tan Sitong Liang Shuming Xiong Shili Feng Youlan Mou Zongsan Du Weiming Buddhism Han Buddhism Tientai Zhiyi Huayan school Fazang Guifeng Zongmi East Asian Mādhyamaka Jizang Kumārajīva Yogācāra Xuanzang Chinese Chan Bodhidharma Huineng Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Sakya Sakya Pandita Nyingma Longchenpa Gelug Tsongkhapa Four Tenets system Rangtong-Shentong Svatantrika-Prasaṅgika distinction Daoism Classical Laozi Zhuangzi Lie Yukou Neo-Daoism Wang Bi Ruan Ji Guo Xiang Ge Hong Cheng Xuanying Hundred Schools of Thought Legalism Guan Zhong Han Feizi Shang Yang Li Si Mohism Mozi Military and Strategy Sun Tzu Wu Qi Modern Hong Xiuquan Hong Rengan Yan Fu Zhang Taiyan Sun Yat-sen Lu Xun Dai Jitao Li Dazhao Chen Duxiu Ai Siqi Mao Zedong Liu Shaoqi Zhang Chunqiao Teng Wensheng Wang Huning Yi Junqing Zhao Tingyang Wang Hui Qin Hui Li Zehou India Āstika (orthodox) Vedic philosophy Agastya Aruni Ashtavakra Atri Vashistha Yajnavalkya Mimamsa Jaimini Vedanta Advaita Badarayana Gaudapada Adi Shankara Dvaita Madhvacharya Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Sri Vaishnavism Ramanuja Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Nyaya Gotama Navya-Nyāya Gangesha Upadhyaya Vaisheshika Kanada Nāstika (heterodox) Ājīvika Charvaka Kashmir Shaivism Abhinavagupta Pratyabhijna Tantra Tamil Valluvam Valluvar Other Chanakya General topics Ahimsa Atomism Atman Ātman (Hinduism) Ātman (Buddhism) Ātman (Jainism) Artha Anekantavada Brahman Dharma Indian logic Karma Kama Maya Moksha Nondualism Samadhi Pramana Yoga Jainism Haribhadra Umaswati Buddhism The Buddha Traditions Madhyamika Nagarjuna Yogacara Vasubandhu Dharmakirti Indian logic Dignāga Topics Dukkha Anatta Anicca Maitrī Nirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Emptiness Japan Traditions Japanese Buddhism Japanese Zen Sōtō school Dogen Rinzai school Eisai Shingon Kukai Japanese Confucianism Tokugawa Mitsukuni Fujiwara Seika Hayashi Razan Nakae Tōju Itō Jinsai Ogyū Sorai Kokugaku Motoori Norinaga Modern Thought Statism Fukuzawa Yukichi Tokutomi Soho Kita Ikki Kyoto School Kitaro Nishida Hajime Tanabe Jun Tosaka Shūzō Kuki Tetsuro Watsuji Kiyoshi Miki Keiji Nishitani Shin'ichi Hisamatsu Masao Abe D. T. Suzuki liberalism and Marxism Masao Maruyama Kojin Karatani Hiroki Azuma Chizuko Ueno Korea Traditions Korean Buddhism Wonhyo Uisang Hwaeom Uicheon Cheontae Jinul Seon Korean Confucianism Persons Chŏng Tojŏn Sŏ Kyŏngdŏk Yi Ŏnjŏk Yi Hwang Yi I Yi Ik Pak Chiwŏn Chŏng Yagyong Kim Chŏnghŭi Choe Han-gi Topics Silhak , Seohak Donghak Choe Je-u Modern Thought Persons Jaegwon Kim Topics Minjung theology Juche Philosophy portal v t e Dignāga (also known as Diṅnāga , c.

470/480 – c.

530/540 CE ) was an Indian Buddhist philosopher and logician. He is credited as one of the Buddhist founders of Indian logic ( hetu vidyā ) and atomism .  Dignāga's work laid the groundwork for the development of deductive logic in India and created the first system of Buddhist logic and epistemology ( pramāṇa ).

[ 1 ] According to Georges B. Dreyfus , his philosophical school brought about an Indian "epistemological turn" and became the "standard formulation of Buddhist logic and epistemology in India and Tibet." [ 2 ] Dignāga's thought influenced later Buddhist philosophers like Dharmakirti and also Hindu thinkers of the Nyaya school. Dignāga's epistemology accepted only "perception" ( pratyaksa ) and "inference" ( anumāṇa ) as valid instruments of knowledge and introduced the widely influential theory of "exclusion" ( apoha ) to explain linguistic meaning.

[ 3 ] His work on language , inferential reasoning and perception were also widely influential among later Indian philosophers.

[ 4 ] According to Richard P. Hayes "some familiarity with Dinnaga's arguments and conclusions is indispensable for anyone who wishes to understand the historical development of Indian thought ." [ 5 ] Life [ edit ] Little is known about Dignāga's life. According to Taranatha , Dignāga was born to a Brahmin family near the city of Kanchi in around 470 or 480 CE and was ordained into the Vātsīputrīya order at an early age by a monk named Nāgadatta.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Xuanzang states that Dignāga was active for a period in the " Andhra country". At some point in his life, Dignāga became associated with the monastery of Nalanda .

[ 8 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Buddhist epistemology holds that perception and inference are the means to correct knowledge.

Dignāga mature philosophy is expounded in his magnum opus , the Pramāṇa-samuccaya . In chapter one, Dignāga explains his epistemology which holds that there are only two 'instruments of knowledge' or 'valid cognitions' ( pramāṇa ); "perception" or "sensation" ( pratyakṣa ) and "inference" or "reasoning" ( anumāna ). In chapter one, Dignāga writes: Sensation and reasoning are the only two means of acquiring knowledge, because two attributes are knowable; there is no knowable object other than the peculiar and the general attribute. I shall show that sensation has the peculiar attribute as its subject matter, while reasoning has the general attribute as its subject matter.

[ 9 ] Perception is a non-conceptual knowing of particulars which is bound by causality, while inference is reasonable, linguistic and conceptual.

[ 10 ] This conservative epistemic theory was in contrast to the Nyaya school who accepted other means of knowledge such as upamāna (comparison and analogy).

Pratyakṣa [ edit ] Pratyakṣa is a kind of awareness that acquires information about particulars, and is immediately present to one of the senses. This is the topic of the first chapter of the Pramāṇa-samuccaya.

[ 11 ] For Dignāga, perception is pre-verbal, pre-conceptual and unstructured sense data. In chapter two of the Pramāṇa-samuccaya he writes: Sensation is devoid of structure. That cognition in which there is no structure is sensation. What kind of thing is this so-called structure? Attaching a name, a universal and so forth.

[ 12 ] According to Dignāga our mind always takes raw sense data or particulars and interprets them or groups them together in more complex ways, compares them to past experiences, gives them names to classify them based on general attributes ( samanyalaksana ) and so forth. This process he terms kalpana (arranging, structuring).

[ 13 ] This cognitive process is already different from sensation, which is a simple cognition based only on the immediately present. Thus pratyakṣa is only awareness of particular sense data such as a patch of green color and the sensation of hardness, never awareness of a macroscopic object such an apple which is always a higher level synthesis.

[ 14 ] For Dignāga, sensation is also inerrant, it cannot "stray" because it is the most basic and simple phenomenon of experience or as he puts it: "it is impossible too for the object of awareness itself to be errant, for errancy is only the content of misinterpretation by the mind." [ 15 ] Also, for Dignaga, pratyakṣa is mostly phenomenalist and is not dependent on the existence of an external world. It is also inexpressible and private.

[ 16 ] Anumāṇa [ edit ] Anumāṇa (inference or reasoning) for Dignāga is a type of cognition which is only aware of general attributes, and is constructed out of simpler sensations. Inference can also be communicated through linguistic conventions.

[ 16 ] A central issue which concerned Dignāga was the interpretation of signs ( linga ) or the evidence ( hetu ) which led one to an inference about states of affairs; such as how smoke can lead one to infer that there is a fire.

[ 17 ] This topic of svārthānumāna (reasoning, literally "inference for oneself") is the subject of chapter two of the Pramāṇa-samuccaya while the topic of the third chapter is about demonstration ( parārthānumāna , literally "inference for others"), that is, how one communicates one's inferences through proper argument.

[ 18 ] According to Richard Hayes, in Dignāga's system, to obtain knowledge that a property (the "inferable property", sadhya ) is inherent in a "subject of inference" ( paksa ) it must be derived through an inferential sign ( linga ). For this to occur, the following must be true: [ 19 ] The inferential sign must be a  property of the subject of the inference. That is, there exists in the subject of inference a property, which is different from the inferable property and which is furthermore evident to the person drawing the inference; this second property may serve as an inferential sign in case it has two further characteristics.

The inferential sign must be known to occur in at least one locus, other than the subject of inference, in which the inferable property occurs.

The inferential sign must not be known to occur in any other loci in which the inferable property is absent.

Richard Hayes interprets these criteria as overly strict and this is because he sees Dignāga's system as one of rational skepticism . Dignāga's epistemology, argues Hayes, is a way to express and practice the traditional Buddhist injunction to not become attached to views and opinions.

[ 20 ] According to Hayes, for Dignāga, the role of logic is: to counter dogmatism and prejudice. As a weapon in the battle against prejudice that rages in every mind that seeks wisdom--in minds of the vast majority of people who do not seek wisdom, prejudice simply takes full control without a contest-there is nothing as powerful as the kind of reason that lies at the heart of Dignaga's system of logic. For it should be clear that very few of our judgments in ordinary life pass the standards set by the three characteristics of legitimate' evidence. Taken in its strictest interpretation, none of the judgments of any but a  fully omniscient being passes. And, since there is no evidence that there exist any fully omniscient beings, the best available working hypothesis is that no one's thinking is immune from errors that require revision in the face of newly discovered realities.

[ 21 ] Apohavada and language [ edit ] Dignāga considered the interpretation of conventional and symbolic signs such as the words and sentences of human language to be no more than special or conventional instances of the general principles of inference or anumana.

[ 17 ] He takes up several issues relating to language and its relationship to inference in the fifth chapter of his Pramāṇa-samuccaya .

[ 11 ] During Dignāga's time, the orthodox Indian Nyaya school and also Hindu Sanskrit grammarians (such as Bhartṛhari ) had discussed issues of epistemology and language respectively, but their theories generally accepted the concept of universals which was rejected by most Buddhist philosophers. Influenced by the work of these thinkers as well as by Buddhist philosophers of the Sautrantika school who rejected Hindu theories of universals in favor of nominalism ( prajñapti ), Dignāga developed his own Buddhist theory of language and meaning based on the concept of " apoha " (exclusion).

[ 22 ] Hattori Masaaki explains the doctrine thus: a word indicates an object merely through the exclusion of other objects ( anyapoha , -vyavrtti ). For example, the word "cow" simply means that the object is not a non-cow. As such, a word cannot denote anything real, whether it be an individual (vyakti), a universal (jati), or any other thing. The apprehension of an object by means of the exclusion of other objects is nothing but an inference.

[ 23 ] Works [ edit ] As noted by Hayes, the difficulty in studying the highly terse works of Dignāga is considerable, because none of them have survived in the original Sanskrit and the Tibetan and Chinese translations which do survive show signs of having been done by translators who were not completely certain of the meaning of the work.

[ 24 ] This difficulty has also led scholars to read Dignaga through the lens of later authors such as Dharmakirti and their Indian and Tibetan interpreters as well as their Hindu Nyaya opponents. Because of this tendency in scholarship, ideas which are actually innovations of Dharmakirti and later authors have often been associated with Dignaga by scholars such as Fyodor Shcherbatskoy and S. Mookerjee, even though these thinkers often differ.

[ 25 ] Pramāṇa-samuccaya [ edit ] Dignāga's magnum opus , the ( Compendium of Epistemology, Derge Kanjur no. 4203) and its auto-commentary (Pramāṇasamuccayavṛtti ), examined perception, language and inferential reasoning. It presents perception as a bare cognition, devoid of conceptualization and sees language as useful fictions created through a process of exclusion ( apoha ).

[ 3 ] The work has six chapters. Chapter one is on perception ( pratyakṣa ), chapter on inference for one’s self ( svārthānumāna ), chapter three on inference for others ( parārthānumāna ), chapter four discusses reason and examples ( hētu-dṛṣṭāna ), chapter five deals apoha and chapter six deals with analogy ( jāti ).

[ 26 ] This work exists in two Tibetan translations. The Sanskrit text was initially thought to be lost by modern scholars, but then a manuscript of the commentary by Jinendrabuddhi was discovered. Modern scholars are currently working to extract and reconstruct the Sanskrit text of the Pramāṇasamuccaya from the commentary in which it is embedded.

[ 27 ] Kumarila Bhatta, in his Shlokavartika , responds to Dignāga's criticism of Mimamsa Sutra 1.1.4.

[ 28 ] List of other known works [ edit ] His other surviving works on reasoning and epistemology include: [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 26 ] Alambana -parīkṣā ( Examination of the Object of Cognition, Derge Kanjur no. 4205) and its auto commentary ( Ālambanaparīkṣāvṛtti ). This work seeks to prove that ālambanas , the objects of perception, are not real and that consciousness alone is real.

Hetucakra ḍamaru ( The Reason Wheel Drum ), considered his first work on formal logic. It may be regarded as a bridge between the older doctrine of trairūpya and Dignāga's own later theory of vyapti which is a concept related to the Western notion of implication .

*Hetvābhāsamukha (Introduction to Fallacious Reasoning) Nyāya -mukha ( Introduction to Logic ), Taisho no. 1628 translated by Xuanzang and T. 1629 by Yijing *Sāmānyalakṣaṇaparīkṣā (Examination of General Characteristics), i.e. Guanzongxiang lun (觀總相論) Trikāla-parikṣa ( Examination of tri-temporality ) *Upādāyaprajñaptiprakaraṇa or *Prajñaptihetusaṃgrahaśāstra (only available in Chinese as Qushishishe lun 取事施設論) He also wrote other works of a more religious or scriptural nature: [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 26 ] Samantabhadracaryāpraṇidhānārthasaṃgraha ( Derge Kanjur no. 4012) - a commentary on the Samantabhadracaryāpraṇidhāna , part of the Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra .

Abhidharmakośamarmapradīpa (Derge no. 4095) – a condensed summary of Vasubandhu 's seminal work the Abhidharmakośa Āryamañjughoṣastotra (Tibetan: Ḥphags-pa ḥjam-paḥi-dbyans-kyibstod-pa , Derge no. 2712) Prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārtha (Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom, Derge 3809) - a  summary of the Mahayana Aṣṭasāhasrikaprajñāpāramitā , survives in Tibetan and Sanskrit.

Guṇaparyantastotraṭīkā (Tibetan: Yon-tam mthaḥ-yas-par bstod-paḥi ḥgrelpa , Derge no. 1156) - a commentary on the Guṇaparyantastotra of Ratnadāsa Miśraka-stotra ( Mixed Hymn, Tibetan : Spel-mar bstod-pa shes-bya-ba, Derge no. 1150), it has also been ascribed to a different author: Mātṛceṭa Yogāvatāra ( Introduction to Yoga , Tibetan: Rnal-ḥbyor-la ḥjug-pa , Derge no. 4074) - a work on yoga from the perspective of mind-only Hastavālaprakaraṇa (Derge no. 3844 and 3848) it has been wrongly ascribed to Āryadeva; There are also several works said to be by Dignaga that are now lost: [ 30 ] Dvādaśaśatikā *Vaiśeṣikaparīkṣā (Examination of Vaiśeṣika ) Vādavidhānaṭīkā - Commentary on Vasubandhu's Vādavidhi Nyāyaparīkṣā (Examination of Logic) *Sāṅkhyaparīkṣā (Examination of Samkhya ) Hetumukha (Introduction to Reasoning) Sāmānyaparīkṣā (Examination of Generality), either lost or the same as *Sāmānyalakṣaṇaparīkṣā Tradition and influence [ edit ] Main article: Buddhist logico-epistemology § The Dignāga-Dharmakīrti tradition Dignāga founded a tradition of Buddhist epistemology and reasoning, and this school is sometimes called the "School of Dignāga" or "The school of Dinnāga and Dharmakīrti" (due to the strong influence of Dharmakīrti as well).

[ 32 ] In Tibetan it is often called "those who follow reasoning" (Tibetan: rigs pa rjes su ‘brang ba ); in modern literature it is sometimes known by the Sanskrit 'pramāṇavāda', often translated as "the Epistemological School." [ 33 ] Many of the figures in these were commentators on the works of Dinnāga and Dharmakīrti, but some of them also wrote original works and developed the tradition in new directions.

[ 32 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] The work of this tradition also went on to influence the Buddhist Madhyamaka school, through the work of figures like Bhāvaviveka ( c.

500 – c.

578 ), Jñanagarbha (700-760), and Śāntarakṣita (725–788). These thinkers attempted to adopt the logical and epistemological insights of Dinnāga and Dharmakīrti to defend the tenets of the Madhyamaka school.

Dignāga's tradition of logic and epistemology continued in Tibet , where it was expanded by thinkers such as Cha-ba (1182–1251) and Sakya Pandita (1182–1251).

Dignāga also influenced non-Buddhist Sanskrit thinkers. According to Lawrence J. McCrea, and Parimal G. Patil, Dignāga set in motion an "epistemic turn" in Indian philosophy. After Dignāga, most Indian philosophers were now expected to defend their views by using a fully developed epistemological theory (which they also had to defend).

[ 36 ] See also [ edit ] Hetucakra Trairūpya Buddhist logic Critical Buddhism References [ edit ] ^ Zheng Wei-hong; Dignāga and Dharmakīrti: Two Summits of Indian Buddhist Logic. Research Institute of Chinese Classics; Fudan University; Shanghai, China ^ Dreyfus, Georges B. J.

Recognizing Reality: Dharmakirti’s Philosophy and its Tibetan Interpretations , Suny, 1997, pp. 15-16.

^ a b Arnold, Dan. The Philosophical Works and Influence of Dignāga and Dharmakīrti, http://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/view/document/obo-9780195393521/obo-9780195393521-0085.xml ^ Dunne, John. "Dignaga" in Buswell (ed.) ENCYCLOPEDIA OF BUDDHISM. Volume One A-L ^ Hayes (1982), p. ix.

^ Edelglass, William (2022). "Dignāga".

The Routledge Handbook of Indian Buddhist Philosophy . Routledge. pp.

284– 303.

ISBN 9781351030885 .

^ Karr, Andy (2007).

Contemplating Reality: A Practitioner's Guide to the View in Indo-Tibetan Buddhism . Shambhala Publications. p. 212.

ISBN 9781590304297 .

^ Eltschinger, Vincent. "Dignāga".

Brill's Encyclopedia of Buddhism Online . BRILL.

^ Hayes (1982), p 133.

^ Tom Tillemans (2011), Dharmakirti , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ a b Hayes (1982), p 132.

^ Hayes (1982), p 134.

^ Hayes (1982), p 135.

^ Hayes (1982), p 138.

^ Hayes (1982), p 139.

^ a b Hayes (1982), p 143.

^ a b Hayes (1982), p 1.

^ Hayes (1982), p 132-33.

^ Hayes (1982), p 146, 153.

^ Hayes (1982), p 146, 167.

^ Hayes (1982), p 167.

^ Hayes (1982), p 27-28.

^ Hayes (1982), p 26.

^ Hayes, (1982), p. 6.

^ Hayes, (1982), p. 15.

^ a b c Pamio, Roberta.

A comparative study between Buddhism and Nyaya , 2021 ^ Eli Franco (2006). A New Era in the Study of Buddhist Philosophy, 34(3), 221–227. doi:10.1007/s10781-005-5019-3 ^ Taber, John A.; Kumārila Bhaṭṭa (2005).

A Hindu critique of Buddhist epistemology: Kumārila on perception: the "Determinatin of perception" chapter of Kumārila Bhaṭṭa's Ślokavārttika . RoutledgeCurzon Hindu studies series. London; New York: RoutledgeCurzon. pp.

15– 17.

ISBN 978-0-415-33602-4 .

^ a b "EAST - Dignāga" .

east.ikga.oeaw.ac.at . Retrieved 7 March 2024 .

^ a b c Eltschinger, "Dignaga" in 2019, Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. II , “Lives,” ed. Jonathan Silk (in chief), Richard Bowring, Vincent Eltschinger and Michael Radich. Leiden/Boston: Brill, 179-185 ^ a b Hattori, Masaaki. 1968.

Dignāga, On Perception: Being the Pratyakṣapariccheda of Dignāga’s Pramāṇasamuccaya from the Sanskrit Fragments and the Tibetan Versions, Translated and Annotated, pp. 6-11 HOS, Harvard Oriental Series 47. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

^ a b Westerhoff, Jan (2018).

The Golden Age of Indian Buddhist Philosophy, p. 217. Oxford University Press.

^ Tillemans, Tom, "Dharmakīrti", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2014 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = < http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/dharmakiirti/ >.

^ Garfield, Jay L; Edelglass, William (editors) . The Oxford Handbook of World Philosophy , p. 234.

^ Cluster of Excellence "Asia and Europe in a Global Context" of the University of Heidelberg, http://east.uni-hd.de/buddh/ind/7/16/ Archived 8 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ Lawrence J. McCrea, and Parimal G. Patil. Buddhist Philosophy of Language in India: Jnanasrimitra on Exclusion. New York: Columbia University Press, 2010. p 5.

Further reading [ edit ] Chu, Junjie (2006).

On Dignāga's theory of the object of cognition as presented in PS (V) 1 , Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 29 (2), 211–254 Frauwallner, Erich, Dignāga, sein Werk und seine Entwicklung.

(Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Süd- und Ostasiens 2:83–164, 1959) Hattori Masaaki, Dignāga, On Perception, being the Pratyakṣapariccheda of Dignāga's Pramāṇasamuccaya from the Sanskrit fragments and the Tibetan Versions (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1968) Hayes, Richard, Dignāga on the Interpretation of Signs (Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Company, 1982) Katsura Shoryu, Dignāga and Dharmakīrti on apoha in E. Steinkellner (ed.), Studies in the Buddhist Epistemological Tradition (Vienna, Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1991), pp. 129–146 Mookerjee, S.

The Buddhist Philosophy of Universal Flux, an Exposition of the Philosophy of Critical Realism as expounded by the School of Dignāga (Calcutta, 1935) Sastri, N. Aiyaswami, Diṅnāga's Ālambanaparīkṣā and Vṛtti. Restored with the commentary of Dharmapāla into Sanskrit from the Tibetan and Chinese versions and edited with English translations and notes with extracts from Vinītadeva's commentary.

(Madras: The Adyar Library. 1942) [1] Tucci, Giuseppe, The Nyāyamukha of Dignāga, the oldest Buddhist Text on Logic after Chinese and Tibetan Materials (Materialien zur Kunde des Buddhismus, 15 Heft, Heidelberg, 1930) Vidyabhusana, S.C.

A History of Indian Logic – Ancient, Mediaeval and Modern Schools (Calcutta, 1921) External links [ edit ] Dignaga's Logic of Invention, by Volker Peckhaus Vidhabhusana, Satis Chandra (1907). History of the Mediaeval School of Indian Logic. Calcutta University.

v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal v t e Yogachara Key doctrines Caitasika Kleśa Mānasvijñāna ālayavijñāna Bīja Vāsanā Trisvabhāva Four Views Parikalpitasvabhāva Paratantrasvabhāva Pariniṣpannasvabhāva Figures India Maitreya-nātha Asaṅga Vasubandhu Dharmapāla Guṇamati Sthiramati Bandhuśri Nanda Śuddhacandra Citrabhāna Viśeṣamitra Jinaputra Jñānacandra Dignāga Asvabhāva Śīlabhadra Dharmakīrti Śāntarakṣita Kamalaśīla China Paramārtha Xuanzang Kuiji Huizhao Zhizhou Japan Dōshō Chitsū Chihō Gyōki Gien Genbō Tokuitsu Shingyō Jōkei Ryōhen Kōin Sūtra Avataṃsaka Sūtra Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra Mahāyāna Abhidharma Sūtra Śāstra Yogācārabhūmi Śāstra Mahāyānasaṃgraha Triṃśikāvijñaptimātratā Vimśatikāvijñaptimātratāsiddhi Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi Viṃśatikā Lamp of Complete Understanding Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi Dōgakushō Kanjinkakumushō Schools Vijñānavāda Alīkākāravāda Satyākāravāda Branches Hossō Kōfuku-ji Yakushi-ji Northern Hossō Kiyomizu-dera Shōtoku-shū Hōryū-ji Hokki-ji Hōrin-ji Chūgū-ji Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Netherlands People DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dignāga&oldid=1298631770 " Categories : Atomists 6th-century Indian philosophers Buddhism amongst Tamils Buddhist logic Buddhist writers Idealists Indian Buddhist monks Indian logicians Indian scholars of Buddhism Yogacara 5th-century Indian philosophers 6th-century Indian mathematicians 5th-century Indian mathematicians 6th-century Indian writers Buddhist monks from Kanchipuram district Pallava people Monks of Nalanda Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from September 2014 Use dmy dates from September 2014 Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 17:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dignāga 24 languages Add topic

