Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Algorithms 2 Applications 3 Nomenclature 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Image color transfer 1 language Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Color mapping ) Function that maps the colors of one image to the colors of another image "Color mapping" redirects here; not to be confused with False color .

Color mapping example Source image Reference image Source image color mapped using histogram matching Image color transfer is a function that maps (transforms) the colors of one (source) image to the colors of another (target) image. A color mapping may be referred to as the algorithm that results in the mapping function or the algorithm that transforms the image colors. The image modification process is sometimes called color transfer or, when grayscale images are involved, brightness transfer function (BTF) ; it may also be called photometric camera calibration or radiometric camera calibration .

The term image color transfer is a bit of a misnomer since most common algorithms transfer both color and shading. (Indeed, the example shown on this page predominantly transfers shading other than a small orange region within the image that is adjusted to yellow.) Algorithms [ edit ] There are two types of image color transfer algorithms: those that employ the statistics of the colors of two images, and those that rely on a given pixel correspondence between the images. In a wide-ranging review, Faridul and others [ 1 ] identify a third broad category of implementation, namely user-assisted methods.

An example of an algorithm that employs the statistical properties of the images is histogram matching . This is a classic algorithm for color transfer, but it can suffer from the problem that it is too precise so that it copies very particular color quirks from the target image, rather than the general color characteristics, giving rise to color artifacts. Newer statistic-based algorithms deal with this problem. An example of such algorithm is one that adjusts the mean and the standard deviation of each of the source image channels to match those of the corresponding reference image channels. This adjustment process is typically performed in the Lαβ or Lab color spaces.

[ 2 ] A common algorithm for computing the color mapping when the pixel correspondence is given is building the joint-histogram (see also co-occurrence matrix ) of the two images and finding the mapping by using dynamic programming based on the joint-histogram values.

[ 3 ] When the pixel correspondence is not given and the image contents are different (due to different point of view), the statistics of the image corresponding regions can be used as an input to statistics-based algorithms, such as histogram matching. The corresponding regions can be found by detecting the corresponding features .

[ 4 ] Liu [ 5 ] provides a review of image color transfer methods.  The review extends into considerations of video color transfer and deep learning methods including Neural style transfer .

Applications [ edit ] Color transfer processing can serve two different purposes: one is calibrating the colors of two cameras for further processing using two or more sample images, the second is adjusting the colors of two images for perceptual visual compatibility.

Color calibration is an important pre-processing task in computer vision applications. Many applications simultaneously process two or more images and, therefore, need their colors to be calibrated. Examples of such applications are: Image differencing , registration , object recognition , multi-camera tracking , co-segmentation and stereo reconstruction .

A photograph of 21st-century London recolored to match an 18th-century painting by Canaletto.

Other applications of image color transfer have been suggested. These include the co-option of color palettes from recognised sources such as famous paintings and the use as a further alternative to color modification methods commonly found in commercial image processing applications such as ‘posterise’, ‘solarise’ and ‘gradient’.

[ 6 ] A web application has been made available to explore these possibilities.

Nomenclature [ edit ] The use of the terms source and target in this article reflects the usage in the seminal paper by Reinhard et al.

[ 2 ] However, others such as Xiao and Ma [ 7 ] reverse that usage and indeed it seems more natural to consider that the colors from a source image are directed at a target image. Adobe use the term source for the color reference image in the Photoshop Match Color function.   Because of confusion over this terminology some software has been released into the public domain with incorrect functionality.

[ 8 ] To minimise further confusion, it may be good practice henceforth to utilise terms such as input image or base image and color source image or color palette image respectively.

See also [ edit ] List of colors Color chart Color management ICC profile IT8 Optical transfer function References [ edit ] ^ Faridul, H. Sheikh; Pouli, T.; Chamaret, C.; Stauder, J.; Reinhard, E.; Kuzovkin, D.; Tremeau, A. (February 2016).

"Colour Mapping: A Review of Recent Methods, Extensions and Applications: Colour Mapping" .

Computer Graphics Forum .

35 (1): 59– 88.

doi : 10.1111/cgf.12671 .

S2CID 13038481 . Retrieved 9 June 2023 .

^ a b Color Transfer between Images ^ Inter-Camera Color Calibration using Cross-Correlation Model Function ^ Piecewise-consistent Color Mappings of Images Acquired Under Various Conditions Archived 2011-07-21 at the Wayback Machine ^ Liu, Shiguang (2022). "An Overview of Color Transfer and Style Transfer for Images and Videos".

arXiv : 2204.13339 [ cs.CV ].

^ Johnson, Terry (28 May 2022).

"A Free-toUse Web App for Image Colour Transfer Processing" .

Medium .

^ Xioa, X; Ma, L (2006).

"Color transfer in correlated color space" .

Proceedings of the 2006 ACM international conference on Virtual reality continuum and its applications . pp.

305– 309.

doi : 10.1145/1128923.1128974 .

ISBN 1-59593-324-7 .

^ "source and target reverse · Issue #11 · jrosebr1/color_transfer" .

GitHub . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Image_color_transfer&oldid=1297574448 " Categories : Image processing Color Digital imaging Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 02:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Image color transfer 1 language Add topic

