Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Journals 3 Footnotes 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Springer Publishing 7 languages Català Español Euskara فارسی Français Norsk bokmål Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American publishing company This article is about the American academic publisher. For the German academic publisher, see Springer Science+Business Media . For the German digital and popular periodical publishing house, see Axel Springer SE .

Springer Publishing Parent company Mannheim Media Status Active Founded 1950 Country of origin United States Headquarters location Salmon Tower Building New York City Distribution self-distributed (US) Login Canada (Canada) Viva Books (India) Taylor & Francis (Asia) Footprint Books (Australia) Eurospan Group (EMEA) [ 1 ] Nonfiction topics Nursing, gerontology, psychology, social work, counseling, public health, and rehabilitation Imprints Demos Medical Publishing Official website www .springerpub .com Springer Publishing Company [ 2 ] is an American publishing company of academic journals and books, focusing on the fields of nursing , [ 3 ] gerontology , psychology , social work , counseling , public health , and rehabilitation (neuropsychology) . It was established in 1951 by Bernhard Springer, a great-grandson of Julius Springer , [ 4 ] and is based in Midtown Manhattan , New York City .

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Springer Publishing Company [ 2 ] was founded in 1950 by Bernhard Springer, the Berlin-born great-grandson of Julius Springer , who founded Springer-Verlag (now Springer Science+Business Media ). Springer Publishing's first landmark publications included Livestock Health Encyclopedia by R. Seiden and the 1952 Handbook of Cardiology for Nurses . The company's books soon branched into other fields, including medicine and psychology. Nursing publications grew rapidly in number, as Modell's Drugs in Current Use , a small annual paperback, sold over 150,000 copies over several editions. Solomon Garb's Laboratory Tests for Nurses , first published in 1954, sold nearly 240,000 copies over six editions in 25 years. In its second decade, the firm expanded into new publishing areas to reflect the rapidly expanding health care industry .

Gerontology was a growing topic of interest, and in the 1960s Bernhard Springer published six titles on aging. Meanwhile, publications in psychiatry and psychology continued to grow.

After Bernhard Springer's death in 1970, [ 2 ] his wife Ursula assumed responsibility for the company, and the firm continued to expand, adding titles in social work, counseling, rehabilitation, and public health, in addition to publishing journals, and annual reviews.

[ 6 ] In 2004, Ursula Springer sold Springer Publishing Company to Mannheim Holdings, LLC, a subsidiary of the Mannheim Trust. In 2008 they established a division to focus on nursing, and "signs to look for" when abuse is suspected.

[ 3 ] In 2015, Demos Medical Publishing merged into Springer Publishing.

[ 7 ] Journals [ edit ] Springer Publishing publishes the following academic journals : [ 8 ] Annals of LGBTQ Public and Population Health Annual Review of Gerontology and Geriatrics Annual Review of Nursing Research Biogerontology Care Management Journals Clinical Lactation Clinical Scholars Review Connect: The World of Critical Care Nurse Creative Nursing Current Hypertension Reports Ethical Human Psychology and Psychiatry Ethical Human Sciences and Services International Journal of Childbirth International Journal for Human Caring Journal of Applied Rehabilitation Counseling Journal of Cell Communication and Signaling Journal of Cognitive Education and Psychology Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy Journal of Doctoral Nursing Practice Journal of EMDR Practice and Research Journal of Financial Counseling and Planning Journal of Nursing Measurement Journal of Perinatal Education Minority Nurse Neonatal Network Nursing History Review Partner Abuse Rehabilitation Education Rehabilitation Research, Policy, and Education Research and Theory for Nursing Practice Scholarly Inquiry for Nursing Practice Sports Medicine Urban Social Work Violence & Victims [ 9 ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ "Booksellers" . Springer Publishing . Retrieved June 4, 2019 .

^ a b c "Bernard Springer, Publisher Here, 63" .

The New York Times . December 30, 1970 . Retrieved September 15, 2022 .

^ a b Patricia R. Olsen, ed. (August 13, 2016).

"A Caregiver for New Books About Nursing" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 15, 2022 .

^ Publishing History , archived from the original on April 26, 2012 , retrieved May 14, 2012 ^ Doreen Carvajal (November 21, 1998).

"Bertelsmann Signs a Deal Springer-Verlag" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 15, 2022 .

^ "SPRINGER,Ursula - Paid Notice: Deaths" .

The New York Times . April 3, 2014 . Retrieved September 15, 2022 .

^ "Springer Publishing Company and Demos Medical Publishing Merge to Better Serve Health Care and Helping Professions" . Archived from the original on September 10, 2017 . Retrieved September 9, 2017 .

^ "Springer Publishing Journals" .

^ "Violence and Victims".

2014 Journal Citation Reports .

Web of Science (Science ed.).

Thomson Reuters . 2015.

(subscription required) Further reading [ edit ] New York City portal Companies portal Books portal Springer, Ursula (2008).

The History of Springer Publishing Company . Springer Publishing.

ISBN 978-0826111128 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI 2 Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Springer_Publishing&oldid=1258954095 " Categories : Academic publishing companies Publishing companies of the United States Publishing companies established in 1950 1950 establishments in New York City Companies based in New York City Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from September 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2022 This page was last edited on 22 November 2024, at 15:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Springer Publishing 7 languages Add topic

