Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Live-in nanny 2.2 Nanny share 2.3 Night nanny 2.4 Maternity nurse / newborn care specialists / confinement nanny 3 Demographic 4 Qualifications 5 Notable nannies Toggle Notable nannies subsection 5.1 British royal family 5.2 Other royal families 5.3 Other 6 Television 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Nanny 34 languages العربية Avañe'ẽ Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Эрзянь Español Esperanto فارسی Bahasa Indonesia עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Latina Madhurâ Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Papiamentu Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person employed to take care of other people's children "Nannies" redirects here. For the TV episode, see Nannies ( How I Met Your Mother ) . For other uses, see Nanny (disambiguation) .

Childcare At home Parents Extended family Au pair Babysitter Governess Nanny Outside the home Daycare Pre-school playgroup Educational settings Early childhood education Homeschooling Pre-kindergarten Preschool Kindergarten Primary school Institutions and standards Child protection In loco parentis Minor Related Child abuse Child marriage Child Online Protection Family law Men in early childhood education Orphanage Parenting v t e A child and her nanny A nanny is a person who provides child care . Typically, this care is given within the children's family setting. Throughout history, nannies were usually servants in large households and reported directly to the lady of the house. Today, modern nannies, like other domestic workers , may live in or out of the house, depending on their circumstances and those of their employers. Some employment agencies specialize in providing nannies, as there are families that specifically seek them and may make them a part of the household.

Nannies differ slightly from other child care providers. A childminder works out of their own home, operating as a small business. In America, childminders are often advertised as a daycare. Depending on the country the childminder or daycare is in, government registration may or may not be required. Within the UK, a childminder must be Ofsted -registered, hold a current pediatric first aid qualification, public liability insurance and follow the EYFS. A mother's helper is someone who may live in or out of the household, and assists the person of the house with general chores as well as caring for the children. The term au pair usually refers to a young person, who comes from abroad to live with the host family and learn the local culture and language, while helping care for the children. A governess concentrates on educating children inside their own home, and a kindergarten or schoolteacher does the same, but in a school environment.

Even though there are no legal requirements to be considered a nanny, families may require a background check and a CPR certification. Families may also look for other special skills in a nanny, such as being bilingual or having early childhood development coursework done. Nannies help play a key role in a child's development by providing care.

History [ edit ] In the 19th and early 20th centuries, a nanny was usually known as a "nurse", and was typically female. "Nurses" were found in higher-income homes, and "nurses" were either hired or were slaves. Originally, the hired person would have been expected to breastfeed the infant, a role known as a " wet nurse ". In some households, the nurse was a senior member of the household staff and ran her own domain, a suite of rooms called the nursery . Some were supported by at least one assistant, known as a nursemaid (or nurserymaid). Because of their deep involvement in raising the children of the family, nannies were often remembered with great affection and treated more kindly than the junior servants.

[ 1 ] A baboe and the children in her care in the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia ), 1934 Nannies were often present in the households of the colonial officials tasked with managing vast colonial empires . Nannies in colonial societies spent their lives in the homes of their masters, often from childhood till old age, taking care of more than one generation (depending on the duration of the post). It was not uncommon for these nannies to be brought along with the family when these colonial officials were posted either back to Europe or to another colony.

[ 1 ] In Colonial India , a nanny was known as ayah , after aia , nurse, governess (in Portuguese) . This term is presently part of the vocabulary of various languages of the Subcontinent , meaning also female servant or maid .

[ 1 ] In Chinese she was an amah .

[ 1 ] In the Dutch East Indies the household nanny was known as baboe .

[ citation needed ] Types [ edit ] Live-in nanny [ edit ] A "live-in" nanny is much less common than it once was.

[ citation needed ] Being a live-in nanny may be ideal for a person looking to move interstate or abroad for either a short period of time or to set themselves up financially. Typically, a live-in nanny is responsible for the entire care of the children of their employers. This includes anything from washing the children's clothes, tidying the children's rooms, supervising homework, preparing children's meals, taking children to and from school, and taking children to after-school sports and/or activities.

Employee benefits may include a separate apartment (sometimes called a "nanny flat") or room, and possibly a car. While a live-in nanny was commonly available 24 hours a day in the past, this is much less common now and often these nannies work 10–12 hours on and the remainder of the day off. Essentially, these nannies are working while the children are awake and the parents are at work. A live-in nanny is nowadays more common among wealthier families because live-in nannies often have all their living expenses paid and provided by the employer.

[ 2 ] Nanny share [ edit ] Some families use what is known as a 'nanny share', where two or more families pay for the same nanny to care for the children in each family on a part-time basis.

[ 3 ] Night nanny [ edit ] A more recent addition to the role of a nanny is that of a night nanny. The night nanny usually works with a family anywhere from one night to seven nights per week. A night nanny generally works with children from newborn to five years of age. A night nanny can provide a teaching role, helping parents to establish good sleeping patterns or troubleshooting the sleeping patterns of a child. Roles and qualifications vary between countries. The night nanny works together with the family's requirements and philosophies. The qualifications of a night nanny are usually in mothercraft nursing (see sleep guidance specialist or early childhood development). Pay rates vary from country to country, but night nannies are usually well paid in comparison to the general nanny, as the night nanny is seen as a specialist or expert in their field.

Maternity nurse / newborn care specialists / confinement nanny [ edit ] See also: Postpartum confinement Historically, European women were confined to their beds or their homes for extended periods of time after giving birth. Care was provided either by her female relatives (mother or mother-in-law) or by a temporary attendant known as a monthly nurse . These weeks were called confinement or lying-in , and ended with the re-introduction of the mother to the community in the Christian ceremony of the churching of women . A modern version of this rest period has evolved with intentions to give maximum support to the new mother, especially if she is recovering from a difficult labor and delivery.

In the US these specialty maternity nannies are known as newborn care specialists (disassociating this specialty from medically qualified nursing). They are highly experienced in all aspects of newborns, aside from medical issues. They may work 24 hours a day, seven days per week, but most commonly work five nights/days a week for the first three months of a newborn's life. The role can consist of assisting parents with feeding guidance, nursery set up, premature infant, multiples, colic, reflux, and sleep guidance/training. There are various training organizations that offer non-accredited certifications, however, in an unregulated field parents should ensure that the qualifications of their maternity nanny are legitimate and accredited. The Newborn Care Specialist Association is one of many self-appointed certification entities. Some doulas specialize in postpartum care for mother and baby. Another related job is perinatal assistant .

Chinese and related East Asian traditions practice a form of postpartum confinement known in Chinese-speaking regions as zuo yue zi "sitting the month", which are traditions and customs regarding recovery from childbirth. The "confinement ladies" are referred to as yue sao , [ 4 ] and they have specialized knowledge of how to care for both baby and mother. In Singapore and Malaysia, newborn care specialists are better known as confinement nannies .

[ 5 ] They assist the mother in taking care of the baby in order to let the mother have a good rest. Confinement food will be prepared to help with the recovery. Usually, the employment period will be about 28 days up to a maximum of 16 weeks. In Korea these postpartum care workers are called Sanhujorisa .

In the Netherlands, standard postnatal care, supported by state medical insurance, includes more than a week of all-day visits called kraamzorg . This kraamverzorgster ( "maternity home care assistant" [ 6 ] ) teaches the new mother how to care for her baby, measures both of their health, prepares light meals, entertains older children, performs light household tasks, cleans the home and disinfects the bathroom.

[ 7 ] They help care for the mother, baby, and family.

Demographic [ edit ] Typically, women from their 20s to 60s take up employment as nannies. Some are younger, though normally younger workers are nursemaids or au pairs rather than nannies in the traditional use of the term.

A few positions are filled by men; the term manny is sometimes used for a male nanny, especially in the US and UK.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Qualifications [ edit ] In the United States, and in the United Kingdom, no formal qualifications are required to be a nanny.  However, some parents prefer or sometimes require their nanny to have a CPR and/or first aid certification. In the United States, nanny training and certifications are increasing as the US Nanny Association [ 10 ] has published national standards [ 11 ] and issues certifications [ 12 ] for Professional Nannies, Newborn and Infant Professionals and Certified Nannies. Many nannies have childhood education credits or degrees, though these are usually not required.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Notable nannies [ edit ] British royal family [ edit ] Charlotte Bill (1875–1965), known as Lalla, nanny of Prince John of the United Kingdom , featured in the film The Lost Prince Clara Knight, known as "Alla", nanny of Queen Elizabeth II and Princess Margaret Tiggy Legge-Bourke MVO (born 1965), nanny to Prince William and Prince Harry Lillian Sperling, head nanny of the show Nanny 911 Other royal families [ edit ] Margaretta Eagar (1863–1936), nanny to the four daughters of Tsar Nicholas II Louise von Sturmfeder (1789–1866), lady-in-waiting to the House of Habsburg and aja (then rendered "nurse", now nanny) to Franz Joseph I of Austria and his brother Maximilian I of Mexico Other [ edit ] St.

Josephine Bakhita (1869–1947), an enslaved African who worked as a nanny and later became a Roman Catholic saint in Italy Deborah Carroll and Stella Reid , highly experienced nannies from the show Nanny 911 Veronica Crook, who has accompanied Jacob Rees-Mogg since childhood Elizabeth Ann Everest (1832–1895), beloved nanny to the young Winston Churchill Jo Frost , nanny who hosted a successful television program Supernanny in the UK and US, showing parents techniques to help with unruly children Loh Chui, amah to Arthur , the son of General Douglas MacArthur , who escaped from the Philippines with his parents in the face of the advancing Imperial Japanese Army and cared for the sickly four-year-old during their nine-day ordeal , including four days fleeing in a torpedo boat and B-17 bomber Yoselyn Ortega , nanny who murdered children Lucia and Leo Krim in 2012 by stabbing them to death Sandra Samuel (b. 1964), an Indian nanny who saved the life of a child during the 2008 Mumbai attacks in which the baby's two parents were murdered; later honored with honorary Israeli citizenship.

Television [ edit ] Various television programs feature real nannies, many of whom help parents discipline children. These include Abismo de pasión (in Spanish), Nanny 911 , Supernanny , and Take Home Nanny .

In addition, several television series feature fictional Nannie's including the comedy titled “The Nanny” as well as the popular Disney series “Jessie”.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Ooi Keat Gin (2013). Dirk Hoerder (ed.).

Proletarian and Gendered Mass Migrations: A Global Perspective on Continuities and Discontinuities from the 19th to the 21st Centuries . BRILL. p. 405.

ISBN 978-9004251366 .

^ kindore.co.uk/nanny-livein-liveout ^ "About Nanny Sharing" .

Nannyshare . Nanny Share. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020 . Retrieved May 2, 2013 .

^ Ayicheng.

"What is a Yue Sao?" . Archived from the original on 13 October 2017 . Retrieved 24 July 2017 .

^ "Should I Get A Confinement Nanny?" .

NannySOS . 23 October 2016 . Retrieved 24 October 2016 .

^ Van Teijlingen, Edwin R. (2004).

Midwifery and the Medicalization of Childbirth: Comparative Perspectives . p. 171.

^ Hayes-Klein (2017).

Reproductive Ethics: New Challenges and Conversations . p. 100.

^ "The Times & The Sunday Times" .

The Times . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ "Meet the manny" .

The Times: Families . Times Newspapers Limited. January 20, 2007.

^ "US Nanny Association" .

US Nanny Association .

^ "US Nanny Association Establishes National Nanny Standards" . PR Newswire. 2019-10-30.

^ "SITTER OR NANNY? US NANNY ASSOCIATION LAUNCHES THREE INDUSTRY CREDENTIALS" . EIN Presswire. 2021-04-13.

^ "Nanny | Explore careers | National Careers Service" .

nationalcareers.service.gov.uk . Archived from the original on December 25, 2019 . Retrieved 2022-01-15 .

^ "Childcare Workers : Occupational Outlook Handbook : U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics" .

Further reading [ edit ] Jonathan Gathorne-Hardy , The Rise and Fall of the British Nanny (Hodder & Stoughton, 1972) Mary Ann Gibbs, The Years of the Nannies (Hutchinson, 1960) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nannies .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Nanny .

NCMA the National Childminding Association website SCMA the Scottish Childminding Association website NICMA the Northern Ireland Childminding Association website OFSTED the Ofsted website USA Today article on CEO nannies v t e Reproductive labor Types of labor Women's work Care work Cognitive labor Double burden Emotional labor Affective labor Invisible labor Global patterns Women migrant workers from developing countries Global care chain Industry sectors Domestic worker Nanny Housewife Nursing women Sex work migrant v t e Parenting Kinship terminology Parent Mother Father Adoptive Alloparenting Coparenting Extended family Foster care Noncustodial Nuclear family Orphaned Same-sex Shared parenting Single parent Blended family Surrogacy In loco parentis Theories · Areas Attachment theory Applied behavior analysis Behaviorism Child development Cognitive development Developmental psychology Human development Identity formation Introjection Love Maternal bond Nature versus nurture Parental investment Care work Cost of raising a child Paternal care Unpaid work Paternal bond Pediatrics Social emotional development Socialization Social psychology Styles Achievement ideology Atlas personality Attachment parenting Baby talk Buddha-like parenting Concerted cultivation Enmeshment Free-range parenting Gatekeeper parent Helicopter parent Nurturant parenting Reflective parenting Slow parenting Soccer mom Strict father model Taking Children Seriously Theybie Tiger parenting Work at home parent Techniques After-school activity Allowance Bedtime Child care Co-sleeping Dishabituation Education Habituation Homeschooling Identification (psychology) Introjection Kommune 1 Latchkey kid Moral development Normative social influence Parent management training Play ( date ) Role model Social integration Television The talk (race) The talk (sex education) Toy ( educational ) Positive Parenting Program Child discipline Blanket training Corporal punishment in the home Curfew Grounding Positive discipline Tactical ignoring Time-out Abuse Adverse childhood experiences Child abandonment Child abuse Child labour Child neglect Cinderella effect Codependency Deadbeat parent Dysfunctional family Effects of domestic violence Incest Management of domestic violence Narcissistic parent Parental abuse by children Parental alienation Stress in early childhood Legal Child custody Child support Disownment Family disruption Right to family life Marriage Parental leave Parental responsibility Parents' rights Paternity Shared parenting Experts Mary Ainsworth Diana Baumrind John Bowlby T. Berry Brazelton Rudolf Dreikurs David Elkind Jo Frost Haim Ginott Thomas Gordon Alan E. Kazdin Truby King Annette Lareau Penelope Leach Matthew Sanders William Sears B. F. Skinner Benjamin Spock Organizations Families Need Fathers Mothers' Union National Childbirth Trust National Fatherhood Initiative National Parents Organization Parent–teacher association Parents Against Child Exploitation Authority control databases : National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐fh7j8
Cached time: 20250814215541
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.487 seconds
Real time usage: 0.597 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1869/1000000
Revision size: 17037/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 63624/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2377/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 79038/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.333/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13693336/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  507.724      1 -total
 24.45%  124.146      1 Template:Reflist
 15.52%   78.789      2 Template:Lang
 14.40%   73.093      3 Template:Cite_book
 14.14%   71.781      1 Template:Childcare
 13.74%   69.766      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.34%   47.437      1 Template:Short_description
  7.91%   40.140      1 Template:Redirect
  7.27%   36.892      1 Template:Commons_category
  7.24%   36.781      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:302912:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215541 and revision id 1304347070. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nanny&oldid=1304347070 " Categories : Child care Child care occupations Domestic work Gendered occupations Nannies Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles with Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles containing Dutch-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 13:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nanny 34 languages Add topic

