Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Open access 2 Scientific Programmes 3 Autonomous S&T Institutions 4 Scientific and industrial research organisations 5 Attached Institutions 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Department of Science and Technology (India) 4 languages हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia മലയാളം தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Department of Science & Technology Parent Agency - Ministry of Science and Technology Central Government of India overview Formed May 3, 1971 ; 54 years ago ( 1971-05-03 ) Jurisdiction India Headquarters New Delhi Annual budget ₹ 6,067.39 crore (US$720 million) (for the Financial Year 2021–22) [ 1 ] Minister responsible Jitendra Singh , Minister of Science and Technology Central Government of India executive Abhay Karandikar ,  Secretary Parent department Ministry of Science and Technology Website dst .gov .in DST Headquarter, Technology Bhavan, New Delhi President of India, on National Science Day 2020, New Delhi Indian government agency The Department of Science and Technology ( DST ) is a department within the Ministry of Science and Technology in India . It was established in May 1971 to promote new areas of science and technology and to play the role of a nodal department for organising, coordinating and promoting scientific and technological activities in the country. It gives funds to various approved scientific projects in India. It also supports various researchers in India to attend conferences abroad and to go for experimental works.

Open access [ edit ] The Department of Science and Technology (DST) supports open access to scientific knowledge, originated from the public-funded research in India. In December 2014, the DST and the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India , had jointly adopted their Open Access Policy.

[ 2 ] Scientific Programmes [ edit ] DST Scientific Programmes Sr. No.

Group Scientific Programmes 1 Scientific & Engineering Research Mega Facilities for Basic Research Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE) programme R&D Infrastructure (FIST, SAIFs, PURSE, SATHI) Science and Technology of Yoga and Meditation (SATYAM) Programme for Science Students Swarnajayanti Fellowships National Science & Technology Management Information System (NSTMIS) Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) [ 3 ] Cognitive Science Research Initiative (CSRI) VAJRA (Visiting Advanced Joint Research) Faculty Scheme 2 Technology Development Technical Research Centres Programme Technology Development and Transfer National Good Laboratory Practice Compliance Monitoring Authority (NGCMA) Natural Resources Data Management System (NRDMS) Climate Change Programme Joint programme on Electric Mobility and Technology Foresighting Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical Systems (ICPS) Division Patent Facilitation Programme (PFP) 3 International S&T Cooperation Bilateral Cooperation with developed and developing countries Multilateral & Regional Cooperation Thematic Cooperation 4 S&T for Socio Economic Programme National Council for Science and Technology Communication (NCSTC) Science For Equity Empowerment and Development (SEED) National Science & Technology Entrepreneurship Development Board (NSTEDB) State Science & Technology Programme Patent Facilitation Programme (PFP) 5 Technology Missions Division Technology Mission Programme on Water and Clean Energy Nano Science & Technology Mission [ 4 ] National Super Computing Mission National Quantum Mission India 6 Women Scientists Programs Gender Advancement for Transforming Institutions (GATI) Women Scientists Scheme Autonomous S&T Institutions [ edit ] The autonomous science and technology institutions organized under the department include: [ 5 ] Agharkar Research Institute , Pune [ 6 ] Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences , Nanital [ 7 ] Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences , Lucknow [ 8 ] Bose Institute , Kolkata [ 9 ] Centre for Nano and Soft Matter Sciences , Bangalore Indian Institute of Geomagnetism , Mumbai International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials, Hyderabad Institute of Nano Science and Technology , [ 10 ] SAS Nagar Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science , Kolkata [ 11 ] Indian Institute of Astrophysics , Bengaluru National Innovation Foundation [ 12 ] Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research , Bengaluru Raman Research Institute , Bengaluru Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology [ 13 ] S.N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences , Kolkata Institute of Advanced Study in Science and Technology (IASST), Guwahati [ 14 ] Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) North East Centre for Technology Application and Reach (NECTAR) Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology , Dehradun Vigyan Prasar, New Delhi Anusandhan National Research Foundation Scientific and industrial research organisations [ edit ] DST runs a program to recognise non-governmental and non-commercial organisations engaged in science and technology areas as Scientific and Industrial Research Organisations (SIRO).

In 2024, there were 884 organisations across natural and applied sciences, agricultural sciences, social sciences and biomedical sciences.

[ 15 ] Attached Institutions [ edit ] National Atlas & Thematic Mapping Organisation, Kolkata Survey of India , Dehradun References [ edit ] ^ "Department of Science and Technology (India)" (PDF) .

Union Budget . 1 February 2021.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 October 2019 . Retrieved 6 February 2021 .

^ "India unveils new open access policy : Indigenus" .

blogs.nature.com . Retrieved 31 March 2016 .

^ "Science and Engineering Research Board" .

SERB . Govt of India . Retrieved 18 March 2021 .

^ Palkhiwala, Kalpana.

"Nano Mission - Towards Global Knowledge Hub" . Press Information Bureau, Government of India.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 .

^ "Autonomous S&T Institutions" . Department of Science & Technology . Retrieved 29 June 2020 .

^ "Agharkar Research Institute (ARI)" .

aripune.org . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ "Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences" .

Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences .

^ "Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences" .

BSIP . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ "Bose Institute" .

J C Bose Institute . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ "Institute of Nano Science and Technology (INST), Mohali" .

NSTITUTE OF NANO SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ "Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science" .

Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ "National Innovation Foundation – India" .

NIF – India . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ "Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum" .

sctimst . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ "IASST develops an artificial intelligence-based computer diagnosis framework for rapid and accurate diagnosis of oral cancers" .

pib.gov.in . 7 June 2020 . Retrieved 17 August 2024 .

^ "Scientific and Industrial Research Organizations (SIRO) | DSIR : Department of Scientific and Industrial Research | Government of India" .

www.dsir.gov.in . Retrieved 21 April 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Department of Science and Technology (India) DST  Autonomous science  and technology institutions Agharkar Research Institute Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences Bose Institute Centre for Nano and Soft Matter Sciences, Bangalore Indian Institute of Geomagnetism International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials, Hyderabad Institute of Nano Science and Technology Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science Indian Institute of Astrophysics National Innovation Foundation – India Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research Raman Research Institute Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences The Institute of Advanced Study in Science & Technology, Guwahati Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) Technology Development Board North East Centre for Technology Application and Reach Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology Vigyan Prasar, New Delhi Attached Institutions National Atlas & Thematic Mapping Organisation, Kolkata Survey of India, Dehradun Scientific Programmes : Scientific & Engineering Research Technology Development International S&T Cooperation S&T for Socio Economic Programme Technology Missions Division Women Scientists Programs v t e Government ministries of India President ( List ) • Vice President ( List ) • Government of India • Prime Minister ( List • Office ) • Deputy Prime Minister • Council of Ministers Current Key Defence External Affairs Finance Home Affairs Economy & Industry Chemicals and Fertilizers Civil Aviation Commerce and Industry Communications Co-operation Corporate Affairs Electronics and Information Technology Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises Information and Broadcasting Labour and Employment Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Mines Steel Textiles Tourism Infrastructure Development of North Eastern Region Jal Shakti Ports, Shipping and Waterways Railways Road Transport and Highways Rural Development Housing and Urban Affairs Food Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying Food Processing Industries Energy & Climate Change Coal Environment, Forest and Climate Change New and Renewable Energy Petroleum and Natural Gas Power Science, Education & Health AYUSH Earth Sciences Education Health and Family Welfare Science and Technology Skill Development and Entrepreneurship General Administration Culture Law and Justice Minority Affairs Panchayati Raj Parliamentary Affairs Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions Planning Social Justice and Empowerment Statistics and Programme Implementation Tribal Affairs Women and Child Development Youth Affairs and Sports Defunct Communications and Information Technology Information Technology Overseas Indian Affairs Surface Transport Drinking Water and Sanitation Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation Ministers Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare Communications Defence Education External Affairs Finance Home Affairs Housing and Urban Affairs Law and Justice Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions Railways Road Transport and Highways Secretaries Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister Cabinet Defence Finance Foreign Home Personnel Departments Current Atomic Energy Biotechnology Economic Affairs Higher Education Official Language Science and Technology Military Affairs Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade Space Technical Education Telecommunications Defunct Criminal Intelligence Thagi and Dakaiti Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX This article about government in India is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Department_of_Science_and_Technology_(India)&oldid=1286651400 " Categories : Ministry of Science and Technology (India) Science and technology in India Science and technology ministries 1971 establishments in India Indian government stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Indian English from September 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from January 2016 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia All stub articles This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 05:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Department of Science and Technology (India) 4 languages Add topic

