Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Legacy 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Al-Bakri 34 languages العربية Català الدارجة Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پنجابی Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenščina کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arab Andalusian geographer and historian (c. 1040–1094) For the lunar crater, see Al-Bakri (crater) . For the medieval biographer of Muhammad, see Abū al-Ḥasan Bakrī .

Abū ʿUbayd ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn Muḥammad ibn Ayyūb ibn ʿAmr al-Bakrī Personal life Born 1040 Huelva Died 1094 Córdoba Era Caliphate of Córdoba Region Al-Andalus Main interest(s) Islamic history , geography Religious life Religion Islam Abū ʿUbayd ʿAbd Allāh ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn Muḥammad ibn Ayyūb ibn ʿAmr al-Bakrī ( Arabic : أبو عبيد عبد الله بن عبد العزيز بن محمد بن أيوب بن عمرو البكري ), or simply al-Bakrī (c. 1040–1094) was an Arab Andalusian historian and a geographer of the Muslim West .

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Al-Bakri was born in Huelva , the son of the sovereign of a short-lived principality established there by his family when the Caliphate of Cordoba fell in 1031.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Al-Bakri belonged to the Arab tribe of Bakr .

[ 4 ] When his father was deposed by al-Mu'tadid (1042–1069) of the ruler of Taifa of Seville , he then moved to Córdoba , where he studied with the geographer al-Udri and the historian Ibn Hayyan . He spent his entire life in Al-Andalus, most of it in Seville and Almeria . While in Seville, he was there when El Cid arrived to collect tributes from Alfonso VI .

[ 3 ] He died in Córdoba without ever having travelled to the locations of which he wrote.

[ 5 ] Works [ edit ] Al-Bakri wrote about Europe, North Africa, and the Arabian peninsula. Only two of his works have survived. His Mu'jam mā ista'jam contains a list of place names mostly within the Arabian peninsula with an introduction giving the geographical background. His most important work is his Kitāb al-Masālik wa-al-Mamālik (" Book of Highways and of Kingdoms ") (كتاب المساليك والمماليك). This was composed in 1068, based on literature and the reports of merchants and travellers, including Muhammad ibn Yūsuf al-Warrāq (904–973) and Abraham ben Jacob .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] It is one of the most important sources for the history of West Africa and gives crucial information on the Ghana Empire , the Almoravid dynasty and the trans-Saharan trade .

[ 6 ] Although the material borrowed from al-Warraq dated from the 10th century, he also included information on events that occurred close to the time that he wrote.

[ 6 ] Al-Bakri mentions the earliest urban centres in the trans-Saharan trade to embrace Islam, late in the 10th century, Gao was one of the very few along the Niger River to have native Muslim inhabitants. Other centres along the serpentine bends of the great river eventually followed: Takrur ( Mauritania , Senegal ); Songhay ( Mali ); Kanem-Bornu ( Chad ); and Hausa territories ( Nigeria ). By the 11th century, reports on these and other flourishing Islamic cities made their way north to Al-Andalus in southern Iberia , enabling Al-Bakri to write in his Kitab al-Masalik wa al-Mamalik (Book of Highways and Kingdoms): "The city of Ghana consists of two towns situated on a plain" and that "One of these towns, which is inhabited by Muslims, is large and possesses twelve mosques in one of which they assemble for the Friday prayer. There are salaried imams and muezzins , as well as jurists and scholars." [ 7 ] His works are noted for the relative objectivity with which they present information. For each area, he describes the people, their customs, as well as the geography, climate and main cities. Similar information was also contained in his written geography of the Arabian Peninsula, and in the encyclopedia of the world in which he wrote. He also presented various anecdotes about each area. Unfortunately, parts of his main work have been lost, and of the surviving parts, some have never been published.

[ 6 ] Legacy [ edit ] The crater Al-Bakri on the Moon is named after him.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Muhammad al-Idrisi , a 12th-century Moroccan geographer who lived in Sicily Notes [ edit ] ^ Lévi-Provençal, E. (24 April 2012).

"Abū ʿUbayd al-Bakrī" .

^ Lévi-Provençal 1960 , p. 155 ^ a b "Al-Bakrī, Ab | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2022-07-11 .

^ Hermes, N. (2012).

The [European] Other in Medieval Arabic Literature and Culture: Ninth-Twelfth Century AD . Springer. "Judged as the greatest geographer of al-Andalus, polyvalent scholar Abu ʿUbayd ʿAbd Allah al-Bakri belonged to the powerful Arab tribe of Bakr ibn Wail" ^ a b Vernet 1970 ^ a b c d Levtzion & Hopkins 2000 , pp. 62–63 ^ "Saudi Aramco World : From Africa, in Ajami" . Archived from the original on 2014-11-30 . Retrieved 2011-09-23 .

^ "Al-Bakri" .

Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature . USGS Astrogeology Research Program.

References [ edit ] Lévi-Provençal, E. (1960), "Abū ʿUbayd al-Bakrī", Encyclopaedia of Islam 2nd Ed. Vol. 1 , Leiden: Brill, pp.

155– 157 .

Levtzion, Nehemia ; Hopkins, John F.P., eds. (2000) [1981], Corpus of Early Arabic Sources for West Africa , New York, NY: Marcus Weiner Press, ISBN 1-55876-241-8 . Pages 62–87 contain an extract from "The Book of Routes and Realms" describing West Africa.

Vernet, J. (1970), "Bakrī, Abū ʿUbayd ʿAbdallāh Ibn ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz Ibn Muḥammad al-", in Gillispie, Charles C. (ed.), Dictionary of Scientific Biography Vol. 1 , New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, pp.

413– 414 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Bakri ".

El-Bekri (1859).

Description de l'Afrique septentrionale .

Mac Guckin de Slane , translator and editor. Paris: Imprimerie Impériale.

Revised edition with corrections (1913), Tangiers: Adolphe Jourdan.

Available from Gallica.

Reinaud, J.T. (1860).

"Notice sur les dictionnaries géographiques arabes" .

Journal Asiatique . 5.

16 : 65– 106.

Al-Bakri's dictionary is mentioned on page 75.

White, Robert C. (1968). "Early geographical dictionaries".

Geographical Review .

58 (4): 652– 659.

doi : 10.2307/212687 .

JSTOR 212687 .

External links [ edit ] Vernet, J. (2008) [1970-80].

"Al-Bakrī, Abū ʿUbayd ʿAbdallāh Ibn ʿAbd Al-ʿAzīz Ibn Muḥammad" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Encyclopedia.com.

"The Culture of Al-Andalus: Geography" . Unity Productions Foundation.

v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) v t e Muslim historians Historians 7th century Aban bin Uthman Urwah ibn Zubayr Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri 8th century Hisham ibn al-Kalbi Ibn Ishaq Al-Waqidi Abu Mikhnaf Sayf ibn Umar Al-Mada'ini Ibn Lahi'a Issa ibn Abi al-Muhajir 9th century Ibn ʽAbd al-Hakam Khalifah ibn Khayyat Ibn Hisham Ya'qubi Al-Tabari Al-Baladhuri Ibn Sa'd Al-Zubayr ibn Bakkar Al-Azraqi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ibn Qutaybah Al-Mada'ini 10th century Ibn al-Nadim Ibn Duraid Ibn al-Qūṭiyya Al-Masudi Miskawayh al-Suli Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu al-Arab Abu Muhammad al-Hamdani Al-Musabbihi al-Kindi Ibn al-Saghir 11th century Arabic Ibn Faradi Ibn Hayyan Said al-Andalusi Al-Udri Al-Bakri Ibn Hazm Hilal al-Sabi' Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi Al-Quda'i Ibn Bassam Persian Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu Sa'id Gardezi 12th century Arabic Mohammed al-Baydhaq Ibn al-Jawzi Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Ibn al-Qalanisi Ibn ʽAsakir Usama ibn Munqidh Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad Ibn Hammad Al-Jawwani Ibn al-Sam'ani Persian Muhammad bin Ali Rawandi 13th century Arabic Yaqut al-Hamawi 'Abd al-Wahid al-Marrakushi Ibn Amira Ibn Jubayr Ibn al-Kardabūs Ibn al-Adim Ibn al-Athir Sibt ibn al-Jawzi Ibn Khallikan Al-Qifti Ibn Abi Zar Persian Ibn Bibi Muhammad Aufi Ibn Isfandiyar Minhaj-i-Siraj Ata-Malik Juvayni Rashid-al-Din Hamadani 14th century Arabic Abu'l-Fida Ibn Idhari Al-Dhahabi Ibn Battuta Ibn al-Khatib Ibn Fadlallah al-Umari Ibn Kathir Ibn al-Tiqtaqa Ibn al-Furat Al-Mufaddal Ibn Khaldun al-ʽAsqalani Persian Hamdallah Mustawfi Wassaf Ziauddin Barani Hafiz-i Abru 15th century Arabic al-Maqrizi Ibn Taghribirdi Al-Sakhawi Al-Suyuti Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi Persian Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi Mirkhvand Mullah Nadiri Zahir al-Din Mar'ashi Fazlallah Khunji Isfahani Idris Bitlisi Yahya bin Ahmad Sirhindi Turkish Oruç Bey Aşıkpaşazade Enveri Ibn Kemal Neshri Tursun Beg 16th century Arabic Ibn Iyas Mujir al-Din Abd al-Aziz al-Fishtali Ibn al-Qadi Mar'i al-Karmi Persian Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak Muhammad Khwandamir ʽAbd al-Qadir Badayuni Nizamuddin Ahmad Firishta Iskandar Beg Munshi Sharafkhan Bidlisi Turkish Mustafa Âlî Lûtfi Pasha Matrakçı Nasuh Sadeddin Effendi Mustafa Selaniki Taşköprüzade 17th century Arabic Ahmed Mohammed al-Maqqari Katib Çelebi Ibn al-Imad al-Hanbali Persian Shaikh Inayat Allah Kamboh Muhammad Saleh Kamboh Abd al-Fattah Fumani Mohsin Fani Turkish Ottoman Ibrahim Petchevi Solakzade Mehmed Hemdemi Kâtip Çelebi Munejjim Bashi Silahdar Findiklili Mehmed Agha Osman Aga of Temesvar Mustafa Naima Al-Hasan al-Burini Abdi Pasha Chagatai Abu al-Ghazi Bahadur Kurdish Ahmad Khani 18th century Arabic Mohammed al-Ifrani Mohammed al-Qadiri Khalil al-Muradi al-Zayyani al-Jabarti Persian Mirza Mehdi Khan Astarabadi Abol-Hasan Golestaneh Turkish Ahmed Resmî Efendi 19th century Arabic Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Nasiri Mohammad Farid Ahmad ibn Abi Diyaf Jurji Zaydan Persian Jalal al-Din Mirza Qajar Agha Ahmad Ali Reza-Qoli Khan Hedayat Turkish Ottoman Ali Amiri Ahmed Cevdet Pasha Ahmed Cevad Pasha Azerbaijani Mirza Adigozal bey Ahmad bey Javanshir Karim agha Shakikhanov Kurdish Mahmud Bayazidi Mastoureh Ardalan Notable works The Meadows of Gold History of the Prophets and Kings Mu'jam al-Buldan Concise History of Humanity The Complete History Al-Bidaya wa'l-Nihaya The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Futuh al-Buldan Kitab al-I'tibar Al-Milal wa al-Nihal History of the Caliphs Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Tarikh al-Yaqubi Muqaddimah Book of Idols Rihla Concepts Isnad Islamic calendar Biographical evaluation Biographical dictionary Hadith studies Tabaqat Isra'iliyyat Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Bakri&oldid=1260684461 " Categories : 1040s births 1094 deaths People from Huelva Geographers from Al-Andalus 11th-century writers from al-Andalus 11th-century historians from al-Andalus 11th-century geographers 11th-century Arabic-language writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 2 December 2024, at 02:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Al-Bakri 34 languages Add topic

