Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 In popular culture 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecumenopolis 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Latviešu Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical planet-spanning city A depiction of Trantor, a fictional ecumenopolis from Isaac Asimov 's Galactic Empire Ecumenopolis (from Ancient Greek οἰκουμένη ( oikouménē ) ' the inhabited world ' and πόλις ( pólis ) ' city ' ; lit.

' world city ' ; pl.

ecumenopolises or ecumenopoleis ) is the hypothetical concept of a planetwide city. It is primarily known as a stock setting in science fiction , but has also received serious consideration in theoretical city planning and futurist concepts.

Description [ edit ] The word was invented in 1967 by the Greek city planner Constantinos Apostolou Doxiadis to represent the idea that, in the future, urban areas and megalopolises would eventually fuse, and there would be a single continuous worldwide city as a progression from the current urbanization , population growth , transport and human networks .

[ 1 ] According to Doxiadis, it was the fifteenth level of ekistic units and the most significant one as the uppermost echelon of the classification.

[ 2 ] This concept was already current in science fiction in 1942, with Trantor in Isaac Asimov 's Foundation series .

[ 3 ] When made public, Doxiadis' idea of ecumenopolis seemed "close to science fiction", but today is "surprisingly pertinent" according to geography researchers Pavle Stamenovic, Dunja Predic and Davor Eres, [ 1 ] especially as a consequence of globalization .

Doxiadis also created a scenario based on the traditions and trends of urban development of his time, predicting at first a European eperopolis ("continent city") which would be based on the area between London , Paris , Rhine-Ruhr and Amsterdam .

[ 4 ] In 2008, Time magazine coined Nylonkong to link New York City , London , and Hong Kong as the eperopolis of the Americas , Euro-Africa and Asia-Pacific respectively.

[ 5 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Before the term had been created, the concept had been previously discussed. The American religious leader Thomas Lake Harris (1823–1906) mentioned city-planets in his verses, and science fiction author Isaac Asimov used the city-planet Trantor as the setting of some of his Foundation novels.

[ 6 ] In science fiction , the ecumenopolis has become a frequent topic and was popularized in 1999 by the fictional city planet Coruscant in the Star Wars franchise, which is the capital of the Galactic Republic (later Empire ) and home to the Jedi Order .

[ 7 ] Other ecumenopolises feature in Star Wars media, including Hosnian Prime , Nar Shaddaa and Taris .

In Dune , the Harkonnens' home world of Giedi Prime is a heavily polluted ecumenopolis infamous for its gladiator arenas.

The concept is depicted in the video game Stellaris , where players are given the option of transforming planets into ecumenopolises, which provides a great deal of housing and space for industrial production through the construction of arcologies , at the cost of making the planet's natural resources inaccessible.

[ 8 ] A central setting in the tabletop wargame Warhammer 40,000 is a portrayal of Earth in the far future, where it is described as having been transformed into a vast, Gothic -style ecumenopolis sometime during the 30th millennium AD after its establishment as the capital of an interstellar superpower known as the Imperium of Man. The ecumenopolis contains multiple continent-scale districts housing different branches of society and government, with the Imperial Palace alone taking up the entirety of the Himalayan Mountains . It is the focus of the "Siege of Terra" storyline of the wider Horus Heresy tie-in novel series.

In Magic: the Gathering , the plane of Ravnica is an ecumenopolis.

[ 9 ] DC Comics continuity features Darkseid 's extra-dimensional home planet of Apokolips , often depicted as a hellish world covered entirely in industrial sprawl to feed Darkseid's brutal empire.

[ 10 ] The manga and film of Blame!

by Tsutomu Nihei is set in a far future in which Earth has become the ruins of planet-covering city, which is suggested to be so large that it has consumed most of the Solar System as well, it may also be along the lines of a hollow-world or dyson shell . Some of his other works also take place in this same setting.

See also [ edit ] Arcology Conurbation Ecumene Ekistics Megacity Megalopolis Megastructure Merger (politics) Metropolis Principles of intelligent urbanism Urban sprawl World government References [ edit ] ^ a b Stamenovic, Pavle; Predic, Dunja & Eres, Davor (2015).

"Transparency of Scale: Geographical Information Program (Google Earth) and the View from Beyond" . In Vaništa Lazarević, Eva; Vukmirović, Milena; Krstić-Furundžić, Aleksandra & Đukić, Aleksandra (eds.).

Keeping Up with Technologies to Improve Places . Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 44.

ISBN 978-1-4438-7739-8 .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2021 . Retrieved May 21, 2020 .

^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 210.

^ Foundation Archived November 6, 2021, at the Wayback Machine By Isaac Asimov, page 9 ^ Doxiadis, C.A. (1975). "Economics and the ekistic grid".

Ekistics .

40 (236): 1– 4.

ISSN 0013-2942 .

JSTOR 43618525 .

^ Elliott, Michael (January 17, 2008).

"A Tale Of Three Cities" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2019 . Retrieved November 11, 2019 .

^ Chu, Seo-Young (2011).

Do Metaphors Dream of Literal Sleep? A Science-Fictional Theory of Representation .

Harvard University Press . p. 100.

^ Tinnin, Drew (March 15, 2023).

"How Star Wars' Coruscant Became The Planet-Wide City Of Your Nightmares" . Slash Film.

^ "Stellaris: Best Origins Explained and Ranked" . The Gamer.

^ "Dungeons & Dragons: Ravnica, the Worldwide City, Explained" .

Comic Book Resources .

^ DC Comics: Anatomy of a Metahuman . Insight Editions. 2018. p. 100.

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of ecumenopolis at Wiktionary Doxiadis, Constantinos (1968).

"Ecumenopolis: Tomorrow's City" (PDF) .

Britannica Book of the Year .

v t e World's largest cities City proper Capitals Africa Americas North Latin Central South Asia Arab world Arabia ASEAN East, South and Southeast Asia Europe Baltic European Union Nordic Metropolitan area Americas ( North South West Indies ) Europe ( European Union ) Asia Africa Middle East Oceania Urban area / agglomeration Asia Africa Europe European Union Nordic North America Oceania Transborder Historical World Europe Related articles Arcology Ecumenopolis Global city Megacity Megalopolis Conurbation Satellite city population Primate city Secondary city Cities portal World portal v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecumenopolis&oldid=1291992132 " Categories : Fictional planets Urban studies and planning terminology Human habitats Cities Types of cities Proposed arcologies Megastructures Fictional populated places Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2022 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 16:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecumenopolis 23 languages Add topic

