Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Events on 13 December Toggle Events on 13 December subsection 1.1 Awards ceremony 1.2 Fireworks 1.3 Monument 1.4 Military parade 2 See also 3 Links 4 References Toggle the table of contents Republic Day (Malta) 4 languages Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Malti Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National holiday of Malta Republic Day The Republic Day monument in Zejtun.

Also called Freedom Day Observed by Malta Significance Celebrates the transformation of the country to a republic.

Observances Military events Awards ceremonies Fireworks Date 13 December Next time 13 December 2025 ( 2025-12-13 ) Frequency annual Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Republic Day ( Maltese : Jum ir-Repubblika) is a public holiday celebrated in Malta on 13 December. It celebrates the anniversary of the creation of the Republic of Malta in 1974, and the ending of the role of Elizabeth II as Queen of Malta , under which Sir Anthony Mamo , the last Governor-General , was sworn in as the first President . British troops did not leave the country until 31 March 1979.

Events on 13 December [ edit ] The main state sponsored celebrations take place in the center of the country's capital, Valletta . The National Festivities Committee is responsible for organizing Republic Day events annually.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Awards ceremony [ edit ] The President of Malta usually presents awards to those who have served Malta in the military/political sphere and public figures who are considered to be effective representatives of the country.

Fireworks [ edit ] A fireworks display is annually held over the Grand Harbour.

Monument [ edit ] A wreath laying ceremony is held at the Republic Day Monument in Marsa . Monuments are also erected during the holiday for wreath laying procedures.

Military parade [ edit ] A traditional Trooping the Colour ceremony and parade is the main military event that takes place on the day. The parade takes place in St. George’s Square in Valletta , where the Presidential Colour is trooped through the ranks of the Armed Forces of Malta . The salute is taken by the President of Malta , in their position as the commander in chief of the AFM. It is similar to the British version of the ceremony, with the parade being composed of 1 Colour Escort Guard and 3 other Guard units, accompanied by the Armed Forces of Malta Band . In the march-past, two marches are performed, By Land and Sea (for the march in slow time) and The British Grenadiers (for the march in quick time). At the conclusion of the ceremony, the guards perform a ceremonial Feu de joie .

See also [ edit ] Republic Day in other countries Public holidays in Malta Victory Day (Malta) Trooping the Colour Links [ edit ] Republic Day Parade 2018 Republic Day Parade 2017 Republic Day Parade 2013 References [ edit ] ^ "Republic Day in Malta in 2021" .

^ "VisitMalta" .

^ "Malta Republic Day - EU" . January 2025.

^ "Republic Day 2021, 2022 and 2023" .

Media related to Republic Day (Malta) at Wikimedia Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Republic_Day_(Malta)&oldid=1293636534 " Categories : Public holidays in Malta Republic days December observances Annual events in Malta Autumn in Malta Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox holiday fixed day (2) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 21:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Republic Day (Malta) 4 languages Add topic

