Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Primitive socialist accumulation 1 language Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Socialist accumulation ) Counterpart to the process of the primitive accumulation of capital Primitive socialist accumulation , sometimes referred to as the socialist accumulation , was a concept put forth in the early Soviet Union during the period of the New Economic Policy . It was developed as a counterpart to the process of the primitive accumulation of capital that took place during the early stages and development of capitalist economies . Because the Soviet economy was underdeveloped and largely agrarian in nature, the Soviet Union would have to be the agent of primitive capital accumulation to rapidly develop the economy. The concept was proposed originally as a means to industrialize the Russian economy through extracting surplus from the peasantry to finance the industrial sector.

History [ edit ] The major proponent and main theorist of the concept was Yevgeni Preobrazhensky , a Soviet economist. His 1921 lectures, From N.E.P. to Socialism and 1924 lectures The Fundamental Law of Socialist Accumulation provided the skeletal framework for what he would expand on in his 1926 work The New Economics.

[ 1 ] The concept was initially developed during Preobrazhensky's interaction with and analysis of the New Economic Policy . Its main principle is that the state sector of economy of the transitional period has to appropriate the peasant 's surplus product to accumulate resources necessary for the growth of the industry . Preobrazhensky describes this process as "the exploitation of one system by the other." [ 2 ] The goal of primitive socialist accumulation was for the state to eventually "achieve the level of present-day capitalist technique", to make possible the changing of the technical basis of the state economy, and "to organize labor scientifically." [ 3 ] Preobrazhensky aligned himself with the Left Opposition after his signage of the Declaration of the 46 , and the theory of primitive socialist accumulation became the main economic platform of the Left Opposition; with Preobrazhensky becoming their foremost political theorist.

[ 4 ] His theory would come under fire from other Soviet economists at the time such as Bukharin.

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] While some have argued that Stalin would eventually implement primitive socialist accumulation as the economic policy of the USSR, Ernest Mandel , Marxist economist, challenged the view that Stalin implemented the policies of Trotsky with the same methods as he stated "Stalin is said to have put Trotsky's programme into practice, even if with a brutality Trotsky himself would not have approved".

[ 6 ] He further elaborated that the economic programme advocated by Trotsky and the Left Opposition "undoubtedly underwent many changes in the period 1923-35". Mandel also argued that the policies of the Left Opposition are distinguishable from the proposals of the United Opposition of 1926-7 and the alternative strategies developed by Trotsky in his later works such as " The Revolution Betrayed (1936) and " The Transitional Programme (1938) ".

[ 7 ] It should also be noted that there was a fundamental difference between the forced industrialization practiced under Stalin and the theory as supported by Trotsky and Preobrazhensky. For example, both did not believe in the use of coercion, and did not believe in the utilization of forced expropriation or collectivization.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Primitive accumulation of capital Capital accumulation Capitalism Economy of the Soviet Union Scissors Crisis References [ edit ] ^ "E.A. Preobrazhensky: From N.E.P. to Socialism (Publisher's Introduction)" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2025-03-06 .

^ a b Preobrazhensky, Evgenii (1926).

The New Economics (PDF) . p. 230.

^ Preobrazhensky, Evgenii (1926).

The New Economics (PDF) . pp.

82– 83.

^ "E.A. Preobrazhensky: From N.E.P. to Socialism (Biographical Note)" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2025-03-06 .

^ "Pierre Broué: The History of the Bolshevik Party (CP) of the USSR (9. The Interregnum and the New Opposition)" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2025-03-06 .

^ Mandel 1995 , p. 59.

^ Mandel 1995 , p. 60.

^ Preobrazhensky, Evgenii (1926).

The New Economics (PDF) . pp. xiii.

Bibliography [ edit ] Mandel, Ernest (1995).

Trotsky as alternative . London: Verso Books .

ISBN 978-1859840856 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Primitive_socialist_accumulation&oldid=1292283353 " Categories : Socialism Economy of the Soviet Union Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 04:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Primitive socialist accumulation 1 language Add topic

