Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani 13 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Português Русский Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Al-Jayyani ) Andalusian philosopher and mathematician "Ibn Mu'adh" redirects here. For other uses, see Ibn Mu'adh (disambiguation) .

Al-Jayyānī Born 989 Iraq Died 1079 Jaén , Al-Andalus Academic background Influences Euclid , al-Khwarizmi Academic work Era Islamic Golden Age Main interests Mathematics , Astronomy Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Muʿādh al-Jayyānī [ 1 ] ( Arabic : أبو عبد الله محمد بن معاذ الجياني ; 989, Cordova , Al-Andalus – 1079, Jaén , Al-Andalus ) was an Arab mathematician , Islamic scholar , and Qadi from Al-Andalus (in present-day Spain).

[ 2 ] Al-Jayyānī wrote important commentaries on Euclid 's Elements and he wrote the first known treatise on spherical trigonometry .

Life [ edit ] Little is known about his life. Confusion exists over the identity of al-Jayyānī of the same name mentioned by ibn Bashkuwal (died 1183), Qur'anic scholar, Arabic Philologist , and expert in inheritance laws (farāʾiḍī). It is unknown whether they are the same person.

[ 3 ] There is some evidence that he lived in Cairo from 1012/13 to 1016/17.

[ 4 ] Works [ edit ] Al-Jayyānī wrote The book of unknown arcs of a sphere , which is considered "the first treatise on spherical trigonometry ", [ 5 ] although spherical trigonometry in its ancient Hellenistic form was dealt with by earlier mathematicians such as Menelaus of Alexandria , whose treatise the Spherics included Menelaus' theorem , [ 6 ] still a basic tool for solving spherical geometry problems in Al-Jayyānī's time. However, E. S. Kennedy points out that while it was possible in pre-Islamic mathematics to compute the magnitudes of a spherical figure, in principle, by use of the table of chords and Menelaus' theorem, the application of the theorem to spherical problems was very difficult in practice.

[ 7 ] Al-Jayyānī's work on spherical trigonometry "contains formulae for right-handed triangles , the general law of sines , and the solution of a spherical triangle by means of the polar triangle ." This treatise later had a "strong influence on European mathematics", and his "definition of ratios as numbers" and "method of solving a spherical triangle when all sides are unknown" are likely to have influenced Regiomontanus .

[ 5 ] There is strong consensus in attributing the authorship of a manuscript about the duration of twilight to him.

[ 8 ] The short treatise On twilight was incorrectly attributed to Ibn al-Haytham for several centuries, due to a reference made by Gerard of Cremona , who translated it into Latin. The first printed edition of Cremona's translation ( Allacen arabis uetustissimi liber de crepusculis, Gerardo Cremonensi interprete ) was made in 1542, by the Portuguese mathematician and cosmographer Pedro Nunes .

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] List of Arab scientists and scholars Islamic mathematics Notes [ edit ] ^ Latin forms include Abenmoat , Abumadh , Abhomadh , or Abumaad , corresponding to either Ibn Muʿādh or Abū ... Muʿādh .

^ Calvo 2007 .

^ Dold-Samplonius & Hermelink 1970 .

^ Smith, A. Mark (1992). "The Latin Version of lbn Mu c ādh's Treatise "On Twilight and the Rising of Clouds" ".

Arabic Sciences and Philosophy .

2 (1): 83.

doi : 10.1017/s0957423900001570 .

^ a b O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Abu Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Muadh Al-Jayyani" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews , al-Jayyani's The book of unknown arcs of a sphere, the first treatise on spherical trigonometry. The work, which is published together with a Spanish translation and a commentary in [3], contains formulae for right-handed triangles, the general law of sines, and the solution of a spherical triangle by means of the polar triangle. Proofs are sometimes only given as sketches.

^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Menelaus of Alexandria" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews "Book 3 deals with spherical trigonometry and includes Menelaus's theorem." ^ Kennedy, E. S. (1969), "The History of Trigonometry", 31st Yearbook , National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Washington, D.C.: 337 ( cf.

Haq, Syed Nomanul, The Indian and Persian background , p. 68 , in Seyyed Hossein Nasr , Oliver Leaman (1996), History of Islamic Philosophy , Routledge , pp.

52– 70, ISBN 0-415-13159-6 ) ^ Sabra, A.I. (1967). "The Authorship of the Liber de crepusculis, an Eleventh-Century Work on Atmospheric Refraction".

Isis .

58 (1): 77– 85.

doi : 10.1086/350185 .

^ Nunes, Pedro (2003).

Obras . Vol. II. Lisboa: Fundação Calouste Gulbenkian.

ISBN 972-31-1084-9 .

References [ edit ] Calvo, Emilia (2007).

"Ibn Muʿādh: Abū ʿAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn Muʿādh al-Jayyānī" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. pp.

562– 3.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Abu Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Muadh Al-Jayyani" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Dold-Samplonius, Yvonne ; Hermelink, Heinrich (1970).

"Al-Jayyānī, Abū'Abd Allāh Muḥammad Ibn Mu'ādh" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography .

Encyclopedia.com .

v t e Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world Mathematicians 9th century 'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk Sanad ibn Ali al-Jawharī Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Kindi Qusta ibn Luqa Al-Mahani al-Dinawari Banū Mūsā brothers Hunayn ibn Ishaq Al-Khwarizmi Yusuf al-Khuri Ishaq ibn Hunayn Na'im ibn Musa Thābit ibn Qurra al-Marwazi Abu Said Gorgani 10th century Abu al-Wafa al-Khazin Al-Qabisi Abu Kamil Ahmad ibn Yusuf Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Sinān ibn al-Fatḥ al-Khojandi Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Brethren of Purity Ibn Sahl Ibn Yunus al-Uqlidisi Al-Battani Sinan ibn Thabit Ibrahim ibn Sinan Al-Isfahani Nazif ibn Yumn al-Qūhī Abu al-Jud Al-Sijzi Al-Karaji al-Majriti al-Jabali 11th century Abu Nasr Mansur Alhazen Kushyar Gilani Al-Biruni Ibn al-Samh Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Avicenna al-Jayyānī al-Nasawī al-Zarqālī ibn Hud Al-Isfizari Omar Khayyam Muhammad al-Baghdadi 12th century Jabir ibn Aflah Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi al-Hassar Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Yasamin 13th century Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Ahmad al-Buni Ibn Munim Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Ibn Adlan al-Urdi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi al-Abhari Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Ibn al-Banna' Kamāl al-Dīn al-Fārisī 14th century Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri Ibn al-Shatir Ibn al-Durayhim Al-Khalili al-Umawi 15th century Ibn al-Majdi al-Rūmī al-Kāshī Ulugh Beg Ali Qushji al-Wafa'i al-Qalaṣādī Sibt al-Maridini Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi 16th century Al-Birjandi Muhammad Baqir Yazdi Taqi ad-Din Ibn Hamza al-Maghribi Mathematical works The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing De Gradibus Principles of Hindu Reckoning Book of Optics The Book of Healing Book on the Measurement of Plane and Spherical Figures Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Toledan Tables Tabula Rogeriana Zij Concepts Alhazen's problem Islamic geometric patterns Centers Al-Azhar University Al-Mustansiriya University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din Madrasa Maragheh observatory University of al-Qarawiyyin Influences Babylonian mathematics Greek mathematics Indian mathematics Influenced Byzantine mathematics European mathematics Indian mathematics Related Hindu–Arabic numeral system Arabic numerals ( Eastern Arabic numerals , Western Arabic numerals ) Trigonometric functions History of trigonometry History of algebra Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF 2 3 WorldCat National Germany United States 2 France 2 BnF data 2 Spain Netherlands Israel 2 Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Mu%27adh_al-Jayyani&oldid=1252996508 " Categories : 989 births 1079 deaths Astronomers from al-Andalus Mathematicians from al-Andalus 11th-century mathematicians 11th-century people from al-Andalus Scientists who worked on qibla determination Mathematicians who worked on Islamic inheritance Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 23 October 2024, at 21:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani 13 languages Add topic

