Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 1.1 Peripheral (posterior) vitreous detachment 1.2 Retinal detachment 1.3 Age-related macular degeneration 1.4 Ocular (retinal) migraine / Migraine aura 1.5 Optic neuritis 1.6 Occipital lobe infarction (stroke) or ischemia 1.7 Sensory deprivation (Ophthalmopathic hallucinations) 2 Appearance 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Photopsia 14 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 עברית മലയാളം 日本語 Polski Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Presence of perceived flashes of light in one's field of vision Medical condition Photopsia This is an approximation of the zig-zag visual of a scintillating scotoma as a migraine aura. It moves and vibrates, expanding and slowly fading away over the course of about 20 minutes.

Specialty Ophthalmology, Neurology Symptoms Flickering lights or flashes in the field of vision, along with pain, loss of colour perception, and eventual vision loss are also part of the damage to the optic nerve during optic neuritis [ 1 ] Usual onset During pregnancy Duration Migraine with aura, which includes photopsia 39% of the time, typically lasts 10 to 20 minutes and often is followed by a headache.

[ 2 ] Causes Peripheral (Posterior) vitreous detachment, retinal detachment, age-related macular degeneration, ocular (retinal) migraine / migraine aura, vertebrobasilar insufficiency, optic neuritis, occipital lobe infarction (similar to occipital stroke), sensory deprivation (ophthalmopathic hallucinations) Risk factors Above age 50 (risk of retinal detachment) [ 3 ] Treatment In most cases, photopsia is a symptom of a preexisting condition. The underlying condition must be identified and treated to resolve the symptoms.

Photopsia is the presence of perceived flashes of light in the field of vision .

It is most commonly associated with: [ 4 ] posterior vitreous detachment migraine aura ( ocular migraine / retinal migraine ) migraine aura without headache scintillating scotoma retinal break or detachment occipital lobe infarction (similar to occipital stroke ) sensory deprivation (ophthalmopathic hallucinations ) age-related macular degeneration vertebrobasilar insufficiency optic neuritis visual snow syndrome Vitreous shrinkage or liquefaction , which is the most common cause of photopsia, causes a pull in vitreoretinal attachments, irritating the retina and causing it to discharge electrical impulses. These impulses are interpreted by the brain as flashes.

This condition has also been identified as a common initial symptom of punctate inner choroiditis ( PIC ), [ 5 ] a rare retinal autoimmune disease believed to be caused by the immune system mistakenly attacking and destroying the retina .  During pregnancy , new-onset photopsia is a concern for severe preeclampsia .

Photopsia can present as retinal detachment when examined by an optometrist or ophthalmologist . However, it can also be a sign of uveal melanoma .

Causes [ edit ] Several conditions affecting the eyes can cause photopsia to occur. The underlying condition must be identified and treated to resolve the symptoms.

Peripheral (posterior) vitreous detachment [ edit ] Peripheral (posterior) vitreous detachment occurs when the gel around the eye separates from the retina . This can naturally occur with age. However, if it occurs too rapidly, it can cause photopsia which manifests in flashes and floaters in the vision . Typically, the flashes and floaters go away in a few months.

Retinal detachment [ edit ] The retina lines the inside of the eye . It is light-sensitive and communicates visual messages to the brain. If the retina detaches, it moves and shifts from its normal position. This can cause photopsia, but can also cause permanent vision loss . Medical attention is needed to prevent vision loss. Procedures may include laser treatment, freezing, or surgery .

Age-related macular degeneration [ edit ] Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a common eye condition among people aged 50 and older. The macula is a part of the eye that helps you see sharply straight ahead. With AMD, the macula slowly deteriorates which can cause photopsia.

Ocular (retinal) migraine / Migraine aura [ edit ] Migraines are a type of recurring headache. Migraines typically cause severe pain in the head, but can also cause visual changes known as auras . Migraines can also cause visual snow .

Optic neuritis [ edit ] Optic neuritis is an inflammation that damages the optic nerve . It's linked to multiple sclerosis (MS). Along with flickering or flashing with eye movement , symptoms include pain, loss of colour perception , and vision loss .

Occipital lobe infarction (stroke) or ischemia [ edit ] The occipital lobe is one of four lobes in the brain . It controls the ability to see things. Impaired blood flow to the cells of the occipital lobe ( ischemia , for example as caused by a TIA or Vertebrobasilar insufficiency ) will lead to temporary visual problems; if the poor blood flow is sustained it will lead to cell death ( infarction , for example as caused by a stroke ) which may cause persistent visual problems.

The main symptoms associated with an occipital lobe infarction involve changes to vision such as: blurry vision blindness , which may affect part of vision only hallucinations , such as flashing lights (photopsia): usually only in the context of blindness Sensory deprivation (Ophthalmopathic hallucinations) [ edit ] Sensory deprivation or ophthalmopathic hallucination are hallucinations that appear in the field of vision .

Appearance [ edit ] Photopsias is defined as an effect on the vision that causes appearances of anomalies in the vision . Photopsias usually appear as: flickering lights shimmering lights floating shapes moving dots snow or static Photopsias are not generally a condition on their own, but a symptom of another condition.

See also [ edit ] Fortification spectra – Visual aura associated with migraine Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Moore's lightning streaks Phosphene – Visual illusion Infarction – Tissue death due to inadequate blood supply Sensory deprivation – Deliberate reduction or removal of stimuli Vertebrobasilar insufficiency References [ edit ] ^ "Photopsia: Is It Dangerous? (How to Treat It) - Nvision" .

Nvision . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

^ "The woman who saw the light" .

MDedge Psychiatry . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ "Retinal detachment - Symptoms and causes - Mayo Clinic" .

Mayo Clinic . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

^ Morrow, Nicole C.; Chung, Anthony T.; Wall, Michael.

"Photopsias" .

EyeRounds.org .

University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine . Retrieved 20 June 2020 .

^ "Punctate inner choroidopathy | Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center (GARD) – an NCATS Program" .

rarediseases.info.nih.gov . Retrieved 2019-08-28 .

Amos JF (1999). "Differential diagnosis of common etiologies of photopsia".

J Am Optom Assoc .

70 (8): 485– 504.

PMID 10506812 .

Engmann, Birk (2008). "Phosphenes and photopsias – ischaemic origin or sensorial deprivation? – Case history." Z. Neuropsychol .

19 (1): 7–13.

ISSN 1016-264X doi : 10.1024/1016-264X.19.1.7 Chu, David S. (MD) (2001). Ocular Immunology and Uveitis Foundation.

https://web.archive.org/web/20160304061225/http://www.uveitis.org/docs/dm/punctate_inner_choroiditis.pdf Sihota, Ramanjit. Tandon, Radhika.(2011). Parsons' Disease of the Eye.  2011. Edition 21st. pp. 90–91.

ISBN 978-81-312-2554-7 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Photopsia&oldid=1289420376 " Categories : Eye diseases Medical signs Migraine Hallucinations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 8 May 2025, at 14:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Photopsia 14 languages Add topic

