Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Important features 2 Contents 3 Commentaries 4 See also 5 Additional reading 6 References Toggle the table of contents Makarandasarini Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia First page of a manuscript of the astronomical table text Makarandasarini ( Internet Archive ) Makarandasāriṇi is a Sanskrit astronomical table text composed by the Indian astronomer-mathematician Makaranda (c.1438-1478) hailing from Varanasi . In the Sanskrit astronomical literature such table texts are referred to as sāriṇi -s or koṣṭhaka -s. (The word sāriṇi may be loosely translated as “stream, path, line”.) It is one of the most popular such texts ever composed in Sanskrit.

[ 1 ] Important features [ edit ] Makarandasāriṇi follows the Saurapakṣa . This is the midnight-epoch system embodied in a recension of the Sūryasiddhānta dating to around the eighth century.

[ 1 ] This is reflected in the choices of the values of the  fundamental parameters, like the values of the celestial bodies’ revolution-numbers and consequent mean velocities. Another unique feature of Makarandasāriṇi is the use of vegetation-themed Sanskrit technical terms for its various tables. The table giving the mean position increments has been called vāṭikā (garden) and the table giving calendar day/time for mean time unit has been called guccha (blossom, flower). There are tables named valli -s (creeper) and saurabhaṃ -s (fragrance, perfume). In comparison to most other sāriṇi -s or koṣṭhakā -s, Makarandasāriṇi has no accompanying set of verses except for an invocatory stanza at the beginning of the text.

[ 1 ] Contents [ edit ] Among other things, the book has tables relating to the following: [ 2 ] the ending moments of tithi , and yoga the mean longitudes of the Sun, the Moon and the five tārāgraha -s viz, Kuja (Mars), Budha (Mercury), Guru (Jupiter), Śukra (Venus) and Śani (Saturn), the mandaphala (equation of the centre) of each of the heavenly bodies, the equation of the conjunction of the five planets, the moments of solar ingress ( saṅkarmaṅa ) into the rāśi -s (zodiacal signs) and nakṣatra -s (the twenty-seven asterisms) the Sun’s declination ( krānti ) the latitude ( śara ,  ' vikṣepa ) of the Moon the angular diameters ( bimba ) of the Sun, the Moon and the Earth’s shadow-cone ( bhūcchāyā , bhūrbhā ) for computing lunar and solar eclipses.

Commentaries [ edit ] There are a large number of commentaries on Makarandasāriṇi in circulation.  These commentaries provide detailed instructions on how to use the tables sometimes with elaborate worked examples. The following is only a partial list of these commentaries.

[ 1 ] Makarandapañcāṅgopapatti of Ḍhuṇḍhirāja (fl. 1590) Makarandavivaraṇa of Divākara (b. 1606) Makarandapaddhatikārikā of Harikarṇa (fl. 1610) Abhinavatāmarasa of Purus.ottama Bhaṭṭa (fl. ca. 1610) Makarandodāharaṇa of Viśvaātha (fl. 1612/1630) Makarandaṭippaṇa of Moreśvara (1622 CE) Subodhikā of Kṣemaṅkara Miśra (fl. 1632) Makarandakārikā of Kṛpārāma Miśra (fl. 1815) vāsanā of Nīlāmbara Jhā (b. 18 July 1823) udāharaṇa of Jīvanātha Jhā (fl. ca. 1846/1900) See also [ edit ] Mahadevi (astronomy book) Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Additional reading [ edit ] Clemency Montelle and Kim Plofker (2018).

Sanskrit Astronomical Tables . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-319-97036-3 . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

David Pingree (1973).

Sanskrit Astronomical Tables In England . Madras (Chennai): The Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

Vishnunath (1923).

Makaranda Sarini . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

(Name of publisher not mentioned. Digitized from Digital Library of India.) Balachandra Rao S, Rupa K and Padmaja Venugopal (2013).

"An analysis of the mandaphala tables of Makaranda and revision of parameters" (PDF) .

Ganita Bharati .

35 (1) . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Clemency Montelle  and Kim Plofker.

Sanskrit Astronomical Tables . 2018: Springer.

ISBN 978-3-319-97036-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ K. Rupa, Padmaja Venugopal and S. Balachandra Rao (2014).

"Makarandasarini and allied Saurapaksa tables: A Study" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of History of Science .

49 (2): 186– 208 . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Makarandasarini&oldid=1206559222 " Categories : Hindu astronomy Astronomy in India Hidden category: CS1 maint: location This page was last edited on 12 February 2024, at 13:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Makarandasarini Add languages Add topic

