Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the society itself Toggle History of the society itself subsection 1.1 Beginnings 1.2 Early Progress 1.3 Progress from WWII on 2 Modern Organization Toggle Modern Organization subsection 2.1 Division of Library, Archives and Museum Collections 2.2 Division of Museums and Historic Sites 2.3 Division of Historic Preservation-Public History 2.4 Wisconsin Magazine of History 2.5 Division of Administrative Services 3 Notable people 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Wisconsin Historical Society 3 languages Español Français Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Agency of Wisconsin, United States Wisconsin Historical Society (WHS) Agency overview Formed 1846 Jurisdiction Wisconsin Headquarters 816 State Street Madison, Wisconsin 53706 Agency executive Christian  W. Øverland, Ruth and Hartley Baker Director Parent agency State of Wisconsin Website wisconsinhistory.org United States historic place State Historical Society Library U.S. National Register of Historic Places The Society's headquarters and library Location 816 State Street, Madison, Wisconsin Built 1896-1900 [ 2 ] Architect Ferry & Clas Architectural style Neoclassical NRHP reference No.

72000049 [ 1 ] Added to NRHP February 23, 1972 The Wisconsin Historical Society (officially the State Historical Society of Wisconsin ) is simultaneously a state agency and a private membership organization whose purpose is to maintain, promote and spread knowledge relating to the history of North America , with an emphasis on the state of Wisconsin and the trans-Allegheny West.

[ 3 ] Founded in 1846 and chartered in 1853, it is the oldest historical society in the United States to receive continuous public funding.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The society's headquarters are located in Madison, Wisconsin , on the campus of the University of Wisconsin–Madison .

History of the society itself [ edit ] Beginnings [ edit ] Massachusetts had formed its state historical society 170 years after the Pilgrims arrived. Because of that delay, parts of that colony's early history were lost. With that in mind, some of Wisconsin Territory 's early history-minded leaders began advocating in 1845 for creation of a state historical society. In late 1846 during the convention to write a state constitution, two meetings were held to organize a state historical society. They adopted a constitution for the society, chose A. Hyatt Smith of Janesville as first president, and chose Governor Doty as one of the vice-presidents. But the newborn historical society seems to have done little for its first few years.

[ 6 ] : 73–75 In January 1849, after Wisconsin became a state, interested parties met in the Senate chamber and revived the society, electing Governor Dewey as president and Increase A. Lapham as corresponding secretary, among other officers. They drafted a constitution for the society which laid out its purpose, including:  "...to preserve the materials for a complete history of Wisconsin embracing the antiquities, and the history of the Indian tribes." This iteration of the society arranged annual speeches and started a book collection, but didn't accomplish a lot because it still had no paid secretary.

[ 6 ] : 75–77 The Pederson house at Old World Wisconsin In 1853 the legislature gave the young historical society a charter and $500 to finance its mission. The members chose Lyman Draper as corresponding secretary and adopted a new constitution which elaborated on the society's aim: The object of the Society shall be to collect, embody, arrange and preserve in authentic form a library of books, pamphlets, maps, charts, manuscripts, papers, paintings, statuary, and other materials illustrative of the history of the State, to rescue from oblivion the memory of its early pioneers and to obtain and preserve narratives of their exploits, perils and hardy adventures; to exhibit faithfully the antiquities and the past and present condition and resources of Wisconsin, and may take proper steps, to promote the study of History by lectures, and to diffuse and publish information relating to the description and history of the State.

[ 6 ] : 77–78 Unlike some other states, the founders decided that Wisconsin's historical society should not restrict its membership to elites, but should be open to anyone interested, if they paid their dues.

[ 7 ] : 9–10 Early Progress [ edit ] With these changes and with Draper carrying the ball, the new Society began making progress. Draper asked for donations of publications from historians and public figures, narratives and old letters from early settlers, descriptions of Indians and Indian mounds, newspapers, pamphlets, and so forth. In 1855 the Society began publishing the Wisconsin Historic Collections every three years, which printed some of the accounts of early Wisconsin which the Society was receiving. At the start of the Civil War Draper asked several Wisconsin army officers to send him relics of the war and encouraged soldiers to keep diaries of their experiences. In 1875 the Society acquired the Perkins Collection of 9,000 stone and copper Indian artifacts. The Society was seeing 20,000 to 35,000 visitors each year and by 1876 had the largest library west of Washington DC.

[ 7 ] : 11–18 Reuben Gold Thwaites took over from Draper in 1887. He identified gaps in the Society's collection and travelled around the state seeking to fill them. He sent staff to libraries outside Wisconsin to copy Wisconsin-related documents. He strengthened ties with the UW by opening the Society's library and source materials to UW students, which was a new thing for a non-university library. He hired assistants Annie Nunns, Mary Stuart Foster and Iva Welsh, who were so important to the Society that their long period of influence has been called "The Matriarchy." He hired Louise Phelps Kellogg as a research assistant in 1901. He improved the Society's museum displays, to serve the general public who were less interested in the Society's library. In line with Progressive Era ideas, Thwaites encouraged local historical societies around the state, and in 1898 advocated state legislation to establish a network of local historical societies, guided by the WHS. Local societies in Green Bay and Ripon were the first to affiliate, in 1899. By this point, the WHS was seen as one of the leading historical societies in the US.

[ 7 ] : 21–26, 45 The physical presence of the Historical Society had started as one bookcase in the state capitol in 1849. After that, the collection resided in Lyman Draper's basement, then the basement of his church, and back to the capitol. These locations were somewhat inconvenient and certainly vulnerable to fire. Meanwhile, the UW had outgrown its own 1878 Library Hall. In 1891 UW President Chamberlain suggested that the Historical Society ask the state legislature for a new building to house libraries of both the UW and the Historical Society. The legislature granted money starting in 1895 and architectural plans were solicited. After some critique and rework, the design from Ferry & Clas of Milwaukee was selected. The building was constructed from 1896 to 1900.

[ 8 ] The new building was just in the nick of time. In pitching the new building, Thwaites had described the state capitol as a fire-trap, and indeed most of the capitol burned in 1904.

[ 7 ] : 26, 32 The library reading room.

Ferry & Clas's building is considered one of the finest Neoclassical Revival designs in Wisconsin. The facade is four stories tall, with a central colonnade across the second and third stories flanked by blocks of windows, all of Bedford sandstone with many features carved.

[ 9 ] The footprint was U-shaped, with the colonaded front the base of the U. Behind the colonade, in the base of the U, is a large reading room a full two stories tall, which was shared by the UW and the Historical Society. Only one upright of the U was initially built, for lack of funds; it extended back from the south end of the base of the U and in the first years held the stacks of both the Historical Society and the UW. By 1914 that wing was filled and the state financed building the northern wing of the U. By the late 40s the whole building was again bursting at the seams, so the state financed a new, separate library for the UW. The UW moved out of the shared building in 1952, leaving the whole building to the Historical Society.

[ 8 ] In 1907, as a result of the capitol fire, the legislature made the Historical Society responsible for preserving and distributing the records of the state. That same year, the Society organized a new museum division and brought on Charles E. Brown to lead it.

[ 7 ] : 32–33 After Thwaites' unexpected death in 1913, historian Milo Quaife was chosen to lead. During his tenure, the Society struggled with shortages during the first World War and after, and Quaife never won over the Matriarchy, but he did expand the Society's publications - in particular with the 1917 launch of Wisconsin Magazine of History , a quarterly that prints historical papers aimed at laymen instead of academics. Quaife was succeeded by Wisconsin native Joseph Schafer, who initiated a statewide historical survey modelled on the ancient English Domesday Book . The Society Museum remained popular, but publications faltered, the Great Depression forced more budget cuts, and then in the early 1940s many of the old hands died or retired.

[ 7 ] : 36–48 Progress from WWII on [ edit ] Starting in 1941 under Edward Alexander and then Clifford Lord the Society focused more on supporting local historical societies around the state. In 1947 the Society began encouraging junior historian chapters in elementary and middle schools, sending them Badger History magazine, which contained articles aimed at those age levels and articles written by the students themselves. When the state began placing historical markers along roadsides to encourage tourism, the Society guided the project. In 1952 the Society opened the Villa Louis to the public - the first of about a dozen permanent historic sites/living history museums sprinkled around the state. In 1954 the Society launched its Historymobile, a mobile museum which travelled all over the state, changing the exhibit each year.

[ 7 ] : 51–52, 56–57, 59–63, 65–66 First Historical marker, installed at Peshtigo Fire Cemetery in 1951 Other things were changing in the Alexander/Lord era. To ease space problems before the UW library moved out, the Society's library began shifting to microfilm storage. After WWII, the society began collecting some materials at a national level, including archives from the McCormick family , NBC , and MTM Enterprises . The Society began updating its museum displays, adding color and better lighting and moving some displays to the first floor where more visitors would run across them. Alexander believed that "museums need not look like morgues." [ 7 ] : 52–53, 57–59, 62–63 In the 1930s and 40s, the Society began producing history programming to run on Wisconsin Public Radio . In the 1950s and '60s that expanded to video to air on public TV . The society had long documented social movements like Communism and entitlements ; in the 1960s that turned to the Civil rights movement , among other trends. The Society also established Area Research Centers, in which the historical documents pertinent to the Eau Claire area, for example, are stored in Eau Claire to be convenient for those who are most interested. In 1963 the Society helped Milwaukee develop a historic preservation ordinance, to be followed by many other communities. With the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, the Society became a designated gatekeeper/advisor for National Register of Historic Places sites in Wisconsin.

[ 7 ] : 72–80 Yoked oxen at Old World Wisconsin In the 1970s the Society opened Old World Wisconsin , the living history museum which presents the farms and daily life of settlers of various ethnicities. The Society also began teaching classes on genealogy and reorganizing its catalogs, responding to new interest inspired by the U.S. Bicentennial. The Society began producing the 6-volume History of Wisconsin series and began the Documentary History of the Ratification of the Constitution , a standard reference work for judges and constitutional scholars nationwide. In 1980, with the Society's building bulging, it bought the Wolff, Kubly & Hirsig hardware store on Capitol Square and converted it to house the Museum, which moved there in 1986.

[ 7 ] : 87, 89–91, 93 In the 1980s the Society began computerizing its collections, and in 1993 made its catalog available over the Internet, at which point requests began arriving from new types of users across the country. Four years later the Society launched its website wisconsinhistory.org, again sharing its resources beyond the bounds of its building and Madison. Through all this, the Society continued opening more historic sites around the state like the H.H. Bennett Studio, and arranging special events at those sites like the Villa Louis Carriage Classic.

[ 7 ] : 95–105 In the 1990s the Society began supporting elementary and middle-schools by producing a new textbook for teaching Wisconsin history to fourth-graders, along with teacher guides and other Wisconsin history books for younger readers. In 2005 the Badger Biographies series started. In 2001 the Society joined the nationwide National History Day, in which students in grades six through twelve pick historical topics to research and create presentations on.

[ 7 ] : 108–111 Also in 2001, the State Historical Society of Wisconsin rebranded itself as the Wisconsin Historical Society, a decision which was criticized by some historians for removing the emphasis on the society as a "state" institution.

[ 10 ] "State Historical Society of Wisconsin" remains the official name of the institution in state law, after an attempt by legislators to change it failed. The shorter name had long been used unofficially, and the Society's name was already abbreviated as "WHS" in many cases rather than "SHSW".

[ 11 ] As of 2024, the Society is replacing its 40-year-old museum with a newer museum building on the same site, planned to open in 2027.

[ 12 ] Modern Organization [ edit ] The Wisconsin Historical Society is organized into four divisions: the Division of Library, Archives and Museum Collections, the Division of Museums and Historic Sites, the Division of Historic Preservation-Public History, and the Division of Administrative Services.

Division of Library, Archives and Museum Collections [ edit ] The Division of Library, Archives and Museum Collections collects and maintains books and documents about the history of Wisconsin, the United States, and Canada. The society's library and archives, which together serve as the library of American history for the University of Wisconsin–Madison , contain nearly four million items, making the society's collection the largest in the world dedicated exclusively to North American history.

[ 3 ] [ 13 ] The Wisconsin Historical Society's extensive newspaper collection is the second largest in the United States after the Library of Congress.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Visual materials in the archives include some three million photographs, negatives, films, architectural drawings, cartoons, lithographs, posters, and a variety of visual ephemera.

[ 17 ] The Wisconsin Center for Film and Theater Research is also housed within the division.

[ 18 ] The society's archives also serve as the official repository for state and local government records.

[ 4 ] The society coordinates an Area Research Center Network, an alliance between the Historical Society in Madison and four-year campuses of the University of Wisconsin System throughout the state and the Northern Great Lakes History Center in Ashland, to make most of the archival collections accessible to state residents.
The society's museum collections are maintained in the Collections Division containing objects relating to Wisconsin history.

Division of Museums and Historic Sites [ edit ] The Division of Museums and Historic Sites operates the Wisconsin Historical Museum in downtown Madison and 11 historic sites throughout the state. The museum has an archaeology program in collaboration with the Department of Transportation and the Department of Natural Resources that undertakes research, and collects and preserves historical artifacts.

[ 19 ] The other historic sites are tourist attractions that display historic buildings reflecting Wisconsin history and provide exhibitions and demonstrations of state history, such as ethnic settlement, mining, farming, fur trading, transportation, and pioneering life.

Villa Louis Historic Site , Prairie du Chien, which is operated by the Society Historic Site Location Black Point Estate Lake Geneva, Wisconsin Circus World Museum Baraboo, Wisconsin First Capitol Belmont, Wisconsin H. H. Bennett Studio Wisconsin Dells, Wisconsin Madeline Island Museum La Pointe, Wisconsin Old World Wisconsin Eagle, Wisconsin Pendarvis Mineral Point, Wisconsin Reed School Neillsville, Wisconsin Stonefield Cassville, Wisconsin Sylvanus Wade House Greenbush, Wisconsin Villa Louis Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin Division of Historic Preservation-Public History [ edit ] The Division of Historic Preservation-Public History administers the state's historic preservation program, [ 4 ] the state's burial sites preservation program, and the Wisconsin Historical Society Press , which publishes books on Wisconsin and American history and a quarterly magazine, the Wisconsin Magazine of History . The division also provides outreach to local historical societies.

Wisconsin Magazine of History [ edit ] The Wisconsin Magazine of History ( ISSN 1943-7366 ) is a quarterly journal published by the WHS since September 1917.

[ 20 ] The society maintains a fully digitized archive that contains more than 2,000 feature articles totaling more than 30,000 pages.

[ 21 ] Division of Administrative Services [ edit ] The Division of Administrative Services provides support and planning for the WHS and its divisions.

The society's website include a large, searchable collection of historical images and a vast digital archive containing thousands of scanned documents relating to Wisconsin history.

Wisconsin Historical Society employees are employees of the State of Wisconsin.

[ 22 ] Notable people [ edit ] John Givan Davis Mack , professor of engineering and curator of the WHS library [ 23 ] F. Gerald Ham , former Wisconsin state archivist and director of the Division of Library-Archives [ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Google Books Library Project List of historical societies in Wisconsin References [ edit ] ^ "National Register Information System" .

National Register of Historic Places .

National Park Service . November 2, 2013.

^ "State Historical Society of Wisconsin" . Wisconsin Historical Society . Retrieved 2024-12-07 .

^ a b "Bucerius Seminar 2005: American History and American Archives" (PDF) .

German Historical Institute London Bulletin (38). German Historical Institute: 139. Spring 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 February 2012 . Retrieved 10 April 2010 .

the Wisconsin Historical Society, which is impressive both as a building and as an institution. It is the largest library for American history, it functions as a state archive, it is the premier place to do research on Wisconsin ^ a b c Wisconsin Legislative Reference Bureau (1985). "The Executive Branch".

State of Wisconsin 1985–1986 Blue Book . Madison: Wisconsin Legislative Reference Bureau. p. 460.

Founded in 1846 and chartered in 1853, the State Historical Society of Wisconsin is the nation's oldest historical society to receive continuing grants of state funds ^ About page at the Wisconsin Historical Society website.

^ a b c Johnson, Peter Leo (September 1942).

"The Founding of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin" .

Wisconsin Magazine of History .

26 (1) . Retrieved 2024-12-02 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Zimm, John (2015).

The Wisconsin Historical Society - Collecting, Preserving, and Sharing Stories since 1846 . Madison: Wisconsin Historical Society Press.

ISBN 978-0-87020-691-7 .

^ a b Feldman, Jim (1997).

The Buildings of the University of Wisconsin . Madison: The University Archives. pp.

82– 84 . Retrieved 2024-12-04 .

^ Donald N. Anderson (1971-11-04).

"National Register of Historic Places Inventory/Nomination: State Historical Society of Wisconsin" .

National Park Service . Retrieved 2024-12-05 .

With two photos from 1971 ^ Kalk, Samara.

"Hi story: Get used to this; Society aims for hipper image" , Madison Capital Times , June 4, 2001, front page and [ https://www.newspapers.com/article/the-capital-times/168938333/ page 10A.

^ Vogt, George L.

"Historical Society still here" , Madison Capital Times , June 18, 2001, page 8A.

^ "Wisconsin Historical Society Preps Construction Site for Wisconsin History Center" . Wisconsin Historical Society . Retrieved 2024-12-27 .

^ "Wisconsin Historical Society" Archived 2009-05-11 at the Wayback Machine at www.madison.com .

^ Cates, Jo A. (2004).

Journalism: A Guide to the Reference Literature . Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing. p. 251.

ISBN 9781591580614 .

^ "Newspapers for Genealogy from the Wisconsin Historical Society" . Archived from the original on 2012-02-12 . Retrieved 2007-06-15 .

^ Newspaper & Periodicals Collections of the Wisconsin Historical Society ^ Visual Materials and Films in Our Collections ^ "About Us" .

Wisconsin Center for Film and Theater Research . Retrieved November 22, 2019 .

^ Wisconsin Historical Society.

About the Division of Museums and Historic Sites ".

^ Schumacher, Ryan (January 2013).

"The Wisconsin Magazine of History: A Case Study in Scholarly and Popular Approaches to American State Historical Society Publishing, 1917–2000" .

Journal of Scholarly Publishing .

44 (2): 114– 141.

doi : 10.3138/jsp.44.2.002 .

ISSN 1198-9742 .

^ "About the Wisconsin Magazine of History Archives" . Wisconsin Historical Society. October 2012 . Retrieved October 21, 2017 .

^ WHS job announcement from 2010 ^ On the Presentation of the Mack Portrait to the State Historical Society .

The Wisconsin Magazine of History , vol. 8, no. 1 (September, 1924), pp. 74–77.

^ John Fleckner, "F. Gerald Ham: Jeremiah to the Profession," American Archivist 77, no. 2 (2014): 377–393 Further reading [ edit ] Buck, Solon J. "Recent Activities of the Wisconsin Historical Society." Minnesota History Bulletin (1915): 94–108.

in JSTOR Schumacher, Ryan. "The Wisconsin Magazine of History: A Case Study in Scholarly and Popular Approaches to American State Historical Society Publishing, 1917–2000." Journal of Scholarly Publishing 44.2 (2013): 114–141.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wisconsin Historical Society .

Official website Wisconsin Magazine of History archive of scholarly articles Legislators' Guide to the Wisconsin Historical Society Teachinghistory.org review of WHS website, American Journeys v t e State of Wisconsin Madison (capital) Topics Outline Agriculture Dairy industry Climate change Geography Islands Lakes Governors Delegations History People Sports Symbols Tourist attractions Society Abortion Administrative divisions Cannabis Crime Culture Demographics Economy Education Gun laws LGBT rights Politics Regions Apostle Islands BOW counties Central Plain Chippewa Valley Door Peninsula Driftless Area Eastern Ridges and Lowlands Fox River Valley Great River Road Lake Superior Lowland Northern Highland Western Upland WOW counties Major metropolitan areas (pop. over 500,000) Chicago metropolitan area Madison metropolitan area Milwaukee metropolitan area Twin Cities metropolitan area Largest cities (pop. over 50,000) Appleton Eau Claire Green Bay Janesville Kenosha La Crosse Madison Milwaukee Oshkosh Racine Waukesha West Allis Smaller cities (pop. 15,000 to 50,000) Beaver Dam Beloit Brookfield Cudahy De Pere Fitchburg Fond du Lac Franklin Greenfield Hartford Hudson Kaukauna Manitowoc Marshfield Menasha Menomonie Mequon Middleton Muskego Neenah New Berlin Oak Creek Oconomowoc Onalaska River Falls Sheboygan South Milwaukee Stevens Point Sun Prairie Superior Watertown Wausau Wauwatosa West Bend Wisconsin Rapids Largest villages (pop. over 15,000) Ashwaubenon Bellevue Caledonia Fox Crossing Germantown Howard Menomonee Falls Mount Pleasant Pleasant Prairie Counties Adams Ashland Barron Bayfield Brown Buffalo Burnett Calumet Chippewa Clark Columbia Crawford Dane Dodge Door Douglas Dunn Eau Claire Florence Fond du Lac Forest Grant Green Green Lake Iowa Iron Jackson Jefferson Juneau Kenosha Kewaunee La Crosse Lafayette Langlade Lincoln Manitowoc Marathon Marinette Marquette Menominee Milwaukee Monroe Oconto Oneida Outagamie Ozaukee Pepin Pierce Polk Portage Price Racine Richland Rock Rusk Sauk Sawyer Shawano Sheboygan St. Croix Taylor Trempealeau Vernon Vilas Walworth Washburn Washington Waukesha Waupaca Waushara Winnebago Wood Wisconsin portal v t e Protected areas of Wisconsin Federal National Estuarine Research Reserves Lake Superior National Forests Chequamegon–Nicolet National Lakeshores Apostle Islands National Marine Sanctuaries Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Trails Ice Age North Country National Wildlife Refuges Driftless Area Fox River Gravel Island Green Bay Hackmatack Horicon Marsh Necedah Trempealeau Upper Mississippi River Whittlesey Creek National Wild and Scenic Rivers St. Croix River Wolf River Other National Historic Landmarks National Natural Landmarks National Register of Historic Places Wilderness Areas State State Parks Amnicon Falls Aztalan Belmont Mound Big Bay Big Foot Beach Blue Mound Brunet Island Buckhorn Capital Springs Copper Culture Copper Falls Council Grounds Devil's Lake Governor Dodge Governor Nelson Governor Thompson Grand Traverse Island Harrington Beach Hartman Creek Heritage Hill High Cliff Interstate Kinnickinnic Kohler-Andrae Lake Kegonsa Lake Wissota Lakeshore Lizard Mound Menominee River Merrick Mill Bluff Mirror Lake Natural Bridge Nelson Dewey New Glarus Woods Newport Pattison Peninsula Perrot Potawatomi Rib Mountain Roche-a-Cri Rock Island Rocky Arbor Straight Lake Tower Hill Whitefish Dunes Wildcat Mountain Willow River Wyalusing Yellowstone Lake State Natural Areas Ableman's Gorge Abraham's Woods Ancient Aztalan Village Avoca River-Bottom Prairie Avon Bottoms Beaver Brook Belmont Mound Big Manitou Falls Black Earth Rettenmund Prairie Black Tern Bog Blomberg Lake Brady's Bluff Prairie Brule Glacial Spillway Canoe Landing Prairie Cherney Maribel Caves Chippewa Moraine Lakes Chiwaukee Prairie Coffee Swamp Copper Falls Crex Sand Prairie Cylon Dells of the Eau Claire River Dells of the Wisconsin River Detroit Harbor Devil's Lake Oak Forest Dewey Marsh Dorothy Lake Dunnville Barrens Durst Rockshelter Flambeau River Hardwood Forest Fourmile Island Rookery French Creek Fen French Creek North Gibraltar Rock Grandma Lake Honey Creek Kangaroo Lake Little Lake Little Wolf River Mazomanie Bottoms Mazomanie Oak Barrens Mill Bluff Mink River Moquah Barrens Natural Bridge and Rockshelter Parfrey's Glen Pewit's Nest Pleasant Valley Conservancy Point Beach Ridges Red Cedar Lake Rice Creek The Ridges Sanctuary Rush River Delta Sister Islands Spread Eagle Barrens Spruce Lake Bog Swan Lake Sedge Meadow and Barrens Swan Lake Tamaracks Swan Lake Wet-mesic Prairie Swenson Wet Prairie Trempealeau Mountain Twin Lakes Bog Two Creeks Buried Forest Wilson Lake Wind Pudding State Recreation Areas Cadiz Springs Chippewa Moraine Fischer Creek Hoffman Hills Menominee River Richard Bong State Forests Black River Brule River Coulee Experimental Flambeau River Governor Knowles Havenwoods Kettle Moraine - Lapham Peak Unit Kettle Moraine - Loew Lake Unit Kettle Moraine - Northern & Southern Units Kettle Moraine - Pike Lake Unit Northern Highland-American Legion Peshtigo River Point Beach State Historical Sites Black Point Estate Circus World Museum First Capitol H. H. Bennett Studio Madeline Island Museum Old World Wisconsin Pendarvis Reed School Stonefield Villa Louis Wade House State Wildlife Areas Ackley Albany Allenton Amberg Amsterdam Sloughs Augusta Avon Bottoms Balsam Branch Beaver Brook Big Beaver Creek Buena Vista Crex Meadows Cylon Dewey Marsh Fish Lake French Creek Gardner Swamp Horicon Marsh Killsnake Leola Marsh Mead Paradise Marsh Powell Marsh Theresa Marsh Vernon Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources v t e Historical societies of the U.S. states Northeast New England Connecticut Museum of Culture and History Maine Historical Society Massachusetts Historical Society New Hampshire Historical Society Rhode Island Historical Society Vermont Historical Society Mid-Atlantic Delaware Historical Society Historical Society of Washington, D.C.

Maryland Historical Society New Jersey Historical Society New York Historical Historical Society of Pennsylvania Midwest East North Central Illinois State Historical Society Indiana Historical Society Historical Society of Michigan Ohio History Connection Wisconsin Historical Society West North Central State Historical Society of Iowa Kansas Historical Society Minnesota Historical Society State Historical Society of Missouri Missouri Historical Society Nebraska State Historical Society State Historical Society of North Dakota South Dakota State Historical Society South South Atlantic Florida Historical Society Georgia Historical Society North Carolina State Historic Preservation Office South Carolina Historical Society Virginia Historical Society West Virginia Division of Culture and History East South Central Alabama Historical Commission Kentucky Historical Society Mississippi Historical Society Tennessee Historical Commission West South Central Arkansas Historical Association Louisiana Historical Society Oklahoma Historical Society Texas State Historical Association West Mountain Arizona Historical Society History Colorado Idaho State Historical Society Montana Historical Society Nevada Historical Society Historical Society of New Mexico Utah State Historical Society Wyoming State Historical Society Pacific Alaska Historical Society California Historical Society Hawaiian Historical Society Oregon Historical Society Washington State Historical Society v t e Midwestern US historical societies East North Central Illinois Chicago Chicago History Museum Chinese American Museum of Chicago Civil War Roundtable DuSable Museum of African American History Forgotten Chicago Inter-University Seminar on Armed Forces and Society Society of American Archivists Society of Architectural Historians Swiss American Historical Society Others Campbell Center for Historic Preservation Studies Clarendon Hills Historical Society Elgin Area Historical Society Illinois Historic Preservation Division Illinois State Historical Society National Amusement Park Historical Association National Collaborative for Women's History Sites Theatre Historical Society of America Indiana American Folklore Society History of Science Society Indiana Historical Society Indiana Landmarks Landmark Columbus Foundation National Council on Public History Organization of American Historians Michigan Berrien County Historical Association International Congress on Medieval Studies Lake Odessa Area Historical Society Leelanau Historical Society and Museum Mason County Historical Society Oceana County Historical & Genealogical Society Society for Medieval Feminist Scholarship Society for Medieval German Studies Society for Industrial Archeology Ypsilanti Historical Society Ohio Cleveland American Catholic Historical Association Center for Public History and Digital Humanities National Council for History Education Western Reserve Historical Society Others Columbus Historical Society Dayton History Marion County Historical Society Montgomery County Historical Society Oberlin Heritage Center Ohio History Connection The Pioneer and Historical Society of Muskingum County Preservation Ohio Sons and Daughters of Pioneer Rivermen Summit County Historical Society of Akron, Ohio Wisconsin Bay View Historical Society Economic History Association Greenfield Historical Society Milwaukee County Historical Society National Episcopal Historians and Archivists Oak Creek Historical Society Wisconsin Historical Society West North Central Iowa Cedar Falls Historical Society Preservation Iowa State Historical Society of Iowa Kansas Kansas Historical Society Minnesota Aitkin County Depot Museum American Society of Church History Anoka County History Center Blue Earth County History Center Brown County Museum (New Ulm, Minnesota) Carlton County History and Heritage Center Giants of the Earth Heritage Center Hennepin History Museum Iron Range Historical Society Kandiyohi County Historical Society Maritime Heritage Minnesota Minnesota Historical Society Northern Great Plains History Conference Norwegian-American Historical Association Red Tail Squadron Wilkin County Museum Missouri Boone County Historical Society John Whitmer Historical Association Missouri Folklore Society Missouri Historical Society State Historical Society of Missouri Nebraska Douglas County Historical Society Nebraska State Historical Society Plains Historical Society Washington County Historical Association Western History Association North Dakota State Historical Society of North Dakota South Dakota South Dakota State Historical Society v t e Government archival agencies in the United States Federal National Archives and Records Administration State Alabama Department of Archives and History Alaska State Archives Arizona State Library Arkansas State Archives California State Archives Colorado State Archives Connecticut State Library Delaware Public Archives State Library and Archives of Florida Georgia Archives Hawaiʻi State Archives Idaho State Archives Illinois State Archives Indiana Archives and Records Administration State Historical Society of Iowa Kansas Historical Society Kentucky Department for Libraries and Archives Louisiana State Archive and Research Library Maine State Archives Maryland State Archives Massachusetts Archives Archives of Michigan Minnesota Historical Society Mississippi Department of Archives and History Missouri State Archives Montana Historical Society History Nebraska Nevada State Library, Archives, and Public Records New Hampshire Archives and Records Management New Jersey State Archives New Mexico State Records Center and Archives New York State Archives State Archives of North Carolina State Historical Society of North Dakota Ohio History Connection Oklahoma Department of Libraries Oregon State Archives Pennsylvania State Archives Rhode Island State Archives South Carolina Department of Archives and History South Dakota State Historical Society Tennessee State Library and Archives Texas State Library and Archives Commission Utah Division of Archives and Records Service Vermont State Archives and Records Administration Library of Virginia Washington State Archives West Virginia Archives and History Wisconsin Historical Society Wyoming State Archives Federal district District of Columbia Agencies within libraries or historical societies in italics.

Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Australia Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wisconsin_Historical_Society&oldid=1305860047 " Categories : Wisconsin Historical Society State historical societies of the United States Scientific organizations established in 1846 1846 establishments in Wisconsin Territory Organizations based in Madison, Wisconsin Digital history projects Photo archives Photo archives in the United States Hidden categories: Articles using NRISref without a reference number Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 14:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wisconsin Historical Society 3 languages Add topic

