Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Features 2 Laghumahādevī 3 See also 4 Additional reading 5 References Toggle the table of contents Mahadevi (astronomy book) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about a Sanskrit astronomical table text. For article about the Supreme Goddess in Hinduism, see Mahadevi .

A page of the Sanskrit astronomical table text Mahadevi with Dipika commentary ( Internet Archive ) Mahādevī is a Sanskrit astronomical table text composed by the Indian astronomer - mathematician Mahādeva around the year 1316 CE. Since its composition, it has become the standard astronomical table among astronomers, astrologers and calendar makers in the Brāhma-pakṣa school. More than  a hundred manuscripts of the work have been unearthed, which is far more numerous than the surviving manuscripts of any earlier koṣṭhaka , the word by which such table texts are referred to in Sanskrit, Mahādevī has been described as the "first 'canonical' koṣṭhaka ".

[ 1 ] In the history of studies on Sanskrit astronomical table texts, Mahādevī was the first such text to be subjected to a systematic analysis using modern mathematical tools.

[ 2 ] Features [ edit ] There are several important features of Mahādevī that  might have helped in spreading its acceptance among a wide cross section of astronomers and astrologers across India.

Mahādevī is an astronomical table text of the Brāhma-pakṣa school. This school uses the values of the fundamental parameters, namely, the values of the celestial bodies ’ revolution-numbers and consequent mean velocities, as given in the Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta of Brahmagupta composed in 628 CE. Its main region of influence in is the northern and western areas of India. The work presents more than 300 tables including "tables for single-year and 60-year mean longitudinal displacement tables for the epact, the lord of the year, the moon, the lunar node, and the five planets, along with a bīja for each of these entities. The bulk of its content, however, consists of the sixty annual true longitude tables given for each of the five planets, each table containing 27 longitudes at intervals of 14 days, as specified in the verse." [ 1 ] In Mahādevī , the planetary true longitudes are expressed in 6° arc-units or sixtieths of a circle and their sexagesimal fractions. This is more convenient than the nakṣatra units of 13° 20′ because they are more easily converted to or from the standard measures of zodiacal signs and degrees.

A very important feature of the book is that it has an abundance of tables and data. The use of smaller unit of 6° arc-units helps in reducing the size of interpolation intervals. The work contains a large amount of compactly organized data per argument value. Each entry for true longitude is accompanied by the tabulated difference between that entry and the corresponding one in the next table, simplifying the task of interpolation between tables. The true velocity and its inter-tabular differences are similarly tabulated. Finally, occurrences of synodic phenomena are noted next to the longitude entries where they occur.

There are no verbal instructions on how to use these tables. With its total verse text amounting to less than 50 verses, the Mahādevī avoids duplication of computational techniques. No algorithms are prescribed as (potentially confusing) alternatives to use of the tables.

Laghumahādevī [ edit ] Laghumahādevī is a condensed version of Mahādevī composed by an anonymous author sometimes around 1578 CE. The condensation is achieved by using 18° arc-units instead of 6° arc-units and copying every third value of the Mahādevī tables, See also [ edit ] Makarandasārini Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Additional reading [ edit ] For a detailed mathematical analysis of the tables in Maahādevī : O. Neugebauer and David Pingree (April 1967).

"The Astronomical Tables of Mahādeva" .

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

111 (2): 69– 92 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

Clemency Montelle and Kim Plofker (2018).

Sanskrit Astronomical Tables . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-319-97036-3 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

For Mahādevī with a commentary called Dīpikā , composed in 1636 A. D. by Dhanaraja: Mahadevi Of Mahadev With Dipika (Internet Archive) Agathe Keller, Koolakodlu Mahesh, Clemency Montelle.

"History of Numerical Tables in Sanskrit Sources" .

shs.hal.science . HAL Open Science . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) References [ edit ] ^ a b Clemency Montelle and Kim Plofker (2018).

Sanskrit Astronomical Tables . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-319-97036-3 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ O. Neugebauer and David Pingree (April 1967).

"The Astronomical Tables of Mahādeva" .

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

111 (2): 69– 92 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mahadevi_(astronomy_book)&oldid=1277930846 " Categories : Hindu astronomy Astronomy in India Hidden category: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 14:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mahadevi (astronomy book) Add languages Add topic

