Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Surveyors (architects) active in this period 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Elizabethan architecture 10 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego Italiano Slovenščina ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term given to early Renaissance architecture in England English Renaissance: Hardwick Hall (1590–1597), a classic prodigy house . The numerous and large mullioned windows are typically English Renaissance, while the loggia is Italian.

Burghley House , completed in 1587 Wollaton Hall , Nottingham, England, completed in 1588 for Sir Francis Willoughby by the Elizabethan architect Robert Smythson Elizabethan architecture refers to buildings in a local style of Renaissance architecture built during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I of England from 1558 to 1603.

[ 1 ] The style is very largely confined to secular buildings, especially the large prodigy houses built for the newly-risen nobility close to the court.  Many ordinary buildings continued vernacular styles with little decoration.  New religious building had ended abruptly at the Dissolution of the Monasteries from c.

1536 .  English architecture was late in adopting Renaissance standards compared to the rest of Europe, and in the Elizabethan style northern Europe rather than Italy was the main influence.  After Elizabeth a new court culture of pan-European artistic ambition under James I (1603–1625) saw the style morph into Jacobean architecture . Stylistically, Elizabethan architecture is notably pluralistic. It came at the end of insular late Gothic traditions in design and construction called the Perpendicular style in church building, the fenestration, vaulting techniques, and open truss designs of which often affected the detail of larger domestic buildings.  In the late part of the 16th century, illustrated continental pattern-books introduced a wide range of architectural exemplars, fueled by the archaeology of Ancient Rome .

As church building turned to the construction of great houses for courtiers and merchants, these novelties accompanied a nostalgia for native history as well as huge divisions in religious identity, plus the influence of continental mercantile and civic buildings. Insular traditions of construction, detail and materials never entirely disappeared. These varied influences on patrons who could favor conservatism or great originality confound attempts to neatly classify Elizabethan architecture. This era of cultural upheaval and fusions corresponds to what is often termed Mannerism and Late Cinquecento in Italy, French Renaissance architecture in France, and the Plateresque style in Spain .

[ 1 ] In contrast to her father Henry VIII , Elizabeth commissioned no new royal palaces, and very few new churches were built, but there was a great boom in building domestic houses for the well-off, largely due to the redistribution of ecclesiastical lands after the Dissolution. The most characteristic type, for the very well-off, is the showy prodigy house , using styles and decoration derived from Northern Mannerism , but with elements retaining signifies of medieval castles, such as the normally busy roof-line.

History [ edit ] The Elizabethan era saw growing prosperity, and contemporaries remarked on the pace of secular building among the well-off. The somewhat tentative influence of Renaissance architecture is mainly seen in the great houses of courtiers, but lower down the social scale large numbers of sizeable and increasingly comfortable houses were built in developing vernacular styles by farmers and townspeople.  Civic and institutional buildings were also becoming increasingly common.

Renaissance architecture had achieved some influence in England during the reign of, and mainly in the palaces of, Henry VIII , who imported a number of Italian artists.  Unlike Henry, Elizabeth built no new palaces, instead encouraging her courtiers to build extravagantly and house her on her summer progresses.  The style they adopted was more influenced by the Northern Mannerism of the Low Countries than Italy, among other features it used versions of the Dutch gable , and Flemish strapwork in geometric designs.  Both of these features can be seen on the towers of Wollaton Hall and again at Montacute House . Flemish craftsmen succeeded the Italians that had influenced Tudor architecture; the original Royal Exchange, London (1566–1570) is one of the first important buildings designed by Henri de Paschen , an architect from Antwerp .

[ 1 ] However, most continental influences came from books, and there were a number of English "master masons" who were in effect architects and in great demand, so that their work is often widely spread around the country.

Important examples of Elizabethan architecture include: Audley End Blickling Hall Charterhouse (London) Condover Hall ( Shropshire ) Danny House Hatfield House Longleat House Montacute House Wollaton Hall Rainthorpe Hall In England, the English Renaissance first manifested itself mainly in the distinct form of the prodigy house , large, square, and tall houses such as Longleat House , built by courtiers who hoped to attract the queen for a ruinously expensive stay, and so advance their careers. Often these buildings have an elaborate and fanciful roofline , hinting at the evolution from medieval fortified architecture.

It was also at this time that the long gallery became popular in large English houses.  This was apparently mainly used for walking in, and a growing range of parlours and withdrawing rooms supplemented the main living room for the family, the great chamber .  The great hall was now mostly used by the servants, and as an impressive point of entry to the house.

Surveyors (architects) active in this period [ edit ] Robert Adams (1540–1595) William Arnold (fl. 1595–1637) Simon Basil (fl. 1590–1615) Robert Lyminge (fl. 1607–1628) Robert Smythson (1535–1614) John Thorpe or Thorp (c. 1565–1655?; fl.1570–1618) See also [ edit ] architecture portal Jacobean architecture , the next phase of English Renaissance architecture Tudorbethan and Jacobethan , revivals derived (in part) from Elizabethan architecture References [ edit ] ^ a b c Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Elizabethan Style" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 9 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 288.

Sources [ edit ] Airs, Malcolm, The Buildings of Britain, A Guide and Gazetteer, Tudor and Jacobean , 1982, Barrie & Jenkins (London), ISBN 0091478316 Girouard, Mark , Life in the English Country House: A Social and Architectural History 1978, Yale, Penguin, etc.

Jenkins, Simon , England's Thousand Best Houses , 2003, Allen Lane, ISBN 0713995963 Summerson, John , Architecture in Britain, 1530 to 1830 , 1993 edition, Yale University Press Pelican History of Art, Yale University Press, ISBN 0300058861 , ISBN 9780300058864 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Elizabethan architecture .

Shaw, Henry (1839).

Details of Elizabethan architecture . London: William Pickering – plates of architectural details v t e Architecture of England Styles Anglo-Saxon Saxo-Norman Norman English Gothic Tudor Elizabethan Jacobean Carolean English Baroque Queen Anne Georgian Strawberry Hill Gothic Victorian Jacobethan Edwardian Bristol Byzantine Brutalist Buildings and structures Castles Abbeys and priories Medieval cathedrals Former cathedrals Round-tower churches Roman villas Historic houses Hall houses Renaissance theatres Listed buildings Museums Church monuments National Trust properties Windmills Hindu temples Stadiums Lighthouses By location Bath Birmingham Brighton and Hove Bristol Leeds Liverpool London Manchester Other Hammerbeam roof Fan vault Almshouse Bastle house Country house Oast house (cowl) Wealden hall house Dartmoor longhouse Somerset towers Anglo-Saxon turriform churches Bath stone Portland stone Flushwork English landscape garden Cruck framing Category Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elizabethan_architecture&oldid=1292827408 " Categories : Elizabethan architecture Renaissance architecture in England Architectural styles Architecture in England by period or style British architectural styles 16th-century architecture 17th-century architecture in Europe Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from January 2016 Use dmy dates from January 2016 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 01:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elizabethan architecture 10 languages Add topic

