Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Establishment and early operation 1.2 Explorations 1.3 20th century 2 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 2.1 Admiralty List of Lights and Fog Signals 2.2 Access to data 3 List of chief executives 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents United Kingdom Hydrographic Office 10 languages Boarisch Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Nederlands 日本語 Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia UK government agency concerned with  providing hydrographic and marine geospatial data United Kingdom Hydrographic Office Agency overview Formed 2001 Headquarters Admiralty Way Taunton TA1 2DN Employees approx 900 Minister responsible Vernon Coaker , Minister of State for Defence Agency executive Vanessa Blake, Chief Executive [ 1 ] Parent agency Ministry of Defence Website gov .uk /ukho The United Kingdom Hydrographic Office ( UKHO ) is the UK's agency for providing hydrographic and marine geospatial data to mariners and maritime organisations across the world. The UKHO is a trading fund of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) and is located in Taunton , Somerset , with a workforce of approximately 900 staff.

The UKHO is responsible for operational support to the Royal Navy and other defence customers. Supplying defence and the commercial shipping industry, they help ensure Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) , protect the marine environment and support the efficiency of global trade.

[ 2 ] The UKHO also produces Admiralty charts , providing SOLAS-compliant charts, publications and digital services for ships trading internationally.

History [ edit ] Establishment and early operation [ edit ] Alexander Dalrymple , engraving by Conrad Westermayr The Admiralty 's first Hydrographer was Alexander Dalrymple , [ 3 ] appointed in 1795 on the order of King George III . The existing charts were brought together and catalogued. The first chart Dalrymple published as Hydrographer to the Admiralty (of Quiberon Bay in Brittany ) did not appear until 1800.

[ 4 ] He also issued Sailing Directions and Notices to Mariners (NMs) .

[ citation needed ] Dalrymple was succeeded on his death in 1808 by Captain Thomas Hurd , under whose stewardship the department was given permission to sell charts to the public in 1821.

[ 5 ] In 1819, Captain Hurd entered into a bilateral agreement with Denmark to exchange charts and publications covering areas of mutual interest. This is thought to be the earliest formal arrangement for the mutual supply of information between the British and any foreign Hydrographic Office.

[ 6 ] Hurd developed the specialism of Royal Navy hydrographic surveyors. Rear-Admiral Sir W. Edward Parry was appointed Hydrographer in 1823 after his second expedition to discover a Northwest Passage .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In 1825 some 736 charts and coastal views were being offered for sale by the Hydrographic Office.

Explorations [ edit ] HMS Challenger by William Frederick Mitchell In 1828 Captain Parry and the Royal Society organised a scientific voyage to the South Atlantic , in collaboration with the Hydrographers of France and Spain, using HMS Chanticleer .

[ 9 ] In 1829, at the age of 55, Rear-Admiral Sir Francis Beaufort became Hydrographer. During his time as Hydrographer, he developed the eponymous Scale , saw the introduction of official tide tables in 1833 and instigated various surveys and expeditions. Several of these were by HMS Beagle , including one to Tierra del Fuego and Patagonia in 1826. In 1831 Captain Beaufort informed Captain FitzRoy that he had found a savant for the latter's surveying voyage to South America, Charles Darwin . After completing extensive surveys in South America he returned to Falmouth, Cornwall via New Zealand and Australia in 1836.

[ 10 ] By the time of Beaufort's retirement in 1855, the Chart Catalogue listed 1,981 charts and 64,000 copies of them had been issued to the Royal Navy .

[ 11 ] In the 1870s, the Royal Naval Surveying Service supported the Challenger expedition , a scientific exercise that made many discoveries, laying the foundation of oceanography . The cruise was named after the mother vessel, HMS Challenger . On her 68,890-nautical-mile (127,580 km) circumnavigation of the globe, [ 12 ] 492 deep sea soundings, 133 bottom dredges, 151 open water trawls and 263 serial water temperature observations were taken.

[ 13 ] The Challenger crew used a method of observation developed in earlier small-scale expeditions. To measure depth, the crew would lower a line with a weight attached to it until it reached the sea floor. The line was marked in 25-fathom intervals, with flags denoting depth. Because of this, the depth measurements from the Challenger were at best accurate to 25 fathoms (150 feet), or about 46 metres.

[ 14 ] As the first true oceanographic cruise, the Challenger expedition established an entire academic and research discipline.

[ 15 ] During the late 19th century, the UKHO took part in several international conferences, including the International Meridian Conference to determine a prime meridian for international use and other conferences working towards the establishment of a permanent international commission concerning hydrographic matters.

Hydrographers to the Admiralty Board during this period included: Rear-Admiral John Washington , Rear-Admiral George Henry Richards , Captain Sir Frederick J. O. Evans and Rear-Admiral Sir William J. L. Wharton .

20th century [ edit ] The expedition's ship Nimrod departing for the South Pole During Rear-Admiral A. Mostyn Field's term as Hydrographer to the Admiralty Board, the Hydrographic Office lent instruments to the Nimrod Expedition of the British Antarctic Expedition led by Ernest Shackleton in 1907. Following the sinking of the RMS Titanic in 1912, the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) convention was established, and ice reporting and forecasting were introduced. During World War I , while Rear-Admiral Sir John F. Parry was Hydrographer of the Navy, the Hydrographic Office produced numerous new charts and products to support the Royal Navy.

Following the war, the First International Hydrographic Conference was held in London. It led to the establishment in 1921 of the International Hydrographic Organization . In the 1930s, the systematic and regular collection of oceanographic and naval meteorological data started. In the Second World War , while led by Vice-Admiral Sir John A. Edgell, chart printing moved to Creechbarrow House in Taunton in June 1941. This was the first purpose-built chart making factory, and was designed by the Chief Draughtsman, Mr Jowsey. In 1968, compilation staff were transferred from Cricklewood , London to Taunton, thus bringing together the main elements of the Hydrographic Office. A purpose-built office, named after Alexander Dalrymple, was opened. Charts were metricated and computerised in the later 1960s and early 1970s under the leadership of Rear-Admiral Sir Edmund G. Irving (1960–1966), Rear-Admiral George Stephen Ritchie (1966–1971), Rear-Admiral Geoffrey P. D. Hall (1971–1975) and Rear-Admiral Sir David W. Haslam (1975–1985).

For centuries, data had mainly been collected using ordinary Royal Navy ships. In 1953, the first purpose-built survey vessel was launched: HMS Vidal .

[ 16 ] With the use of the echo sounder and other electronic equipment in the 20th century, there was a big increase in the quantity and quality of the data collected. The technology used to collect data also improved with the first commercial use of multibeam survey technology in 1977; HMS Bulldog undertook the first side-scan sonar of Mount's Bay , Cornwall, in 1987. The work has since been continued by the Bulldog-class survey vessels which form the "Hydrographic Squadron".

In 1994, the Hydrographer of the Navy also became the Chief Executive of UKHO. The post was held by Rear-Admiral Nigel R. Essenhigh (1994–1996) and Rear-Admiral John P. Clarke (1996–2001).

Publications [ edit ] An example of an Electronic Navigational Chart (NOAA) The UKHO continues to serve the Royal Navy as its prime customer by supplying hydrographic and geospatial data. The UKHO's products and services are sold to merchant mariners and leisure users through its commercial branch.

[ 17 ] In addition to traditional paper nautical charts and publications, the range has expanded to include a number of digital products and services. In 1996, the UKHO developed ADMIRALTY Raster Chart Service, a raster navigational chart service for Electronic Chart Display and Information System . This was followed in 2008 by ADMIRALTY Vector Chart Service, offering 15,750 fully vectorised Electronic Navigational Charts (ENCs) .

The UKHO produces over 200 nautical publications, which are available as e-Nautical Publications or in the Digital Publications suite. Notable publications include Sailing directions (Pilots) , Tide tables , List of Radio Signals , List of Lights and Fog Signals and the Mariner's Handbook .

[ 18 ] The UKHO also offers astronomical publications from HM Nautical Almanac Office , including The Nautical Almanac and The Astronomical Almanac , among others.

[ 19 ] Today, the UKHO has expertise in areas such as bathymetry , oceanography , geodesy and data science . It provides advice on technical aspects of Law of the Sea , specialising in maritime limits and boundaries .

[ 20 ] It also delivers a range of cartographic and ENC training programmes internationally to develop the core skills of marine cartography. Since 2015, the UKHO has supported the delivery of the Commonwealth Marine Economies (CME) Programme in partnership Cefas and NOC , a programme enabling Small Island Developing States (SIDS) to sustainably develop their marine economies.

[ 21 ] Admiralty List of Lights and Fog Signals [ edit ] The UKHO publishes the Admiralty List of Lights and Fog Signals covering the whole world in 12 volumes. The information is also available in digital form.

[ 22 ] Access to data [ edit ] The UKHO is the government department responsible for charting the seas. It is part of the Ministry of Defence, and operates as a trading fund , enabling it to be self-funding through sale of products and licensing of data. The UKHO sources much of its information from foreign governments to whom it pays royalty fees, funded by the profits it makes.

[ citation needed ] The UKHO grants six different licences, according to the use of the product. Whilst it generally allows use for non-navigational, non-commercial or low value purposes free of charge (over 80% of licences), where licensing is for use in a commercial product, a licence fee is charged. The UKHO is committed to the Information Fair Traders Scheme [ 23 ] and makes available for reuse those data that are collected as part of its Public Task, [ 24 ] which do not include third party Intellectual Property Rights.

The Information Fair Trader Scheme Report on the UKHO in April 2011 [ 25 ] states that the UKHO data will not be included in the Public Data Corporation to make government owned data more freely available, but it recommends that the "UKHO should consider the introduction of a Free Navigational Licence" for non-commercial or low value use, consistent with its treatment of non-navigational use.

[ citation needed ] List of chief executives [ edit ] See also: Hydrographer of the Navy 2001-2006: Wyn Williams 2006–2011: Mike Robinson 2011–2015: Rear Admiral Ian Moncrieff 2015–2019: John Humphrey 2019–2020: Rear Admiral Tim Lowe [ 26 ] 2020–2024: Rear Admiral Peter Sparkes (acting from 2020–2021) [ 27 ] 2024–present : Vanessa Blake See also [ edit ] Admiralty chart Australian Pilot Geospatial Commission Hydrographic office References [ edit ] ^ "Vanessa Blake" .

^ "Our role in Government" . Admiralty . Retrieved 24 February 2025 .

^ "Alexander Dalrymple (1737–1808)".

Dalrymple, Alexander (1737–1808) . Australian Dictionary of National Biography . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ "Admiralty Charts of Scottish coasts, 1795–1963" . National Library of Scotland . Retrieved 28 December 2017 .

^ Hardisty, Jack (2008).

Estuaries: Monitoring and Modeling the Physical System . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

41– 42.

ISBN 9781405172325 .

^ Webb, Adrian (November 2010).

"Foundations for 'International cooperation in the field of hydrography': some Contributions by British Admiralty Hydrographers, 1795–1855" (PDF) .

The International Hydrographic Review .

4 : 7– 15.

^ Webb, Adrian.

"The Expansion of British Naval Hydrographic Administration, 1808–1829" (PDF) .

PhD Thesis . University of Exeter . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ J.C. Sainty (1975).

"Hydrographer 1795–1870" .

Office-Holders in Modern Britain: Volume 4: Admiralty Officials 1660–1870 . Institute of Historical Research . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ "NMM, vessel ID 382156" (PDF) .

Warship Histories, vol v .

National Maritime Museum . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2011 . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ "FitzRoy, R. 1839. Narrative of the surveying voyages of His Majesty's Ships Adventure and Beagle between the years 1826 and 1836, describing their examination of the southern shores of South America, and the Beagle's circumnavigation of the globe. Proceedings of the second expedition, 1831–36, under the command of Captain Robert Fitz-Roy, R.N. London: Henry Colburn" . Darwin Online . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ "Charting the world for over 200 years" . UK Hydrographic Office. Archived from the original on 25 September 2006 . Retrieved 15 November 2006 .

^ Rice, A. L. (1999).

"The Challenger Expedition" .

Understanding the Oceans: Marine Science in the Wake of HMS Challenger . Routledge. pp.

27– 48.

ISBN 978-1-85728-705-9 .

^ Peter K. Weyl (1970).

Oceanography: an introduction to the marine environment , p.49 ^ "The Science: sounding" .

HMS Challenger . Birch Aquarium at Scripps. Archived from the original on 28 September 2012.

^ "Then and Now: The HMS Challenger Expedition and the 'Mountains in the Sea' Expedition" . Ocean Explorer . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ "Timeline of the UKHO" (PDF) . UK Hydrographic Office. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 March 2007 . Retrieved 15 November 2006 .

^ "About Us" . United Kingdom Hydrographic Office . Retrieved 24 January 2018 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "ADMIRALTY Publications" . United Kingdom Hydrographic Office . Retrieved 24 January 2018 .

^ "HM Nautical Almanac Office Publications" . United Kingdom Hydrographic Office . Retrieved 24 January 2018 .

^ "UK Maritime Limits and Law of the Sea" . United Kingdom Hydrographic Office . Retrieved 24 January 2018 .

^ "Commonwealth Marine Economies Programme" . gov.uk . Retrieved 24 January 2018 .

^ "Admiralty Nautical Paper Publications" . UK Hydrographic Office.

^ "Information Fair Traders Scheme" (PDF) . UKHO . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ "Public Task" (PDF) . UKHO. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 January 2014 . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ "Information Fair Trader Scheme Report on the UKHO" (PDF) . National Archives . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ "UK Hydrographic Office appoints Rear Admiral Tim Lowe CBE as Acting Chief Executive" .

GOV.UK . UK Hydrographic Office. 10 December 2018 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 .

^ "UKHO appoints RAdm Peter Sparkes as Acting Chief Executive following the retirement of CEO Tim Lowe CBE" .

GOV.UK . UK Hydrographic Office. 13 July 2020 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Department of Admiralty Direction and control of Admiralty and Naval affairs Office of First Lord of the Admiralty and President of the Board of Admiralty Lord High Admirals Council Admiralty buildings Boards and offices under the First Lord Board of Admiralty Navy Board Navy Office Navy Pay Office Office of the Naval Secretary Office of the First Naval Lord Office of the First Sea Lord Office of the Senior Naval Lord Office of the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty Office of the Permanent Secretary to the Admiralty Office of the Private Secretary to the First Lord of the Admiralty Direction of Admirals Naval/Sea Lords War and Naval Staff Office of the Senior Naval Lord Office of the First Naval Lord Office of the First Sea Lord Secretariat and staff under the First Sea Lord Office of the Naval Assistant to the First Sea Lord Office of the Additional Naval Assistant to the First Sea Lord Office of the Hydrographer of the Navy Offices of the Sea Lords Admiralty Navy War Council Admiralty War Staff Admiralty Naval Staff Operational planning, policy strategy, tactical doctrine requirements Admiralty Navy War Council Admiralty War Staff Admiralty Naval Staff Divisions and sections under the War and Naval Staff Administrative Planning Department Administrative Planning Division Air Division Anti-Submarine Division Anti-Submarine and Warfare Division Anti-U-boat Division Air Warfare Division Air Warfare and Fly Training Division Air Warfare and Training Division Combined Operations Division Communications Division Convoy Section Directorate of Defence Plans (Navy) Economic Warfare Division Gunnery and Anti-Aircraft Warfare Division Gunnery Division Gunnery and Torpedo Division Historical Section Local Defence Division Division Mercantile Movements Division Naval Air Division Naval Air Organisation and Training Division Naval Artillery and Torpedoes Division Navigation and Direction Division Navigation Division Minesweeping Division Mobilisation Division Naval Intelligence Division Operations Division Operations Division (Home) Operations Division (Foreign) Operations Division (Mining) Plans Division Plans Division (Q) Press Division Signal Division Signal Section Standardisation Division Tactical Division Tactical and Weapons Policy Division Torpedo Division Torpedo, Anti-Submarine and Minewarfare Division Trade  Division Trade and Operations Division Training and Staff Duties Division Tactical and Staff Duties Division Undersurface Warfare Division Offices of the Sea Lords Office of the Second Sea Lord Office of the Third Sea Lord Office of the Fourth Sea Lord Office of the Fifth Sea Lord Admiralty civil departments and organisations under the Sea Lords Admiralty Area Cash Offices Admiralty Central Dockyard Laboratory Admiralty Central Metallurgical Laboratory Admiralty Civilian Shore Wireless Service Admiralty Compass Observatory Admiralty Constabulary Admiralty Constabulary Headquarters Admiralty Engineering Laboratory Admiralty Experimental Station Admiralty Experiment Works Admiralty Gunnery Establishment Admiralty Interview Board Admiralty Labour Department Admiralty Marine Technology Establishment Admiralty Materials Laboratory Admiralty Mine Design Department Admiralty Mining Establishment Admiralty Naval Aircraft Materials Laboratory Admiralty Record Office Admiralty Regional Offices Admiralty Research Laboratory Admiralty Signal Establishment Admiralty Signals and Radar Establishment Admiralty Surface Weapons Establishment Admiralty Surveying Service Admiralty Torpedo Experimental Establishment Admiralty Underwater Weapons Establishment Admiralty Underwater Weapons Launching Establishment Architectural and Engineering Works Department Air Equipment and Naval Photography Department Air Department Air Materiel Department Air Personnel Department Amphibious Warfare Headquarters Armament Supply Department Board of Invention and Research Board of Longitude Boom Defence Department Boom Defence and Marine Salvage Department Britannia Royal Naval College Chemical Board Chemical Department Civil Catering Department Civil Engineer in Chiefs Department Coastguard and Reserves Branch Combined Operations Headquarters Commissioner for Property and Income-tax for the Naval Department Compass Department Contract and Purchase Department Council of Naval Education Dental Examining Board Department of Radio Equipment Department of the Accountant-General of the Navy Department of Aeronautical and Engineering Research Department of Miscellaneous Weapons Development Department of Naval Assistant (Foreign) to Second Sea Lord Department of Naval Education Operational Research Department of Personal Services and Officer Appointments Department of Physical Research Department of Physical Training & Sports Department of Radio Equipment Department of Research Programmes and Planning Department of Superintendent of de-magnetisation Department of the Admiral of the Training Service Department of the Chief Inspector of Naval Ordnance Department of the Chief of Naval Information Department of the Chief Scientist Department of the Civil Engineer-in-Chief Department of the Comptroller of Steam Machinery Department of the Comptroller of Victualling and Transport Services Department of the Controller of the Navy Department of the Controller-General of Merchant Shipbuilding Department of the Controller for Navy Pay Department of the Deputy Controller for Auxiliary Shipbuilding Department of the Deputy Controller for Dockyards and Shipbuilding Department of the Director Contract-Built Ships Department of the Director-General Aircraft Department of the Director-General of Manpower Department of the Director-General, Supply and Secretariat Branch Department of the Director of Aircraft Maintenance and Repair Department of the Director of Contract Labour Department of the Director of Dockyards Department of the Director of Electrical Engineering Department of the Director of Manning Department of the Director of Merchant Shipbuilding Department of the Director of Merchant Shipbuilding and Repairs Department of the Director of Merchant Ship Repairs Department of the Director of Naval Construction Department of the Director of Naval Equipment Department of the Director of Naval Recruiting Department of the Director of Naval Weather Service Department of the Director of Personal Services Department of the Director of Physical Training and Sports Department of the Director of Torpedoes and Mining Department of the Director of Transports Department of the Director of Underwater Weapons Department of the Director of Underwater Weapons Materials Department of the Director of Unexploded Bombs Department of the Director of Warship Production Department of the Director of Welfare and Service Conditions Department of the Director of Wreck Dispersal Department of the Flag Officer Sea Training Department of the Engineer in Chief Department of the Paymaster Director-General Department of the Inspector of Anti-Aircraft Weapons Department of the Inspector of Dockyard Expense Accounts Department of the Inspector-General of Naval Hospitals and Fleets Department of the Medical Director-General of the Navy Department of the Physician of the Navy Department of the Physician General of the Navy Department of the Storekeeper-General of the Navy Department of the Surveyor of Buildings Department of the Surveyor of Dockyards Directorate-General, (Naval Manpower and Training) Directorate General Training Dockyards and Fleet Maintenance Department Dockyards Branch Dockyard Expense Accounts Department Dockyard Schools Electrical Engineering Department Engineer Branch Engineering Department Experimental Department Fire Control Group Greenwich Hospital Department Inspector of Telegraphs Inspector of Repairs Joint Warfare Establishment Medical Consultative Board Medical Examining Board Historical Section Hydrographic Department Marine Department Marine Pay Department Materials and Priority Department Medical Consultative Board Medical Department Medical Examining Board Movements Department Nautical Almanac Office Naval Artillery and Torpedo Department Naval Engineering College Naval Equipment Department Naval Historical Branch Naval Construction Department Naval Intelligence Department Naval Medical Service Naval Law Division Naval Manpower Department Naval Mobilisation Department Naval Ordnance Department Naval Ordnance Inspection Department Naval Ordnance Stores Department Naval Personnel Services and Officer Appointments Department Naval Publicity Department Naval Regional Offices Naval Reserve Department Naval Security Department Naval Stores Department Naval Training Department Naval Works Department Navy, Army and Air Force Institute Navy and Army Canteen Board Navy Works Department Navigation Department Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope Office of the Admiral Commanding Coast Guard and Reserves Office of the Admiral Commanding, Reserves Office of the Admiralty Chemist Office of the Adviser on the Naval Construction to the Board of Admiralty Office of the Assistant Controller Office of the Assistant Controller Research and Development Office of the Clerk of the Journals Office of the Chief Polaris Executive Office of the Deputy Controller of Navy Office of the Deputy Controller Production Office of Extra Naval Assistant to Second Sea Lord Office of the Inspector Gun Mountings Office of the Keeper of Records Office of the Senior Psychologist (Naval) Office of the Senior Psychologist of the Navy Office of the Translator of French and Spanish Languages Office of the Vice Controller Air Office of the Vice Controller of the Navy Organisation and Methods Department Packet Service Regional Organisation for Merchant Shipbuilding and Repairs Royal Corps of Naval Constructors Royal Flying Corps Royal Marine Police Royal Marines Office Office of the Chaplain of the Fleet Royal Naval Academy Royal Naval Aircraft Workshops Royal Naval Air Service Royal Naval Air Stations Royal Naval Armaments Depot Royal Naval Auxiliary Service Royal Naval Cordite Factories Royal Naval Propellant Factory Royal Naval College Royal Naval College and the School for Naval Architecture Royal Naval College, Dartmouth Royal Naval College, Greenwich Royal Naval College, Keyham Royal Naval College, Osborne Royal Naval Engineering College Royal Naval Film Corporation Royal Naval Hospital Royal Naval Medical Depot Royal Naval Minewatching Service Royal Naval Mine Depot Royal Naval Patrol Service Royal Naval Scientific Service Royal Naval Sick Quarters Royal Naval Torpedo Depot Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve Royal Naval War College Royal Naval War College, Portsmouth Royal Navy Dockyard Royal Navy Medical Service Royal Navy Shore Signal Service Royal Observatory, Greenwich Royal School of Naval Architecture Salvage Department School of Mathematics and Naval Construction Scientific Research and Experiment Department Sea Transport Branch Sea Transport Department Sea Transport Division Ship Department Ship Design Department Signal Department Signal School Sixpenny Office Statistics Department Steam Department Superintendent of De-magnetisation Torpedo Experimental Establishment Transport Department Undersurface Warfare Department Victualling Department Volunteer Boys and Cadet Corps Weapons Department Weapons Department (Naval) Women's Royal Naval Service Wireless Telegraphy Board Direction/Command of the Fleet Office of the Permanent Secretary to the Admiralty Office of the First Naval Lord Office of the First Sea Lord Admiralty Naval Staff Naval formations after 1707 1st Fleet 2nd Fleet 3rd Fleet Commander-in-Chief, Africa Atlantic Fleet Commodore, Arabian Seas and Persian Gulf Australia Station Cape of Good Hope Station Cape and West Africa Station Battle Cruiser Fleet Battle Cruiser Force Caspian Flotilla Channel Fleet Channel Squadron Commander-in-Chief, Coast of Ireland Cork Station Coast of Scotland Commander-in-Chief, China Commander-in-Chief, Dover Flag Officer, East Africa East Indies Station East Indies and China Station Eastern Fleet Far East Fleet English Channel Grand Fleet Flag Officer Gibraltar Harwich Force Home Fleet Jamaica Station Leith Station Commander-in-Chief, Levant Levant and East Mediterranean Commander-in-Chief, Leeward Islands Mediterranean Fleet Medway Newfoundland Station New Zealand Division New Zealand Naval Forces Nore North America and West Indies Station Commander-in-Chief, North Sea Admiral Commanding, Orkneys and Shetlands Pacific Fleet Pacific Station Admiral of Patrols Commander-in-Chief, Plymouth Commander-in-Chief, Portsmouth Queenstown Station Royal East African Navy Royal Indian Navy Flag Officer Submarines Commander-in-Chief, Rosyth Reserve Fleet Scotland and Northern Ireland Commander-in-Chief, South Atlantic South East Coast of America Station Commander-in-Chief, Thames and Medway West Africa Squadron Flag Officer, West Africa Commander-in-Chief, Western Approaches Naval formations before 1707 Lisbon Station West Indies Station Western Squadron Thames, Medway and Nore Commander-in-Chief, Thames Narrow Seas Downs Station Direction of Naval Finance Department of the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty Departments under the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary Department of the Civil Lord of the Admiralty Accountant-General's Department Comptroller of the Navy Department of the Surveyor of the Navy Direction of Naval Administration and the Admiralty Secretariat Department of the Permanent Secretary Branches and offices under the Permanent Secretary Admiralty Central Copying Branch Admiralty Central Registry Branch Admiralty Record Office Admiralty Library Admiralty Secretariat Air Branch Civil Branch Legal Branch Military Branch Naval Branch Ship Branch Civil Administration Department of the Civil Lord of the Admiralty , Department of the Additional Civil Lord of the Admiralty Departments under the Civil Lords Accountant-General's Department Contract and Purchase Department Department of the Director of Contract Labour Department of the Surveyor of Buildings Department of the Director of Works Greenwich Hospital Department Works Loan Department Legal Admiralty Judicial Department Admiralty court High Court of Admiralty Office of the Judge of the High Court of Admiralty High Court of Justice Office of the Judge Advocate of the Fleet Office of the Marshall High Court of the Admiralty Office of the Admiralty Advocate Office of the Admiralty Proctor Office of the Chief Naval Judge Advocate Office of the Counsel for the Affairs of the Admiralty and Navy Office of the Counsel to the Admiralty Office of the Deputy Judge Advocate of the Fleet Office of the Receiver of Droits High Court of Admiralty Office of the Registrar High Court of the Admiralty Office of the Solicitor for the Affairs of the Admiralty Office of the Solicitor to the Admiralty and Navy Office of the Solicitor to the Admiralty Office of the Counsel to the Admiralty Court of Admiralty for the Cinque Ports King's Bench Division (Admiralty) Queens's Bench Division (Admiralty) Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division Vice Admiralty courts Colonial Courts of Admiralty v t e Ministry of Defence Headquarters: Main Building, Whitehall Armed Forces Service branches Naval Service Royal Navy Royal Marines British Army Royal Air Force By nation Scotland Wales the Irish Defence Council Political Secretary of State for Defence Minister of State for the Armed Forces Minister of State for Defence Procurement and Industry Minister of State for Defence (House of Lords) Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Veterans and People Military Chief of the Defence Staff Vice-Chief of the Defence Staff First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff Chief of the General Staff Chief of the Air Staff Commander Strategic Command Chief of Defence People Civil Service Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Defence Chief Scientific Adviser Director-General Finance Director-General Head Office and Commissioning Services Director-General Nuclear Director-General Security Policy Lead Non-Executive Board Member Non-Executive Defence Board Member and Chair of the People Committee Non-Executive Defence Board Member and Chair of the Defence Audit Committee Non-Executive Defence Board Member and Chair of the Defence Equipment and Support Board Service boards Admiralty Board ( Navy Board ) Army Board Air Force Board Service commands Navy Command Army Command Air Command Strategic Command Arm's-length bodies Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S) Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (DSTL) Submarine Delivery Agency (SDA) United Kingdom Hydrographic Office (UKHO) Top-level budget agencies managed on an arm's-length basis Defence Business Services (DBS) Defence Infrastructure Organisation (DIO) Defence Digital Defence Nuclear Organisation Ministry of Defence Police Regulatory organisations Defence Safety Authority Single Source Regulations Office Intelligence Defence Intelligence (under Strategic Command) Defence Secretariat 19 (defunct) Non-departmental public bodies National Army Museum National Museum of the Royal Navy Royal Air Force Museum Public corporations Oil and Pipelines Agency (OPA) Sheffield Forgemasters Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Norway Croatia Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_Kingdom_Hydrographic_Office&oldid=1303705495 " Categories : 1795 establishments in Great Britain Executive agencies of the United Kingdom government Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom) National hydrographic offices Organisations based in Taunton Trading funds of the United Kingdom government Geographic data and information organisations in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 15:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United Kingdom Hydrographic Office 10 languages Add topic

