Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Shops 3 Publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Motilal Banarsidass 7 languages भोजपुरी Deutsch हिन्दी Norsk bokmål Русский தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Publishing house on Sanskrit and Indology in Delhi, India Motilal Banarsidass Founded 1903 ( 1903 ) Founder Motilal Jain Successor Banarsidass Jain Country of origin India Headquarters location A-44, Naraina Industrial Area, Phase-1, New Delhi-110028 Distribution Worldwide Key people Rajendra Prakash Jain & Varun Jain Publication types See list Nonfiction topics Buddhology , Indology , Oriental studies , Sanskrit Official website www .mlbd .in Motilal Banarsidass Publishing House ( MLBD ) is an Indian academic publishing house , founded in Delhi , India in 1903. It publishes and distributes serials, monographs, and scholarly publications on Asian religions , Buddhology , Indology , Eastern philosophy , history , culture , arts , architecture , archaeology , language , literature , linguistics , musicology , mysticism , yoga , tantra , occult , medicine , astronomy , and astrology .

[ 1 ] Amongst its publications are the 100 volumes of the Mahapuranas ; the 50 volumes of the Sacred Books of the East , edited by Max Müller ; Bibliotheca Buddhica (30 volumes in 32 pts); Ramcharitmanas with Hindi and English translations; the Manusmriti in 10 volumes and the Sanskrit lexicon; and the 7 volumes of Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies . It also brings out books based on research and study conducted at organizations such as the Indian Council of Historical Research (ICHR), Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA), and Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It has a turnover of approximately ₹ 5–6 crore, roughly 75% coming from exports.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Motilal Banarsidass Shop in North Delhi Motilal Banarsidass Publishers was first established in Lahore in 1903 by Lala Motilal Jain, a descendant of the family of court jewellers to Maharaja Ranjit Singh in Amritsar. Motilal borrowed ₹ 27 from his wife's savings that she had earned from her knitting work, to start a bookshop selling Sanskrit books in 'Said Mitha Bazar' in Lahore. He named it after his eldest son Motilal Banarsidass Jain, who later took charge of the publishing business.

The interior of Motilal Banarsidass, in Delhi In 1911, MLBD opened a branch at Mai Sewan Bazar, Amritsar , under the supervision of Lala Sundarlal Jain, another son of Lala Motilal Jain, though after the untimely death of Lala Banarasidass in 1912, Sundarlal Jain, his only surviving brother had to close this establishment and relocate to Lahore to look after the family business. Soon he was joined by his young nephew Shantilal Jain, who had just finished school, who eventually became the company's chairman. Soon a printing unit was also set up and the publishing house was established.

[ 5 ] In 1937, a branch was started in Patna at the suggestion of Rajendra Prasad . Subsequently, during the Partition of India a riot burnt down the Lahore shop. Post independence, the family moved to India and initially stayed at Bikaner and Patna, before moving to Varanasi in 1950, where it set up shop in 1951, and finally shifted base to Delhi in 1958. Today it is one of the few large publishing houses in the world which has its own in-house printing unit.

In 1992, Shantilal Jain was awarded the Padma Shri by the government of India, the first ever Padma award for outstanding community service through publishing.

[ 3 ] Today Shantilal's eldest son Narendra Prakash Jain, widely known as 'Prakash' and his four brothers and their sons, along with their mother, Leela Jain, who is the company's Chairperson, run the business.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In 2003, the company celebrated its centenary at a function in Chennai , where Kanchi Sankaracharya, Jayendra Saraswathi , honoured three Sanskrit scholars: R. Balasubramaniam, B.M.K. Sharma and K.V. Sharma.

[ 6 ] At a function held at Bangalore , Governor of Karnataka , T.N. Chaturvedi , felicitated centenarian Sudhakar Chaturvedi , S.M.S. Chari, and B.K. Krishnamurthy of Hyderabad for their contribution to Indology, and astrologer B.V. Raman was honoured posthumously.

[ 7 ] Shops [ edit ] Its main office in New Delhi is at A-44, Naraina Industrial Area, Phase-1, New Delhi - 110028. It houses Indological literature of around 30,000 titles.

[ 8 ] Publications [ edit ] Sacred Books of the East (50 Volumes) edited by Max Müller (reprints, originally Oxford University Press ); Indian Kavya Literature by A. K. Warder (10 Volumes, 7 Volumes already published); History of Indian Philosophy by S.N. Dasgupta (5 Volumes); Aspects of Political Ideas and Institutions in Ancient India by Ram Sharan Sharma (Fifth revised edition, 2005) Sudras in Ancient India: A Social History of the Lower Order Down to Circa A D 600 by Ram Sharan Sharma (Third Revised Edition, Delhi, 1990; Reprint, Delhi, 2002) Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology (English translation of the Mahapuranas, 79 Volumes already published); Buddhist Tradition Series , edited by Alex Wayman (30 Volumes); MLBD Series in Linguistics , edited by Dhanesh Jain (10 Volumes); Lala Sundar Lal Jain Research Series edited by Dayanand Bhargava (10 Volumes already published).

Advaita Tradition Series by Shoun Hino & K.P. Jog (8 Volumes already published); Performing Arts Series edited by Farlay P. Richmond (7 Volumes already published).

Wisdom of Sankara Series by Som Raj Gupta (2 Volumes published); Kalamulasastra Series (21 Volumes published).

Bibliotheca Buddhica (30 Volumes in 32 pts) ed.

Sergey Oldenburg , Fyodor Shcherbatskoy , (reprints, originally St. Petersburg) Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies (25 Volumes already published).

Also many Sanskrit Grammar books by SC Vasu, MR Kale; Dictionaries by MM Williams, Apte.

References [ edit ] ^ a b A 100-year romance with books The Hindu , 13 March 2003.

^ a b Treasure trove of Indology The Hindu , 5 November 2004.

^ a b Motilal Banarsidass SASNET - Swedish South Asian Studies Network, Lund University , Sweden ^ 100 years on the spiritual trail Archived 13 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine TNN, The Times of India , 24 June 2002.

^ Indologists urge studying past Archived 8 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine Asia Africa Intelligence Wire, 23 March 2003.

^ At the function held to mark the centenary of the Motilal Banarsidass , The Hindu , 17 September 2003.

^ Publishing house celebrates centenary The Hindu , 14 September 2003.

^ "Motilal Banarsidass" .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2009 . Retrieved 21 August 2009 .

External links [ edit ] Motilal Banarsidass, Website Treasure trove of Indology at The Hindu Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Poland Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Motilal_Banarsidass&oldid=1275014397 " Categories : Book publishing companies of India Indology Publishing companies established in 1903 Bookstores of India Companies based in Delhi Religious tract publishing companies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2019 Use Indian English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English This page was last edited on 10 February 2025, at 16:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Motilal Banarsidass 7 languages Add topic

