Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 References 3 Sources 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Eutocius of Ascalon 23 languages Alemannisch العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th–6th century Greek mathematician Eutocius of Ascalon ( / j uː ˈ t oʊ ʃ ə s / ; Greek : Εὐτόκιος ὁ Ἀσκαλωνίτης ; c.

480s – c.

520s) was a Greek mathematician who wrote commentaries on several Archimedean treatises and on the Apollonian Conics .

Life and work [ edit ] Little is known about the life of Eutocius. He was born in Ascalon , then in Palestina Prima and lived during the reign of Justinian.

Eutocius probably became the head of the Alexandrian school following Ammonius , and he was succeeded in this position by Olympiodorus , possibly as early as 525.

[ 1 ] From his testimony, it seems he traveled to other cultural centers of his time to find missing manuscripts.

Eutocius wrote commentaries on Apollonius and Archimedes . The surviving commentaries are: A Commentary on the first four books of the Conics of Apollonius.

[ 2 ] Commentaries [ 3 ] on Archimedes' work: On the Sphere and Cylinder I-II.

Measurement of the Circle (Latin: In Archimedis Dimensionem Circuli ).

On the Equilibrium of Planes I-II.

An introduction to Book I of Ptolemy 's Almagest .

[ 4 ] Historians owe much of their knowledge of Archimedes' solution of a cubic by means of intersecting conics, alluded to in On the Sphere and Cylinder , to Eutocius and his commentaries. Eutocius dedicated his commentary on Apollonius' Conics to Anthemius of Tralles , also a mathematician and the architect of the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople .

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ Watts, p. 233-234 ^ "Conica" .

whistleralley.com . Retrieved 25 February 2021 .

^ Eutocii Ascalonitae commentarius . 1401–1500.

^ "Eutocius – Biography" .

Maths History . Retrieved 27 October 2021 .

^ Boyer, p. 193. "Eutocius (born ca. 480), commented on several Archimedean treatises and on the Apollonian Conics . It is to Eutocius that we owe the Archimedean solution of a cubic through intersecting conics, referred to in The Sphere and Cylinder but not otherwise extant except through the commentary of Eutocius. The commentary by Eutocius on the Conics of Apollonius was dedicated to Anthemius of Tralles (t534), an able mathematician and architect of St. Sophia of Constantinople." Sources [ edit ] Boyer, Carl Benjamin (1991).

A History of Mathematics (Second ed.). John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

ISBN 0-471-54397-7 .

Watts, Edward J. (2006).

City and School in Late Antique Athens and Alexandria . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-25816-7 .

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Eutocius of Ascalon" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eutocius_of_Ascalon&oldid=1301224035 " Categories : 480s births 520s deaths Ancient Greek geometers Ancient Greeks from Ascalon 6th-century mathematicians 6th-century Byzantine writers 6th-century Byzantine scientists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2022 Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 18:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eutocius of Ascalon 23 languages Add topic

