Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Other perspectives 3 Debate over the inviolability of heavenly bodies 4 Literature 5 NASA photograph 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Splitting of the Moon 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kurdî مصرى Bahasa Melayu پنجابی پښتو Русский Shqip کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Miracle attributed to Muhammad, in which the Moon was split in two This article is about an Islamic theological issue. For theories of formation of the Moon which involve fragments, see Origin of the Moon § Accretion .

"Splitting the Moon" redirects here. For the book of Islamic poetry, see Splitting the Moon: A Collection of Islamic Poetry .

This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( April 2025 ) Muhammad points out the splitting of the Moon. Anonymous 16th-century watercolor from a falnama , a Persian book of prophecy. Muhammad is the veiled figure on the right.

This article is part of a series about Muhammad Life Mecca Hijrah First Islamic state After Conquest of Mecca Farewell Pilgrimage ( Farewell Sermon ) Hadith Milestones and records Career Military Diplomatic Miracles Quran ( First revelation ) Isra and Mi'raj Splitting of the Moon Views and Perspectives Views Jews Christians Perspectives Islam Bible Judaism Medieval Christian Historicity Criticism Succession Saqifah Ghadir Khumm Companions of Muhammad Hadith of the pen and paper Ahl al-Bayt Praise Salawat Naat Mawlid Related Mohammedan Mahound Al-Masjid an-Nabawi Possessions Relics Seal History of Islam Islam portal Biography portal v t e Quran History Waḥy First revelation Asbab al-Nuzul Historicity Manuscripts Samarkand Kufic Quran Sanaa manuscript Topkapi manuscript Birmingham manuscript Codex Mashhad Divisions Surah List Meccan Medinan Āyah Juz' Muqatta'at Al-Fatiha Al-Musabbihat Al-Mu'awwidhatayn Content Quranic counter-discourse Self-referential discourse of the Quran Quranic cosmology Punishment narratives in the Quran Prophets No compulsion Women Animals Legends Miracles Parables Science Eschatology God Reading Qāriʾ Hifz Tajwid Tarteel Ahruf Qira'at Translations List Ahmadiyya Bengali English Hebrew Exegesis List Hermeneutics Esotericism Abrogation Biblical parallels Related persons Mentioned by name Characteristics I'jaz Inerrancy Related Criticism Attempted imitations Quran and Sunnah Quranism Shi’a view Category Islam portal v t e The Splitting of the Moon ( Arabic : انشقاق القمر , romanized : Anshiqāq al-Qamar ) is a miracle in the Muslim faith attributed to the Islamic prophet Muhammad . It is derived from Surah Al-Qamar 54:1–2 and mentioned by Muslim traditions such as the asbāb al-nuzūl (context of revelation).

Origin The earliest available tafsir compilations mention the Splitting of the Moon.

[ 1 ] There is a suggestion that the event would be likely due to a lunar eclipse .

[ 2 ] The Quran identifies the eclipsed or split Moon as a "sign" ( aya , pl.

ayat ) showcasing the might of Muhammad's God, akin to other natural happenings such as the seed germination and rainfall.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] However, the disbelievers during Muhammad's time referred to this as "enchantment" ( sihr ), meaning that Muhammad was trying to beguile them into accepting the astronomical event as proof of his prophethood, as they also dismissed as sihr the verbal signs he recited to them, particularly the Quranic warnings about the end of times.

[ 5 ] Instead, they asked him to provide visual signs that defy the law of nature (miracles), such as causing a fountain to burst forth from the ground, creating a lush garden with flowing rivers amidst palm and grape trees, and building a golden house. Nevertheless, it is opined that Muhammad was able to perform such miraculous signs and thus provided them with various reasons.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Some are of the opinion that some post-Quranic scholars, aiming at attributing miracles to Muhammad, reinterpreted the verb inshaqqa in the verse from its original figurative meaning to a literal one. As a result, the event of Muhammad interpreting the natural phenomenon of a lunar eclipse in an eschatological context was transformed into an extraordinary miracle of considerable magnitude—the splitting of the Moon.

[ 1 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The narrative was used by some later Muslims to convince others of the prophethood of Muhammad.

Annemarie Schimmel for example quotes the following from Muslim scholar Qadi Iyad , who worked in the 12th century: It has not been said of any people on the earth that the Moon was observed that night such that it could be stated that it was not split. Even if this had been reported from many different places, so that one would have to exclude the possibility that all agreed upon a lie, yet, we would not accept this as proof to the contrary, for the Moon is not seen in the same way by different people... An eclipse is visible in one country but not in the other one; in one place it is total, in the other one only partial.

[ 11 ] Other perspectives Al-Raghib al-Isfahani , Al-Mawardi and Al-Zamakhshari in their commentaries, in addition to mentioning the miracle, also note that the second half of verse 54:1 can be read as "and the moon will be cleaved", referring to one of the signs of the Islamic end of times.

[ 12 ] According to Sebastian R. Prange , during the 12th to 14th centuries CE, the Muslims in Malabar , who were at the time a minority there, composed a story to solidify their community’s influence in the region, [ 13 ] claiming that a king of the medieval Chera dynasty called Cheraman Perumal ( lit.

"Great lord of the Cheras"), or in its Arabic rendering, Shakarwatī Farmad , had witnessed the Moon splitting in his dream. He then partitioned his realm among different lieutenants, journeyed to Arabia to see Muhammad, and died some years later.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Prange maintains that historical research has found this story to be fictitious.

[ 16 ] The Muslim scholar Yusuf Ali provides three different interpretations of the verse. He holds that perhaps all three are applicable to the verse: Moon once appeared cleft asunder at the time of Muhammad to convince the unbelievers. It will split again when the Day of Judgment approaches (here the prophetic past tense is taken to indicate the future). Yusuf Ali connects this incident with the disruption of the Solar System mentioned in 75:8-9 . Lastly, he says that the verses can be metaphorical, meaning that the matter has become clear as the Moon.

[ 17 ] Some dissenting commentators who do not accept the miracle narration believe that the verse only refers to the splitting of the Moon at the Day of Judgment .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Likewise, M. A. S. Abdel Haleem writes: The Arabic uses the past tense, as if that Day were already here, to help the reader/listener imagine how it will be. Some traditional commentators hold the view that this describes an actual event at the time of the Prophet, but it clearly refers to the end of the world.

[ 20 ] Historians including A. J. Wensinck and Denis Gril reject the historicity of the miracle, arguing that the Quran itself denies miracles, in the traditional sense, in connection with Muhammad.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Debate over the inviolability of heavenly bodies Quran 54:1–2 was part of the debate between medieval Muslim theologians and Muslim philosophers over the issue of the inviolability of heavenly bodies. The philosophers held that nature was composed of four fundamental elements: Earth, air, fire, and water. These philosophers however held that the composition of heavenly bodies was different. This belief was based on the observation that the motion of heavenly bodies, unlike that of terrestrial bodies, was circular and without any beginnings or ends. This appearance of eternity in the heavenly bodies led the philosophers to conclude that the heavens were inviolable. Theologians, on the other hand, proposed their own conception of terrestrial matter: Nature was composed of uniform atoms that were re-created at every instant by God (this latter idea was added to defend God's omnipotence against the encroachment of the independent secondary causes). According to this conception, heavenly bodies were essentially the same as terrestrial bodies and thus could be pierced.

[ 23 ] To deal with the implications of the traditional understanding of the Quranic verse 54:1–2 , some philosophers argued that the verse should be interpreted metaphorically (e.g. the verse could have referred to a partial lunar eclipse, in which then Earth obscured part of the Moon).

[ 23 ] Literature This tradition has inspired many Muslim poets, especially in India.

[ 21 ] [ 24 ] In poetry, Muhammad is sometimes equated with the Sun or the morning light.

Sana'i , an early twelfth century Persian Sufi poet, writes: "the Sun should split the Moon in two".

[ 11 ] In one of his poems, the poet and mystic Jalal ad-Din Rumi expresses that the greatest bliss for the lowly moon is to be split by Muhammad's finger, and a devoted believer splits the moon with Muhammad's finger.

[ 11 ] In another place, Rumi , according to Schimmel, alludes to two miracles attributed to Muhammad in tradition, i.e. the splitting of the Moon (which shows the futility of man's scientific approach to nature), and the other that Muhammad was illiterate.

[ 11 ] Abd ar-Rahman Jami , one of the classical poets and mystics of Persia, plays with the shapes and numerical values of Arabic letters in a complicated way: the full Moon, Jami says, resembles the Arabic letter for M , a circular mīm ( ـمـ ), with the numerical value 40. When Muhammad split the Moon, its two halves each became like a crescent-shaped nūn ( ن ) (the Arabic letter for N ) whose numerical value is 50 each. This would mean that thanks to the miracle, the value of the Moon had increased.

[ 11 ] NASA photograph NASA photograph from Apollo 10 in 1969.

Rima Ariadaeus , one of many rilles on the surface of the Moon, has been claimed on Internet forums to be evidence of the splitting of the Moon.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] After NASA made an Apollo mission photograph of Rima Ariadaeus available online, it began circulating in the Muslim online community, with "the moon's crack line" being interpreted as evidence that the Moon had once split.

[ 27 ] NASA clarified that the image shows a lunar rille similar to Earth's geological faults , stretching about 300 km.

[ 28 ] Astronomer Paul Groot from Radboud University explained that the "split" seen in the photo does not encircle the entire lunar surface, and it possibly relates to the impact that formed the Tycho crater nearby the feature. Additionally, NASA scientist Brad Bailey stated, "No current scientific evidence reports that the Moon was split into two (or more) parts and then reassembled at any point in the past." [ 27 ] [ 29 ] Therefore, the commonly circulated image is not considered scientific evidence of a literal splitting of the Moon.

See also Islamic view of miracles Musa's splitting the sea , for the miracle of splitting the Red Sea , as told in the Quran Muhammad in Mecca Muhammad's eclipse References ^ a b Brockopp 2010 , p. 47.

^ Al-Azmeh 2017 , p. 309.

^ Brockopp 2010 , p. 44.

^ Sirry 2021 , p. 193–4.

^ Brockopp 2010 , p. 46.

^ Brockopp 2010 , p. 45.

^ Phipps 2016 , p. 40.

^ Peters 2010 , p. 204.

^ Peters 2010 , p. 204–5.

^ Sirry 2021 , p. 193–6.

^ a b c d e Schimmel 1985 , pp. 69–70.

^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr, ed. (2017). "The Moon, al-Qamar".

The Study Quran: A New Translation and Commentary .

^ Prange 2018 , p. 101.

^ Prange 2018 , p. 93–5.

^ ( Hurvitz et al. 2020 , p. 257) ^ Prange 2018 , p. 94–5, 100.

^ Yusuf Ali, Meaning of The Noble Qur’an , Sura 54, v.1 ^ Allameh Tabatabaei , Tafsir al-Mizan , Verse 54:1-2 ^ Majma Ul-Bayan ^ M. A. S. Abdel Haleem: The Qur'an, a new translation , note to 54:1 ^ a b Wensinck, A.J. "Muʿd̲j̲iza".

Encyclopaedia of Islam . Edited by: P. Bearman , Th. Bianquis , C. E. Bosworth , E. van Donzel and W. P. Heinrichs. Brill, 2007.

^ Denis Gril, Miracles , Encyclopedia of the Qur'an , Brill, 2007.

^ a b Robert G. Mourison, The Portrayal of Nature in a Medieval Qur’an Commentary , Studia Islamica, 2002 ^ "Muhammad".

Encyclopædia Britannica in Islamic mythology. 2007.

Encyclopædia Britannica Online, p. 13 ^ "Moon Split Miracle Chain Letter" .

Hoax Slayer . Archived from the original on 30 October 2020.

^ Soora, Gayathri (14 April 2020).

"Split Moon image goes viral on WhatsApp; Fact Check | Digit Eye" . Retrieved 2021-01-13 .

^ a b "Social media posts falsely claim the Moon 'was once split in two' " .

AFP Fact Check . 2022-05-04. Archived from the original on 5 August 2023 . Retrieved 2023-11-19 .

^ "Rima Ariadaeus, a Linear Rille" . NASA. Archived from the original on 16 March 2010 . Retrieved 8 June 2016 .

Experts agree that Rima Ariadaeus, about 300 km (186.4 mi) long, is a fault system similar to those on Earth.

^ Bailey, Brad (21 June 2010).

"Evidence of the moon having been split in two" .

Solar System Exploration Research Virtual Institute . Archived from the original on 19 April 2014.

Bibliography Prange, Sebastian R. (2018-05-03).

Monsoon Islam: Trade and Faith on the Medieval Malabar Coast . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-108-42438-7 .

Hurvitz, Nimrod; Sahner, Christian C.; Simonsohn, Uriel; Yarbrough, Luke (2020-12-15).

Conversion to Islam in the Premodern Age: A Sourcebook . Univ of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-29672-5 .

Al-Azmeh, Aziz (2017-02-23).

The Emergence of Islam in Late Antiquity: Allah and His People . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-316-64155-2 .

Brockopp, Jonathan E. (2010-04-19).

The Cambridge Companion to Muhammad . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-82838-3 .

Peters, F. E. (2010).

Jesus and Muhammad: Parallel Tracks, Parallel Lives . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-978004-4 .

Phipps, William E. (6 October 2016).

Muhammad and Jesus: A Comparison of the Prophets and Their Teachings . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4742-8935-1 .

Schimmel, Annemarie (1985).

And Muhammad Is His Messenger: The Veneration of the Prophet in Islamic Piety . University of North Carolina Press.

Sirry, Mun'im (2021-06-21).

Controversies over Islamic Origins: An Introduction to Traditionalism and Revisionism . Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-5275-7134-1 .

v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Splitting_of_the_Moon&oldid=1297378132 " Categories : Islamic eschatology Miracles attributed to Muhammad Moon myths Prophecy in Islam Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Good articles Wikipedia introduction cleanup from April 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 20:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Splitting of the Moon 25 languages Add topic

