Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Examples 3 Formation 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Submarine canyon 29 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Steep-sided valley cut into the seabed of the continental slope Shaded relief image of seven submarine canyons imaged on the continental slope off New York, using multibeam echosounder data. The Hudson Canyon is the furthest to the left.

Perspective view shaded relief image of the San Gabriel and Newport submarine canyons off Los Angeles The Congo Canyon off southwestern Africa, about 300 km (190 mi) visible in this view Heavily canyoned northern margin to the Biscay abyssal plain, with the Whittard Canyon highlighted Bering Sea showing the larger of the submarine canyons that cut the margin Sketch showing the main elements of a submarine canyon A submarine canyon is a steep-sided valley cut into the seabed of the continental slope , sometimes extending well onto the continental shelf , having nearly vertical walls, and occasionally having canyon wall heights of up to 5 km (3 mi), from canyon floor to canyon rim, as with the Great Bahama Canyon .

[ 1 ] Just as above-sea-level canyons serve as channels for the flow of water across land, submarine canyons serve as channels for the flow of turbidity currents across the seafloor.  Turbidity currents are flows of dense, sediment laden waters that are supplied by rivers, or generated on the seabed by storms, submarine landslides, earthquakes, and other soil disturbances.  Turbidity currents travel down slope at great speed (as much as 70 km/h (43 mph)), eroding the continental slope and finally depositing sediment onto the abyssal plain , where the particles settle out.

[ 2 ] About 3% of submarine canyons include shelf valleys that have cut transversely across continental shelves, and which begin with their upstream ends in alignment with and sometimes within the mouths of large rivers , such as the Congo River and the Hudson Canyon .  About 28.5% of submarine canyons cut back into the edge of the continental shelf, whereas the majority (about 68.5%) of submarine canyons have not managed at all to cut significantly across their continental shelves, having their upstream beginnings or "heads" on the continental slope, below the edge of continental shelves.

[ 3 ] The formation of submarine canyons is believed to occur as the result of at least two main process: 1) erosion by turbidity current erosion; and 2) slumping and mass wasting of the continental slope.  While at first glance the erosion patterns of submarine canyons may appear to mimic those of river-canyons on land, several markedly different processes have been found to take place at the soil/water interface.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Many canyons have been found at depths greater than 2 km (1 mi) below sea level . Some may extend seawards across continental shelves for hundreds of kilometres before reaching the abyssal plain. Ancient examples have been found in rocks dating back to the Neoproterozoic .

[ 5 ] Turbidites are deposited at the downstream mouths or ends of canyons, building an abyssal fan .

Characteristics [ edit ] Submarine canyons are more common on the steep slopes found on active margins compared to those on the gentler slopes found on passive margins .

[ 6 ] They show erosion through all substrates, from unlithified sediment to crystalline rock .  Canyons are steeper, shorter, more dendritic and more closely spaced on active than on passive continental margins.

[ 3 ] The walls are generally very steep and can be near vertical.  The walls are subject to erosion by bioerosion , or slumping .  There are an estimated 9,477 submarine canyons on Earth, covering about 11% of the continental slope.

[ 7 ] Examples [ edit ] Avilés Canyon , off the coast of Asturias, Spain , reaches depth of about 4,700 m (15,420 ft).

[ 8 ] Amazon Canyon , extending from the Amazon River Baltimore and Wilmington Canyons, East Coast of Maryland and Delaware States [ 9 ] Blanes Canyon in the coast of Catalonia , in de Mediterranean Bering Canyon , in the Bering Sea Congo Canyon , the largest river canyon, extending from the Congo River , is 800 km (497 mi) long, and 1,200 m (3,900 ft) deep [ citation needed ] Delgada Submarine Canyon , off the coast of California [ 10 ] Hatteras Canyon , off the coast of North Carolina [ 11 ] Hudson Canyon , extending from the Hudson River Ganges Canyon , extending from the Ganges Indus Canyon , extending from the Indus River Kaikōura Canyon , extending offshore from the Kaikōura Peninsula , New Zealand La Jolla and Scripps Canyon , off the coast of La Jolla , Southern California Mona Canyon , off the coast of western Puerto Rico Monterey Canyon , off the coast of central California Nazaré Canyon , off the coast of Portugal , reaches abyssal depths of 5,000 m (16,404 ft) Perth Canyon , off the coast of Perth , Western Australia , reaches a depth of 4,000 m (13,123 ft) and contains the world's largest plunge pool Pribilof Canyon , in the Bering Sea Whittard Canyon , Atlantic Ocean off southwest Ireland Zhemchug Canyon the deepest and joint-widest submarine canyon in the world, in the Bering Sea Formation [ edit ] Different mechanisms have been proposed for the formation of submarine canyons. Their primary causes have been subject to debate since the early 1930s.

[ 12 ] An early and obvious theory was that the canyons present today were carved during glacial times, when sea level was about 125 meters (410 ft) below present sea level, and rivers flowed to the edge of the continental shelf. However, while many (but not all) canyons are found offshore from major rivers, subaerial river erosion cannot have been active to the water depths as great as 3,000 meters (9,800 ft) where canyons have been mapped, as it is well established (by many lines of evidence) that sea levels did not fall to those depths.

The major mechanism of canyon erosion is thought to be turbidity currents and underwater landslides . Turbidity currents are dense , sediment-laden currents which flow downslope when an unstable mass of sediment that has been rapidly deposited on the upper slope fails, perhaps triggered by earthquakes. There is a spectrum of turbidity- or density-current types ranging from " muddy water" to massive mudflow, and evidence of both these end members can be observed in deposits associated with the deeper parts of submarine canyons and channels, such as lobate deposits (mudflow) and levees along channels.

Mass wasting , slumping, and submarine landslides are forms of slope failures (the effect of gravity on a hillslope) observed in submarine canyons. Mass wasting is the term used for the slower and smaller action of material moving downhill. Slumping is generally used for rotational movement of masses on a hillside. Landslides, or slides, generally comprise the detachment and displacement of sediment masses.

It is now understood that many mechanisms of submarine canyon creation have had effect to greater or lesser degree in different places, even within the same canyon, or at different times during a canyon's development. However, if a primary mechanism must be selected, the downslope lineal morphology of canyons and channels and the transportation of excavated or loose materials of the continental slope over extensive distances require that various kinds of turbidity or density currents act as major participants.

In addition to the processes described above, submarine canyons that are especially deep may form by another method.  In certain cases, a sea with a bed significantly below sea level is cut off from the larger ocean to which it is usually connected.  The sea which is normally repleted by contact and inflow from the ocean is now no longer replenished and hence dries up over a period of time, which can be very short if the local climate is arid.  In this scenario, rivers that previously flowed into the sea at a sea level elevation now can cut far deeper into the bottom of the bed now exposed.  The Messinian salinity crisis is an example of this phenomenon; between five and six million years ago, the Mediterranean Sea became isolated from the Atlantic Ocean and evaporated away in roughly a thousand years.  During this time, the Nile River delta, among other rivers, extended far beyond its present location, both in depth and length.  In a cataclysmic event, the Mediterranean sea basin was flooded.  One relevant consequence is that the submarine canyons eroded are now far below the present sea level.

See also [ edit ] List of submarine canyons List of submarine topographical features Passive margin References [ edit ] ^ Shepard, F.P., 1963. Submarine Geology. Harper & Row, New York ^ a b Continental Margin Sedimentation: From Sediment Transport to Sequence Stratigraphy (Special Publication 37 of the IAS) March 2009, by Charles Nittroeur, pg 372.

^ a b Harris, P.T., Whiteway, T., 2011. Global distribution of large submarine canyons: geomorphic differences between active and passive continental margins. Marine Geology 285, 69–86.

^ Submarine Canyon Archived 2016-03-07 at the Wayback Machine by Richard Strickland, 2004 ^ Giddings, J.A.; Wallace M.W.; Haines P.W.; Mornane K. (2010). "Submarine origin for the Neoproterozoic Wonoka canyons, South Australia".

Sedimentary Geology .

223 ( 1– 2).

Elsevier : 35– 50.

Bibcode : 2010SedG..223...35G .

doi : 10.1016/j.sedgeo.2009.10.001 .

^ Harris, P.T. (2011).

"Seafloor Geomorphology–Coast, Shelf, and Abyss" . In Harris P.T. & Baker E.K. (ed.).

Seafloor Geomorphology as Benthic Habitat: GeoHAB Atlas of Seafloor Geomorphic Features and Benthic Habitats .

Elsevier . pp.

125– 127.

ISBN 978-0-12-385141-3 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 .

^ Harris, P.T., MacMillan-Lawler, M., Rupp, J., Baker, E.K., 2014. Geomorphology of the oceans. Marine Geology 352, 4–24.

^ Sánchez, F., Cartes, J.E. and Papiol, V., 2014,  "Sistema de Cañones Submarinos de Avilés". Áreas de estudio del proyecto LIFE+ INDEMARES ^ Arthur Newell Strahler , Physical Geography . New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1960, Second Edition, p. 290 ^ "Marine Regions · Delgada Canyon (Canyon(s))" .

marineregions.org . Retrieved 2024-07-04 .

^ "Exploring Carolina Canyons: NOAA Office of Ocean Exploration and Research" .

^ Shepard, Francis P. (1936).

"The Underlying Causes of Submarine Canyons" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

22 (8): 496– 502.

Bibcode : 1936PNAS...22..496S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.22.8.496 .

PMC 1079213 .

PMID 16577732 .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal v t e Coastal geography Landforms Anchialine pool Archipelago Atoll Avulsion Ayre Barrier island Bay Bight Bodden Brackish marsh Cape Channel Cliff Coast Coastal plain Coastal waterfall Continental margin Continental shelf Coral reef Cove Dune cliff-top Estuary Firth Fjard Fjord Freshwater marsh Fundus Gat Geo Gulf Gut Hapua Headland Inlet Intertidal wetland Island Islet Isthmus Liman Lagoon Machair Mudflat Natural arch Peninsula Reef Ria Salt marsh Shoal Skerry Sound Spit Stack Strait Strand plain Submarine canyon Tidal island Tidal marsh Tide pool Tied island Tombolo Waituna Windwatt Beaches Beach cusps Beach evolution Beach ridge Beach wrack Beaches in estuaries and bays Beachrock Coastal morphodynamics Pocket beach Raised beach Recession Shell beach Shingle beach Storm beach Wash margin River mouths Debouch Mouth bar River delta mega regressive Processes Blowhole Cliffed coast Coastal biogeomorphology Coastal erosion Concordant coastline Current Cuspate foreland Discordant coastline Emergent coastline Feeder bluff Flat coast Graded shoreline Ingression coast Large-scale coastal behaviour Longshore drift Marine regression Marine transgression Raised shoreline Rip current Rocky shore Sea cave Sea foam Shoal peresyp Steep coast Submergent coastline Surf break Surf zone Surge channel Swash Undertow Volcanic arc Wave-cut platform Wave shoaling Wind fetch Wind wave Management Accretion Coastal management Integrated coastal zone management Submersion Related Bulkhead line Coastal engineering Grain size boulder clay cobble granule gravel pebble sand shingle silt Intertidal zone Littoral zone Physical oceanography Region of freshwater influence River plume Category Authority control databases : National Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Submarine_canyon&oldid=1258744696 " Category : Submarine canyons Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013 This page was last edited on 21 November 2024, at 11:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Submarine canyon 29 languages Add topic

