Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 References Toggle References subsection 2.1 General references 2.2 Inline citations 3 External links Toggle the table of contents King tide 1 language Magyar Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Especially high spring tide For other uses, see King Tide .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "King tide" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The erosive effects of a king tide on the Gold Coast, Queensland A king tide is an especially high spring tide , especially the perigean spring tides which occur three or four times a year. King tide is not a scientific term, nor is it used in a scientific context.

The expression originated in Australia , New Zealand and other Pacific nations to describe especially high tides that occur a few times per year. It is now used in North America as well, [ 1 ] particularly in low-lying South Florida , where king tides can cause tidal flooding . In Vancouver, Canada, king tides are a growing problem along its seawall .

[ 2 ] Definition [ edit ] King tides are the highest tides. They are naturally occurring, predictable events.

Tides are the movement of water across Earth 's surface caused by the combined effects of the gravitational forces exerted by the Moon , Sun , and the rotation of Earth which manifest in the local rise and fall of sea levels. Tides are driven by the relative positions of the Earth, Sun, Moon, land formations, and relative location on Earth.
In the lunar month, the highest tides occur roughly every 14 days, at the new and full moons, when the gravitational pull of the Moon and the Sun are in alignment. These highest tides in the lunar cycle are called spring tides.

The proximity of the Moon in relation to Earth and Earth in relation to the Sun also has an effect on tidal ranges. The Moon moves around Earth in an elliptic orbit that takes about 29 days to complete. The gravitational force is greatest when the Moon is at perigee (closest to Earth) and smallest when it is at apogee (farthest from Earth). The Moon has a larger effect on the tides than the Sun, but the Sun's position also has an influence on the tides. Earth moves around the Sun in an elliptic orbit that takes a little over 365 days to complete. Its gravitational force is greatest when the Earth is at perihelion – closest to the Sun in early January – and least when the Earth is at aphelion – farthest from the Sun in early July.

The king tides occur at new and full moon when the Earth, Moon and Sun are aligned at perigee and perihelion , resulting in the largest tidal range seen over the course of a year. So, tides are enhanced when the Earth is closest to the Sun around January 2 of each year. They are reduced when it is furthest from the Sun, around July 2.

[ 3 ] The predicted heights of a king tide can be further augmented by local weather patterns and ocean conditions.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] General references [ edit ] tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov Inline citations [ edit ] ^ "Hurricanes leave Florida coasts vulnerable to 'King tides' " .

The Big Story . Archived from the original on 18 October 2016 . Retrieved 14 October 2016 .

^ "CityNews" . 9 January 2022.

^ Tidal Variations - The Influence of Position and Distance NOAA ocean service education ^ LaFever, Matt (16 December 2024).

"California king tides flood small town restaurant, which still opens anyway" .

SFGATE . Retrieved 17 December 2024 .

External links [ edit ] EPA King Tides Factsheet EPA page on king tides and climate change oceanservice.noaa.gov – NOAA National Ocean Service NOAA tool for predicting tide events – Tides and water levels – NOAA tides tutorial King tides photo initiative – North Carolina, US King tides photo initiative – Washington State, US King tides photo initiative – Oregon, US King tides photo initiative – Long Island Sound, US King tides photo initiative – Barnegat Bay, US King tides photo initiative [ usurped ] – Australia King tides photo initiative – New South Wales, Australia www.thesinkingoftuvalu.com – King Tide / The Sinking of Tuvalu King tides photo initiative – Hawaii and Pacific Islands King Tides Project v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=King_tide&oldid=1299003755 " Category : Tides Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2012 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from December 2024 This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 01:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents King tide 1 language Add topic

