Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Colleges 3 Notable alumni 4 See also 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Al-Mustansiriya University 21 languages العربية বাংলা Cebuano Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français हिन्दी Italiano مصرى پنجابی Polski Português کوردی Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 33°20′19″N 44°23′23″E ﻿ / ﻿ 33.33861°N 44.38972°E ﻿ / 33.33861; 44.38972 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public university in Baghdad, Iraq Al-Mustansiriyah University الجامعة المستنصرية Motto اقْرَأْ وَرَبُّكَ الْأَكْرَمُ (3) الَّذِي عَلَّمَ بِالْقَلَمِ (4) عَلَّمَ الْإِنْسَانَ مَا لَمْ يَعْلَمْ Motto in English "Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous – Who taught by the pen – Taught man that which he knew not."
(Surah Al-‘Alaq, 96:3–5) Type Public University Established 1227 ; 798 years ago ( 1227 ) 1963 (modern) Founder Mustansir President Prof. Dr. Hamid Tamimi Location Baghdad , Iraq Website www.uomustansiriyah.edu.iq Al Mustansiriya University main door.

Al-Mustansiriya University ( Arabic : الجامعة المستنصرية , romanized : al-Jāmiʿa al-Mustanṣariyya ) is a public university located in Baghdad , Iraq . It traces its origin back to 1227. The modern form of the university was founded in 1963.

History [ edit ] The original Mustansiriya Madrasah was established in 1227 (or 1232/34 A.D. by some accounts) by the Abbasid Caliph Al-Mustansir and was one of the oldest universities in the world. Its building, on the left bank of the Tigris River, survived the Mongol invasion of 1258 and has been restored.

The modern Mustansiriyah University was established with the help and financial support of the Republic of Ίrāq Teachers' Union in 1963, mainly providing evening courses.  In 1964, the university was given the status of a semi-state institution and some state financial support.  At the same time it absorbed Al-Shahab University, another private university that had been founded by the Ίrāqi Association of Economists, and then moved to a new campus to the north of the city center. Initially, the university also managed colleges in Mosul and Basra.

In 1966 a law was passed under which the private universities were converted into public universities.  Mustansiriyah thus became, briefly, a college within the University of Baghdad . In 1967 a major reorganization of higher education was initiated, with the intention that by 1969 all previous institutions would be abolished and reconstituted.  Mustansiriyah was designated as a separate University in 1968, and its branch campuses were detached to form part of the University of Mosul and the University of Basra .

Colleges [ edit ] College of Medicine : Based outside the main campus, attached to Al-Yarmouk Teaching Hospital and the National Center of Hematology . It is one of four medical schools in Baghdad and the second to be established (after the University of Baghdad 's College of Medicine).

College of Dentistry : The second in Baghdad (after the University of Baghdad 's College of Dentistry). Established by Dr. Ahmad M. Ismail. Based outside the main campus, attached to Al-Karama Teaching Hospital.

College of Law College of Management and Economy College of Arts College of Education College of Science College of Physical Education College of Engineering College of Pharmacy College of Political Science College of Basic Education College of Hospitality Notable alumni [ edit ] Kasim Muhammad Taqi al-Sahlani , a member of the Council of Representatives of Iraq Rahim AlHaj , an oud player and composer Nadhmi Auchi , a businessman and billionaire Alia Mamdouh , a novelist, author and journalist Betool Khedairi , novelist/author Abdullatif Ahmad Mustafa , Kurdish Salafi cleric Bashar M. Nema , Professor of Information security See also [ edit ] List of Islamic educational institutions List of universities in Iraq External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Al-Mustansiriya University .

Official website (in Arabic) Official website (in English) College of Medicine (in English) College of dentistry (in English) College of Pharmacy (in English) 33°20′19″N 44°23′23″E ﻿ / ﻿ 33.33861°N 44.38972°E ﻿ / 33.33861; 44.38972 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Mustansiriya_University&oldid=1304632051 " Categories : Al-Mustansiriya University Educational institutions established in the 13th century Education in Baghdad Arabic architecture Abbasid architecture 1227 establishments in Asia 1963 establishments in Iraq Iraq War sites in Baghdad Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Arabic-language sources (ar) Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 06:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Al-Mustansiriya University 21 languages Add topic

