Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Design 3 Uses 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Halligan bar 8 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Polski Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Forcible entry tool Halligan bar The adze and pick end of a Halligan A Halligan bar (also known as a Halligan tool or Hooligan tool [ 1 ] ) is a forcible entry tool used by firefighters .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The Halligan bar was designed by New York City Fire Department (FDNY) First Deputy Chief Hugh Halligan in 1948 and was named after him.

"Created by Hugh Halligan, allegedly modeled on a burglar's tool found in the rubble of a bank fire during overhaul operations." [ 3 ] — New York City Fire Museum That same year, blacksmith Peter Clarke made the first prototype of the tool.

[ 4 ] "Due to a dispute between the Department and Halligan, the tool was not purchased by the FDNY until the patent expired and the Department was able to buy comparable tools from other vendors. Nonetheless it was widely used; firefighters purchased their own "Halligans" out-of-pocket, a tribute to its effectiveness and dependability. The FDNY now issues a modified Halligan Tool called the "PRO-BAR," manufactured by Fire Hooks Unlimited, for use as the primary forcible entry tool." [ 5 ] — New York City Fire Museum Despite its popularity among FDNY ladder companies, the department initially refrained from purchasing the tool to avoid the appearance of a conflict of interest.

[ 6 ] However, the Boston Fire Department was the first major customer of the Halligan bar, purchasing one for every fire company in the city. This led to widespread adoption of the tool, first in North America and eventually worldwide. The Halligan bar has become the most versatile hand tool for fireground tasks over the past seven decades.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] Design [ edit ] A Halligan tool on display at the NYC Fire Museum (middle), next to the earlier Kelly tool (2nd from left) on which it was based Based on the earlier Kelly tool , the Halligan is a multipurpose tool for prying , twisting, punching, or striking.

[ 8 ] It consists of a claw (or fork), a blade ( wedge or adze ), and a tapered pick, which is especially useful in quickly breaching many types of locked doors.

One variant of the Halligan has a heavy sliding collar on the shaft. Once the prying end of the tool is wedged into position, the sliding "hammer" is used to force the wedge, allowing for proper seating before prying. The adze end is also assisted by using the sliding hammer to generate forced traction on a hooked cylinder. Another variant has an end that resembles a lever-type can opener, used for making large holes for access or ventilation in sheet metal.

The Halligan is available in a number of lengths – typically 18–54 inches (46–137 cm) – and of various materials, including titanium , beryllium copper or stainless steel . Carrying straps or rings can be found. The 18-inch Halligan is often referred to as an officer's tool.

A Halligan and flat head axe. When joined they are known as "the irons" A Halligan bar and a flathead axe can be joined (and partially interlocked, head-to-toe) to form what is known as a married set , set of irons or simply the irons . This combination of tools is most common within the fire service. However, the Halligan may also be combined with a Halligan hook or sledgehammer as an alternative.

Uses [ edit ] Doors and locks Either the adze end or fork end of the tool can be used to break through the latch of a swinging door by forcing the tool between the door and door jamb and prying the two apart, striking it with a sledgehammer or a flat-head axe .

The firefighter holding the Halligan can use a "baseball bat swing" to sink the pick into the door frame near the door handle and then force the door by applying pressure to the adze.

[ 9 ] Another option is to use the Halligan to pry the door off the top hinges.

[ 9 ] The pick and adze (only when properly used) provide protection to the arms, hands, and body of the holder during forcible entry operation.

[ 10 ] The pick can be placed into the shackle (or eye) of a padlock or hasp and twisted or pried to break it free.

Using a K-tool and the adze end, a lock cylinder can easily be pulled.

Vehicles The Halligan can be used to make a purchase point on a car hood to cut the battery.

[ 11 ] The Halligan can also be used for vehicle extrication , among other things.

The tool can be used to pry open the hood of a car when it is jammed from an accident.

[ 12 ] The Halligan can be used to knock down a wall in a house to get to another area.

[ 13 ] The point can be used to break glass on a car or building for access or ventilation.

[ 14 ] It can also be driven into a roof to provide a foothold for firefighters engaged in vertical ventilation .

The fork end is routinely used to shut off gas meter valves.

The Halligan can be used as a step to get up on a window that is at head level.

[ 15 ] The Halligan can be tied to a rope and act as an anchor in the window frame, for improvised bailout.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Claw tool – Forcible entry tool used by firefighters Pulaski (tool) Glass breaker References [ edit ] ^ Dornan, Scott (2008).

Industrial Fire Brigade: Principles and Practice . Jones & Bartlett Learning.

ISBN 978-0-7637-3502-9 . Retrieved 19 June 2022 .

^ "DEA vs. Heroin Kingpin" .

DEA . Season 1. Episode 1. 2008-04-02.  26:03 minutes in.

Spike .

Archived from the original on 2011-01-29 . Retrieved 2009-03-14 .

^ "Forcible Entry Tool" .

nycfiremuseum.catalogaccess.com PastPerfect .

New York City Fire Museum . Retrieved 17 December 2024 .

^ Maughan, William F.X. (2007).

The Grappling Hook . Scranton and London: University of Scranton Press . p. 257.

ISBN 978-1-58966-179-0 . Archived from the original on 2017-09-18 . Retrieved 2020-01-07 .

^ "Forcible Entry Tool" .

nycfiremuseum.catalogaccess.com  PastPerfect .

New York City Fire Museum . Retrieved 17 December 2024 .

^ a b Fire Department City of New York: The Bravest; An Illustrated History 1865–2002 , page 72.

^ Morelock, Jamie. Upgrading the Halligan Bar's Roof Ring. Fire Engineering. Pennwell Corporation. Volume 163, Issue 3. Page 47. 2010.

^ "The Halligan Bar – By: Rob Fisher" .

Brotherhoodinstructors.com . 2011-01-10. Archived from the original on 2012-03-08 . Retrieved 2020-06-26 .

^ a b White, Billy & Johnson, Fergus. "The Backup Firefighter's Role in the Initial Fire Attack".

Fire Engineering . 2011-06-02.

^ Fisher, Rob. "History of the Halligan Bar".

Firefighternation . 2007.

^ Fritz, Richard. Tools of the Trade: Hand Tools and Their Use. Pennwell Books. 1997.

^ Smith, Steve. militarygovernmentcareeres.knojji.com. 2013.

^ Equipment Used by Firefighters. ABCO Fire Protection.

^ Schottke, David. Fundamentals of Firefighter Skills. Jones and Barlett Publishers. 2014 ^ The Art of the Fire Service. Tips From the Bucket. Vententersarch.com ^ Thomas Delmar Learning. The Firefighter's Handbook. Thomas and Delmar Learning. Clifton Park, New York. 2000.

Ryan, Gregory.

Firefighter's Escape Implement . Patent. 2007.

Further reading [ edit ] Essentials of Fire Fighting ; Hall, Richard and Adams, Barbara, eds.; 4th Ed., 1998: Board of Regents, Oklahoma State University–Stillwater .

ISBN 0-87939-049-2 FDNY Forcible Entry Reference Guide, Techniques and Procedures External links [ edit ] Halligan bar at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Halligan bar demonstration on YouTube v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e Hand tools Sawhorse Toolbox Workbench Adjustable spanner Antique tools Basin wrench Block plane Brace Bradawl Breaker bar Cat's paw Caulking gun Clamp Crimper Crowbar Dead-blow hammer Fish tape Gimlet Glass breaker Grease gun Hammer Hammer tacker Hawk Headlamp Hex key Hole punch Impact driver Jack Locking pliers Lug wrench Mallet Mitre box Monkey wrench Multi-tool Nut driver Paint roller Paintbrush Pencil sharpener Persian drill Pincers Pipe wrench Pliers Plumber wrench Plumber's snake Plunger Podger spanner Punch Punch down tool Scratch awl Screwdriver Sledgehammer Slide hammer Socket wrench Spike maul Staple gun Stitching awl Strap wrench Tactical light Tire iron Tongue-and-groove pliers Torque wrench Tweezers Upholstery hammer Wrench Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Kitchen Machine and metalworking Masonry Measuring and alignment Mining Power Textile Woodworking Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Halligan_bar&oldid=1298725819 " Categories : Firefighter tools Hand tools Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 08:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Halligan bar 8 languages Add topic

