Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Priesthood 1.3 1640s 1.4 Death and memorial 2 Scientific achievements 3 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 3.1 Exercitationes 3.2 Animadversiones 3.3 Syntagma philosophicum 4 Views Toggle Views subsection 4.1 Vegetarianism 5 Early commentary 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Pierre Gassendi 50 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Magyar മലയാളം مصرى မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Tagalog Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French priest, astronomer, and mathematician (1592–1655) The Reverend Pierre Gassendi Pierre Gassendi by Louis-Édouard Rioult Born ( 1592-01-22 ) 22 January 1592 Champtercier , Provence Died 24 October 1655 (1655-10-24) (aged 63) Paris , France Education Education University of Aix-en-Provence University of Avignon ( Th.D.

, 1614) Philosophical work Era 17th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Aristotelianism Epicureanism Atomism Empiricism Nominalism [ 1 ] Materialism [ 1 ] Corpuscularianism [ 2 ] Theological voluntarism [ 3 ] Institutions University of Aix-en-Provence Collège Royal Main interests Philosophical logic , physics , ethics Notable ideas Calor vitalis (vital heat) Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Pierre Gassendi ( French: [pjɛʁ gasɛ̃di] ; [ 5 ] also Pierre Gassend , Petrus Gassendi, Petrus Gassendus ; 22 January 1592 – 24 October 1655) was a French philosopher , Catholic priest , astronomer , and mathematician .

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] While he held a church position in south-east France, he also spent much time in Paris, where he was a leader of a group of free-thinking intellectuals. He was also an active observational scientist , publishing the first data on the transit of Mercury in 1631. The lunar crater Gassendi is named after him.

He wrote numerous philosophical works, and some of the positions he worked out are considered significant, finding a way between skepticism and dogmatism .

Richard Popkin indicates that Gassendi was one of the first thinkers to formulate the modern "scientific outlook", of moderated skepticism and empiricism . He clashed with his contemporary Descartes on the possibility of certain knowledge. His best known intellectual project attempted to reconcile Epicurean atomism with Christianity .

Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Gassendi was born at Champtercier , near Digne , in France to Antoine Gassend and Françoise Fabry.

[ 8 ] His earliest education was entrusted to his maternal uncle, Thomas Fabry, the curé of the church of Champtercier.

[ 9 ] A youthful prodigy, at a very early age he showed academic potential and attended the collège (the town high school) at Digne, where he displayed a particular aptitude for languages and mathematics . In 1609 he entered the University of Aix-en-Provence , to study philosophy under Philibert Fesaye, O.Carm.

[ 10 ] at the Collège Royal de Bourbon (the Faculty of Arts of the University of Aix).

[ 11 ] In 1612 the college of Digne called him to lecture on theology . While at Digne, he travelled to Senez , where he received minor orders from Bishop Jacques Martin. In 1614 he received the degree of Doctor of Theology from the University of Avignon , [ 12 ] and was elected Theologian in the Cathedral Chapter of Digne. On 1 August 1617 he received holy orders from Bishop Jacques Turricella of Marseille.

[ 9 ] In the same year, at the age of 24, he accepted the chair of philosophy at the University of Aix-en-Provence, and yielded the chair of theology to his old teacher, Fesaye. Gassendi seems gradually to have withdrawn from theology. He maintained his position as Canon Theologian at Digne, however, and in September 1619, when Bishop Raphaël de Bologne took possession of the diocese of Digne, Gassendi participated and made the speech on behalf of the Chapter.

[ 13 ] He lectured principally on the Aristotelian philosophy , conforming as far as possible to the traditional methods while he also followed with interest the discoveries of Galileo and Kepler . He came into contact with the astronomer Joseph Gaultier de la Vallette (1564–1647), the Grand Vicar of the Archbishopric of Aix.

[ 14 ] Priesthood [ edit ] In 1623 the Society of Jesus took over the University of Aix. They filled all positions with Jesuits, so Gassendi was required to find another institution.

[ 15 ] He left, returning to Digne on 10 February 1623, and then returned to Aix to witness an eclipse of the moon on 14 April and the presence of Mars in Sagittarius on 7 June, from which he returned again to Digne.

[ 16 ] He travelled to Grenoble on behalf of the Chapter of Digne for a lawsuit, most reluctantly, since he was working on his project on Aristotle's paradoxes.

[ 17 ] In 1624 he printed the first part of his Exercitationes paradoxicae adversus Aristoteleos .  A fragment of the second book later appeared in print at The Hague (1659), but Gassendi never composed the remaining five, apparently thinking that the Discussiones Peripateticae of Francesco Patrizzi left little scope for him.

He spent some time with his patron Nicolas Peiresc . After 1628 Gassendi travelled in Flanders and in Holland where he encountered Isaac Beeckman and François Luillier .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] He returned to France in 1631. In 1634 the Cathedral Chapter of Digne had become disgusted at the wasteful behavior of Provost Blaise Ausset, and they voted to replace him. They obtained an arrêt of the Parliament of Aix, dated 19 December 1634, which consented to his deposition and to the election of Gassendi as provost of the Cathedral Chapter . Gassendi was formally installed on 24 December 1634. He held the Provostship until his death in 1655.

[ 19 ] During this time he wrote some works, at the insistence of Marin Mersenne . They included his examination of the mystical philosophy of Robert Fludd , [ 20 ] an essay on parhelia , [ 21 ] and some observations on the transit of Mercury .

1640s [ edit ] Gassendi then spent some years travelling through Provence with the duke of Angoulême , governor of the region. During this period he wrote only the one literary work, his Life of Peiresc, whose death in 1637 seemed to afflict him deeply; [ 22 ] it received frequent reprintings and an English translation. He returned to Paris in 1641, where he met Thomas Hobbes .

[ 23 ] He gave some informal philosophy classes, gaining pupils or disciples; according to the biographer Grimarest, these included Molière , Cyrano de Bergerac (whose participation in classes is disputed), [ 24 ] Jean Hesnault and Claude-Emmanuel Chapelle , son of Lullier.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] In 1640 Mersenne engaged him in controversy with René Descartes . His objections to the fundamental propositions of Descartes appeared in print in 1641; they appear as the Fifth Set of Objections in the works of Descartes [ 27 ] and as a separate edition entitled Disquisitio Metaphysica [ 28 ] with rejoinders.

[ 29 ] Though Descartes is often credited with the discovery of the mind-body problem , Gassendi, reacting to Descartes' mind-body dualism, was the first to state it.

[ 30 ] Gassendi's tendency towards the empirical school of speculation appears more pronounced here than in any of his other writings.

Jean-Baptiste Morin attacked his De motu impresso a motore translato (1642).

[ 22 ] In 1643 Mersenne also tried to garner support from the German Socinian and advocate of religious tolerance Marcin Ruar . Ruar replied at length that he had already read Gassendi but was in favour of leaving science to science not to the church.

[ 31 ] In 1645 he accepted the chair of mathematics in the Collège Royal in Paris, and lectured for several years with great success. In addition to controversial writings on physical questions, there appeared during this period the first of the works for which historians of philosophy remember him. In 1647 he published the well-received treatise De vita, moribus, et doctrina Epicuri libri octo . Two years later appeared his commentary on the tenth book of Diogenes Laërtius .

[ 32 ] In the same year he had published the more important commentary Syntagma philosophiae Epicuri .

[ 33 ] In 1648 ill-health compelled him to give up his lectures at the Collège Royal. Around this time he became reconciled to Descartes, after years of coldness, through the good offices of César d'Estrées .

[ 34 ] Death and memorial [ edit ] Gassendi travelled in the south of France in the company of his protégé , aide and secretary François Bernier , another pupil from Paris. He spent nearly two years at Toulon ,  where the climate suited him. In 1653 he returned to Paris and resumed his literary work, living in the house of Montmor , publishing in that year lives of Copernicus and of Tycho Brahe . The disease from which he suffered, a lung complaint, had, however, established a firm hold on him. His strength gradually failed, and he died at Paris in 1655. A bronze statue of him (by Joseph Ramus) was erected by subscription at Digne in 1852. 
A large crater on the Moon is named after him.

[ 35 ] Scientific achievements [ edit ] As part of his promotion of empirical methods and his anti- Aristotelian and anti- Cartesian views, Gassendi was responsible for a number of scientific 'firsts': He explained parhelia in 1629 as due to ice crystals.

In 1631, Gassendi became the first person to observe the transit of a planet across the Sun, viewing the transit of Mercury that Kepler had predicted. In December of the same year, he watched for the transit of Venus , but this event occurred when it was night time in Paris.

Use of camera obscura to gauge the apparent diameter of the Moon.

Dropping a stone from the mast of a ship (in De motu ) conserves horizontal momentum, removing an objection to the rotation of the Earth .

Measurement of speed of sound (to about 25% accuracy), showing that it is invariant of pitch.

Satisfactory interpretation of Pascal 's Puy-de-Dôme experiment with a barometer in the late 1640s; this suggested a created vacuum is possible.

He asserted and defended (in "Syntagma philosophiae Epicuri", 1649, see Philosophical Writings below) the notion that matter is made of atoms, following Epicurus .

In addition to these achievements, Gassendi performed work on determining longitude via eclipses of the Moon and on improving the Rudolphine Tables . He addressed the issue of free fall in De motu (1642) and De proportione qua gravia decidentia accelerantur (1646).

[ 36 ] Writings [ edit ] Romanum calendarium Edward Gibbon styled him "Le meilleur philosophe des littérateurs, et le meilleur littérateur des philosophes" (The greatest philosopher among literary men, and the greatest literary man among philosophers).

Henri Louis Habert de Montmor published Gassendi's collected works, most importantly the Syntagma philosophicum (Opera, i. and ii.), in 1658 (6 vols., Lyons).

Nicolaus Averanius published another edition, also in 6 folio volumes, in 1727. The first two comprise entirely his Syntagma philosophicum ; the third contains his critical writings on Epicurus , Aristotle , Descartes , Robert Fludd and Herbert of Cherbury , with some occasional pieces on certain problems of physics ; the fourth, his Institutio astronomica , and his Commentarii de rebus celestibus ; the fifth, his commentary on the tenth book of Diogenes Laërtius , the biographies of Epicurus, Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc , Tycho Brahe , Nicolaus Copernicus , Georg von Peuerbach , and Regiomontanus , with some tracts on the value of ancient money, on the Roman calendar , and on the theory of music, with an appended large and prolix piece entitled Notitia ecclesiae Diniensis ; the sixth volume contains his correspondence . The Lives , especially those of Copernicus, Tycho and Peiresc, received much praise.

Exercitationes [ edit ] The Exercitationes excited much attention, though they contain little or nothing beyond what others had already advanced against Aristotle. The first book expounds clearly, and with much vigour, the evil effects of the blind acceptance of the Aristotelian dicta on physical and philosophical study; but, as occurs with so many of the anti-Aristotelian works of this period, the objections show the usual ignorance of Aristotle's own writings [ citation needed ] . The second book, which contains the review of Aristotle's dialectic or logic , throughout reflects Ramism in tone and method. One of the objections to Descartes became famous through Descartes's statement of it in the appendix of objections in the Meditations .

Animadversiones [ edit ] His book Animadversiones , published in 1649, contains a translation of Diogenes Laërtius , Book X on Epicurus, and appeared with a commentary, in the form of the Syntagma philosophiae Epicuri .

[ 36 ] His labors on Epicurus have historical importance, but he has been criticized for holding doctrines arguably irreconcilable with his strong expressions of empiricism.

In the book, Gassendi maintains his maxim "that there is nothing in the intellect which has not been in the senses" ( nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuerit in sensu ), but he contends that the imaginative faculty ( phantasia ) is the counterpart of sense, because it involves material images, and therefore is intrinsically material, and that it is essentially the same both in men and brutes. However, he also admits that the classic qualifier of humanity, intellect , which he affirms as immaterial and immortal, comes to an understanding of notions and truths that no effort of sensation or imagination could have attained (Op. ii. 383). Gassendi illustrates the capacity to form "general notions"; the conception of universality (ib. 384), which he says brutes never are able to partake in, though they utilize phantasia as truly as men; the notion of God , whom he says we may imagine as corporeal , but understand as incorporeal; and lastly, the reflex by which the mind makes the phenomena and operations within it the objects of its attention.

The English Epicurean Walter Charleton produced an English adaptation of this book, Physiologia Epicuro-Gassendo-Charletonia , in 1654.

[ 36 ] Syntagma philosophicum [ edit ] The Syntagma philosophicum is divided, according to the usual fashion of the Epicureans , into logic (which, with Gassendi, as with Epicurus , is truly canonic), physics, and ethics.

The logic contains a sketch of the history of the science De origine et varietate logicae , and is divided into theory of right apprehension ( bene imaginari ), theory of right judgment ( bene proponere ), theory of right inference ( bene colligere ), theory of right method ( bene ordinare ). The first part contains the specially empirical positions which Gassendi afterwards neglects or leaves out of account. The senses, the sole source of knowledge, supposedly yield us immediate cognition of individual things; phantasy (which Gassendi takes as material in nature) reproduces these ideas; understanding compares these ideas, each particular, and frames general ideas. Nevertheless, he admits that the senses yield knowledge—not of things—but of qualities only, and that we arrive at the idea of thing or substance by inductive reasoning . He holds that the true method of research is the analytic, rising from lower to higher notions; yet he sees and admits that inductive reasoning, as conceived by Francis Bacon , rests on a general proposition not itself proved by induction.  The whole doctrine of judgment, syllogism and method mixes Aristotelian and Ramist notions.

In the second part of the Syntagma , the physics, appears the most glaring contradiction between Gassendi's fundamental principles. While approving of the Epicurean physics, he rejects the Epicurean negation of God and particular providence . He states the various proofs for the existence of an immaterial, infinite, supreme Being, asserts that this Being is the author of the visible universe, and strongly defends the doctrine of the foreknowledge and particular providence of God. At the same time he holds, in opposition to Epicureanism, the doctrine of an immaterial rational soul , endowed with immortality and capable of free determination .

Friedrich Albert Lange [ 37 ] claimed that all this portion of Gassendi's system contains nothing of his own opinions, but is introduced solely from motives of self-defence.

The positive exposition of atomism has much that is attractive, but the hypothesis of the calor vitalis (vital heat), a species of anima mundi (world-soul) which he introduces as a physical explanation of physical phenomena, does not seem to throw much light on the special problems which  he invokes it to solve. Nor is his theory of the weight essential to atoms as being due to an inner force impelling them to motion in any way reconcilable with his general doctrine of mechanical causes.

In the third part, the ethics, over and above the discussion on freedom, which on the whole is indefinite, there is little beyond a milder statement of the Epicurean moral code. The final end of life is happiness, and happiness is harmony of soul and body ( tranquillitas animi et indolentia corporis ). Probably, Gassendi thinks, perfect happiness is not attainable in this life, but it may be in the life to come.

Views [ edit ] According to Gabriel Daniel , Gassendi was a little Pyrrhonian in matters of science; but that was no bad thing.

[ 38 ] He wrote against the magical animism of Robert Fludd, and judicial astrology .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] He became dissatisfied with the Peripatetic system, the orthodox approach to natural philosophy based on the writings of Aristotle . Gassendi shared an empirical tendency of the age. He contributed to the objections against Aristotelian philosophy, but waited to publish his own thoughts.

There remains some controversy as to the extent to which Gassendi subscribed to the so-called libertinage érudit , the learned free-thinking that characterised the Tétrade , the Parisian circle to which he belonged, along with Gabriel Naudé and two others ( Élie Diodati and François de La Mothe Le Vayer ). Gassendi, at least, belonged to the fideist wing of the sceptics, arguing that the absence of certain knowledge implied the room for faith.

[ 41 ] In his dispute with Descartes he did apparently hold that the evidence of the senses remains the only convincing evidence; yet he maintains, as is natural from his mathematical training, that the evidence of reason is absolutely satisfactory.

Vegetarianism [ edit ] Gassendi acknowledged that while the complete realisation of the continual pursuit of ultimate pleasure through communion with God might not occur in one's lifetime, he argued against the consumption of meat, considering it a significant obstacle to achieving a divine vision. Drawing support from scripture and the natural world, he envisioned a restored paradise where humans and animals coexisted in peaceful dominion, contrary to the tyranny displayed in the butchering of animals for pleasure.

[ 2 ] Gassendi supported his case for vegetarianism with arguments from medicine, history, and scripture. Inspired by Neoplatonic vegetarians and early Christian thinkers, he aligned vegetarianism with Christian doctrines, emphasizing the immortality of the soul. Gassendi, a Catholic priest, advocated for a plant-based diet without dogmatism, asserting that decisions in this lifetime were crucial for preparing the body and mind for the next. He admired the historical virtue of vegetarian practitioners and urged scholars to extract and follow the best ideas from throughout history, asserting that, especially among humanists, a vegetarian lifestyle should be embraced.

[ 2 ] Gassendi himself was not a vegetarian, but admitted that "if I were wise, I would abandon [meat] bit by bit, and nourish myself solely on the gifts on the earth ... I do not doubt that I would be happier for longer and more constantly in better health." [ 42 ] Early commentary [ edit ] Samuel Sorbière , a disciple, [ 43 ] recounts Gassendi's life in the first collected edition of the works, by Joseph Bougerel , Vie de Gassendi (1737; 2nd ed., 1770); as does Jean Philibert Damiron , Mémoire sur Gassendi (1839). An abridgment of his philosophy was given by his friend, the celebrated traveller, François Bernier ( Abrégé de la philosophie de Gassendi , 8 vols., 1678; 2nd ed., 7 vols., 1684).

See also [ edit ] Ontological pluralism List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Fisher, Saul (August 28, 2014). "Pierre Gassendi". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ a b c Vere Claiborne Chappell (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Locke , Cambridge University Press, 1994, p. 56.

^ Peter Harrison , The Fall of Man and the Foundations of Science , Cambridge University Press, p. 220: "There has been considerable discussion in the secondary literature about the impact of Boyle's theological voluntatism on his approach to natural philosophy." ^ Caruso 1981 , p. 443.

^ Léon Warnant (1987).

Dictionnaire de la prononciation française dans sa norme actuelle (in French) (3rd ed.). Gembloux: J. Duculot, S. A.

ISBN 978-2-8011-0581-8 .

^ Brundell, Barry (1987).

Pierre Gassendi . Synthese Historical Library. Vol. 30.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-009-3793-2 .

ISBN 978-94-010-8187-0 – via link.springer.com.

^ "Brundell, B., Pierre Gassendi from Aristotelianism to a New Natural Philosophy, D. Reidel Publishing, 1987" (PDF) .

^ Hockey, Thomas (2009).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers .

Springer Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 . Retrieved August 22, 2012 .

^ a b Fisquet, p. 249.

^ Bougerel (1737), p. 6.

^ Ferdinand Belin (1896).

Histoire de l'ancienne université de Provence, ou Histoire de la fameuse université d'Aix: période. 1409-1679 (in French). Paris: A. Picard et fils. pp. 183, 340– 341.

^ "Pierre Gassendi - Biography" .

Maths History .

^ Fisquet, p. 250.

^ Bougerel (1737), pp. 8-9.

Dictionary of Scientific Biography , Gassendi (Gassend), Pierre , retrieved: 2017-08-02.

^ J J O'Connor and E F Robertson, Pierre Gassendi , retrieved: 2017-08-02 [ self-published source ] ^ Bougerel, p. 15.

^ a b Galileo Project page . Bougerel, p. 15.

^ The Archimedes Project , Gassendi, Pierre (actually Pierre Gassend) Archived 2012-02-20 at the Wayback Machine ^ Fisquet, pp. 248, 252, 256.

^ Epistolica Exercitatio, in qua precipua principia philosophiae Roberti Fluddi deteguntur , 1631.

^ Epistola de parheliis .

^ a b "Gassendi - Pierre Gassendi - Biography - Information - Links - Dr Robert A. Hatch" .

^ Patricia Springborg (editor), The Cambridge Companion to Hobbes's Leviathan (2007), p. 422.

^ "www.paulvates.com" .

www.paulvates.com .

^ "LoveToKnow: Advice you can trust" . Archived from the original on 2009-01-25 . Retrieved 2009-01-07 .

^ "Encyclopedie de l'Agora" .

^ Nolan, Lawrence (August 28, 2021). "Descartes' Ontological Argument". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Gassendi, Pierre (1644).

Disquisito metaphysica, seu dubitationes et instantiae adversus Renati Cartesii metaphysicam et responsa (in Latin). Vrin.

^ Descartes, René; Ariew, Roger; Cress, Donald A. (2006-03-10).

Meditations, Objections, and Replies . Hackett Publishing. pp. ix.

ISBN 978-1-60384-350-8 .

^ Cottinghm, Stoothof, Murdoch, Vol. II, CUP 1984, pp.  234-237 ^ Murr, Sylvia, ed. (1997) (in French), Gassendi et l'Europe , Paris: Vrin, ISBN 978-2-7116-1306-9 .

^ De vita, moribus, et placitis Epicuri, seu Animadversiones in X. librum Diog. Laër.

Lyons, 1649; last edition, 1675.

^ Lyons, 1649; Amsterdam, 1684.

^ Desmond M. Clarke, Descartes: A Biography (2006), p. 377.

^ "THE ESSENTIAL GUIDE TO ASTRONOMY - Moon map" (PDF) .

^ a b c Fisher, Saul (2009).

"Pierre Gassendi" . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Geschichte des Materialismus , 3rd ed., i. 233.

^ Richard Popkin , The History of Scepticism from Erasmus to Spinoza (1979), p. 104.

^ Keith Thomas , Religion and the Decline of Magic (1973), p. 418 and p. 770.

^ "Ueberweg" . Archived from the original on 2009-02-03 . Retrieved 2009-01-06 .

^ Amesbury, Richard Fideism Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 26 September 2012 ^ Shapiro, Laura (2007-02-27).

"Meat vs. Potatoes" .

Slate .

ISSN 1091-2339 . Retrieved 2024-01-21 .

^ "Scepticism - Lecture 7b" . Archived from the original on 2012-02-14 . Retrieved 2023-08-09 .

References [ edit ] Seventeenth to nineteenth-century commentary Bougerel, Joseph (1737).

Vie de Pierre Gassendi (in French). Paris: Imprimerie de Jacques Vincent.

Johann Gottlieb Buhle , Geschichte der neuern Philosophie , (1802) iii. 1, 87-222 Jean Philibert Damiron , Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de la philosophie au XVIIe siècle (1864) Feuerbach, Ludwig (1833).

Geschichte der neuern Philosophie von Bacon von Verulam bis Benedict Spinoza . Ansbach: C. Brügel. pp.

127– 150 . Retrieved 2012-02-05 .

Fisquet, Honoré (1864).

La France pontificale: Metropole d'Aix: Digne , 1re partie: Digne et Riez (Paris: Étienne Repos 1864).

C. Güttler , "Gassend oder Gassendi?" in Archiv für Geschichte d. Philos.

x. (1897), pp. 238–242.

F. X. Kiefl , P. Gassendis Erkenninistheorie and seine Stellung zum Materialismus (1893) and "Gassendi's Skepticismus" in Philos. Jahrb. vi.

(1893) Heinrich Ritter , Geschichte der Philosophie , (1851) X. 543-571 Pierre-Félix Thomas , La Philosophie de Gassendi (Paris, 1889) Twentieth- and twenty-first-century commentary Caruso, Esther (1981). "Sul nominalismo di Gassendi".

Rivista critica di storia della filosofia .

36 (4): 438– 450.

JSTOR 44022083 .

Alberti Antonina (1988).

Sensazione e realtà. Epicuro e Gassendi , Florence, Leo Olschki.

ISBN 88-222-3608-4 Olivier Bloch (1971).

La philosophie de Gassendi. Nominalisme, matérialisme et métaphysique , La Haye, Martinus Nijhoff, ISBN 90-247-5035-0 George Sidney Brett (1908).

Philosophy of Gassendi , London, Macmillan Barry Brundell (1987).

Pierre Gassendi. From Aristotelianism to a New Natural Philosophy , Dordrecht, Springer Franz Daxecker (2004).

The Physicist and Astronomer Christoph Scheiner: Biography, Letters, Works , Innsbruck, Publikations of Innsbruck University 246, ISBN 3-901249-69-9 Saul Fisher (2005).

Pierre Gassendi's Philosophy and Science , Leiden/Boston, Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-11996-3 Lynn Sumida Joy (1987).

Gassendi the Atomist: Advocate of History in an Age of Science , Cambridge, UK/New York, Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-52239-0 Antonia Lolordo (2007).

Pierre Gassendi and the Birth of Early Modern Philosophy , Cambridge, UK/New York, Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-86613-2 Marco Messeri (1985).

Causa e spiegazione. La fisica di Pierre Gassendi , Milan, Franco Angeli.

ISBN 88-204-4045-8 Margaret J. Osler (1994).

Divine Will and the Mechanical Philosophy: Gassendi and Descartes on Contingency and Necessity in the Created World , Cambridge, UK/New York, Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-46104-9 Rolf W. Puster (1991).

Britische Gassendi-Rezeption am Beispiel John Lockes , Frommann-Holzboog.

ISBN 3-7728-1362-3 Lisa T. Sarasohn (1996).

Gassendi's Ethics: Freedom in a Mechanistic Universe.

Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Reiner Tack (1974).

Untersuchungen zum Philosophie- und Wissenschaftsbegriff bei Pierre Gassendi: (1592–1655) , Meisenheim (am Glan), Hain.

ISBN 3-445-01103-6 Pierre Gassendi (1654).

The Life of Copernicus (1473–1543). The Man Who Did Not Change the World , with notes by Oliver Thill, XulonPress, 2002, ISBN 1-59160-193-2 The Life of Copernicus (1473-1543) Tertiary sources This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Adamson, Robert (1911). " Gassendi, Pierre ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 11 (11th ed.). pp.

503– 504.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Pierre Gassendi at Wikimedia Commons Works by or about Pierre Gassendi at Wikisource Quotations related to Pierre Gassendi at Wikiquote Works by Pierre Gassendi at Open Library Fisher, Saul.

"Pierre Gassendi" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

De proportione qua gravia decidentia accelerantur (1646) Concerning Happiness MathPages - Mercurius in Sole Visus Timeline v t e Epicureanism Philosophers Greek Founders Epicurus Metrodorus Polyaenus Hermarchus Students of Epicurus Idomeneus of Lampsacus Colotes Carneiscus Leontion Themista Leonteus Batis Nikidion Scholarchs of The Garden Epicurus Hermarchus Polystratus Dionysius Basilides Apollodorus Zeno of Sidon Phaedrus Patro Philonides of Laodicea Diogenes of Seleucia Diogenes of Tarsus Demetrius Lacon Roman Alcaeus and Philiscus Amafinius Rabirus Titus Albucius Catius Calpurnius Piso Philodemus Atticus Lucretius Siro Diogenes of Oenoanda Works On Nature Canon Principal Doctrines Letters of Epicurus To Herodotus To Pythocles To Menoeceus To Mother De rerum natura English Herculaneum papyri Paris 4 Vatican Sayings Concepts Atomism Ataraxia Clinamen Epilogism Eudaimonia Free will Hedone Javelin argument Otium Parrhesia Phantasiai Epicurean paradox Principle of Multiple Explanations Problem of the criterion Related articles Villa of the Papyri Epicuri de grege porcum Epikoros Epicurea Pierre Gassendi v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain 2 3 4 Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pierre_Gassendi&oldid=1294174713 " Categories : 1592 births 1655 deaths Atomists People from Alpes-de-Haute-Provence 17th-century writers in Latin 17th-century French philosophers 17th-century French Catholic theologians 17th-century French mathematicians Academic staff of the Collège de France Empiricists 17th-century astrologers 17th-century French astronomers Catholic clergy scientists Writers about religion and science French vegetarianism activists Scientists from Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur Activists from Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur Vegetarianism writers Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from August 2017 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages with French IPA Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons link from Wikidata Open Library ID different from Wikidata Articles with Open Library links This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 02:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pierre Gassendi 50 languages Add topic

