Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Bibliography 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Fritjof Capra 34 languages Afrikaans العربية تۆرکجه Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American physicist and author (born 1939) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Fritjof Capra" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fritjof Capra Capra in 2010 Born ( 1939-02-01 ) February 1, 1939 (age 86) Vienna, Austria Alma mater University of Vienna Known for Ecoliteracy Scientific career Fields Physics , systems theory Institutions U.C. Santa Cruz , U.C. Berkeley , San Francisco State University Writing career Notable works The Tao of Physics The Turning Point Fritjof Capra (born February 1, 1939) is an Austrian-born American author, physicist , systems theorist and deep ecologist .

[ 1 ] [ non-primary source needed ] In 1995, he became a founding director of the Center for Ecoliteracy in Berkeley, California . He was on the faculty of Schumacher College which was disestablished in 2024.

Capra is the author of several books, including The Tao of Physics (1975), The Turning Point (1982), Uncommon Wisdom (1988), The Web of Life (1996), and The Hidden Connections (2002), and co-author of The Systems View of Life (2014).

Life and work [ edit ] Born in Vienna, Austria, Capra attended the University of Vienna , where he earned his PhD in theoretical physics in 1966. He conducted research in particle physics and systems theory at the University of Paris (1966–1968), the University of California, Santa Cruz (1968–1970), the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (1970), Imperial College, London (1971–1974) and the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (1975–1988). While at Berkeley, he was a member of the Fundamental Fysiks Group , founded in May 1975 by Elizabeth Rauscher and George Weissmann , which met weekly to discuss philosophy and quantum physics .

[ 2 ] He also taught at U.C. Santa Cruz, U.C. Berkeley , and San Francisco State University .

He has written popular books on the implications of science, notably The Tao of Physics (1975), subtitled An Exploration of the Parallels Between Modern Physics and Eastern Mysticism .

The Tao of Physics asserts that both physics and metaphysics lead inexorably to the same knowledge. After touring Germany in the early 1980s, Capra co-wrote Green Politics with author Charlene Spretnak in 1984.

[ citation needed ] He is fluent in German, English, French and Italian.

[ citation needed ] Capra contributed to the screenplay for the 1990 movie Mindwalk , starring Liv Ullmann , Sam Waterston and John Heard . The film is loosely based on his book, The Turning Point .

[ citation needed ] In 1991 Capra co-authored Belonging to the Universe with David Steindl-Rast , a Benedictine monk . Using Thomas Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions as a stepping stone, the book explores parallels between new paradigm thinking in science and in  religion; the authors posit that, together, these new paradigms offer remarkably compatible views about the universe.

[ citation needed ] Capra advocates that Western culture abandon conventional linear thought and the mechanistic views of Descartes . Critiquing the reductionistic Cartesian view that everything can be studied in parts to understand the whole, he encourages a holistic approach. In The Web of Life , Capra focuses on systemic information generated by the relationships among all parts as a significant additional factor in understanding the  character of the whole, emphasizing the web-like structure of all systems and the interconnectedness of all parts.

[ citation needed ] He is a founding director of the Center for Ecoliteracy located in Berkeley , California, which promotes ecology and systems thinking in primary and secondary education.

[ citation needed ] Capra is an Earth Charter International Council member.

[1] Bibliography [ edit ] The Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the Parallels Between Modern Physics and Eastern Mysticism (1975), Capra's first book, draws parallels between Vedic and Oriental mystical traditions and the discoveries of 20th century physics. Originally published by a small publisher with no budget for promotion, the book became a bestseller by word of mouth until it was picked up by a major American publishing house. It has now been published in 43 editions in 23 languages. It is credited as a major influence for the rise of quantum mysticism .

[ 3 ] The Turning Point: Science, Society, and the Rising Culture (1982) explains perceived scientific and economic crises. It begins by outlining and tracing the history of science and economics, and criticizing Cartesian , Newtonian , and reductionist paradigms. It argues that such viewpoints have grown inadequate for modern technology and ecology needs, and that science needs to develop the concepts and insights of holism and systems theory to solve society's complex problems.

[ 4 ] Green Politics (1984), co-authored with Charlene Spretnak , analyzes the rise of the Green Party in Germany and similar ecology-oriented political parties in other European countries. It has been published in 7 editions in 4 languages.

Uncommon Wisdom (1988) describes dialogues and personal encounters between himself and the thinkers who helped to shape the theme of The Turning Point . It has been published in 16 editions and 12 languages.

Belonging to the Universe: Explorations on the Frontiers of Science and Spirituality (1993) was coauthored with David Steindl-Rast and Thomas Matus. The book explores parallels between ways of thinking in science and Christian theology . It has been published in 10 editions in 7 languages.

The Web of Life: A New Scientific Understanding of Living Systems (1996) starts from the conceptual framework presented in The Turning Point , summarizes the mathematics of complexity , and offers a synthesis of recent nonlinear theories of living systems that have dramatically increased our understanding of the key characteristics of life. Capra makes extensive reference to the work of Humberto Maturana , Francisco Varela , Ilya Prigogine , Gregory Bateson and others in proposing a new, systems-based scientific approach for describing the interrelationships and interdependence of psychological, biological, physical, social, and cultural phenomena. The book has been published in 14 editions in 10 languages.

The Hidden Connections (2002) extends the framework of systems and complexity theory to the social domain and uses the extended framework to discuss some of the critical issues of our time.

The Science of Leonardo: Inside the Mind of the Great Genius of the Renaissance (2007). Its central idea is that Leonardo da Vinci's science is a science of living forms, of quality, which can be seen as a distant forerunner of today's complexity and systems theories. The book has been published in 7 editions in 5 languages.

Learning from Leonardo: Decoding the Notebooks of a Genius (2013), offers a glimpse into the works of the prescient thinker, Leonardo da Vinci , whose pioneering genius contributed to many scientific fields.

The Systems View of Life (2014), co-authored with Pier Luigi Luisi , offers radical solutions to twenty-first century challenges by focusing on the connected world and examining life through its inextricably linked systems.

[ clarification needed ] Patterns of Connection: Essential Essays from Five Decades (2021) is a personal account of the author's intellectual journey, documented by a series of essays together with extensive commentaries that interweave the essays and provide historical and philosophical context.

See also [ edit ] Arne Næss Center for Ecoliteracy Deep Ecology Ecoliteracy Ervin Laszlo Gaia hypothesis Gregory Bateson Hindu idealism Holism Systems theory References [ edit ] ^ Fritjof Capra homepage , retrieved July 14, 2009.

^ Kaiser, David .

How the Hippies Saved Physics: Science, Counterculture and the Quantum Revival . W. W. Norton & Company, 2011, pp. xv–xvii, xxiii.

^ Ascari, Maurizio (1 March 2009). "From Spiritualism to Syncretism: Twentieth-Century Pseudo-Science and the Quest for Wholeness".

Interdisciplinary Science Reviews .

34 (1): 9– 21.

Bibcode : 2009ISRv...34....9A .

doi : 10.1179/174327909X421425 .

ISSN 0308-0188 .

^ Capra, Fritjof (1982).

The Turning Point , Bantam Books, New York.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Fritjof Capra .

Official website The Turning Point Home on the web for the Center for Ecoliteracy Interview with Fritjof Capra by Francis Pisani Fritjof Capra at IMDb Earth Charter International Board and Council-Fritjof Capra v t e American Book Awards winners (1980–1999) 1980 Douglas Woolf Edward Dorn Jayne Cortez Leslie Marmon Silko Mei-mei Berssenbrugge Milton Murayama Quincy Troupe Rudolfo Anaya 1981 Alta Alan Chong Lau Bienvenido N. Santos Helen Adam Lionel Mitchell Miguel Algarín Nicholasa Mohr Peter Blue Cloud Robert Kelly Rose Drachler Susan Howe Toni Cade Bambara 1982 Al Young Duane Niatum E. L. Mayo Frank Chin Hilton Obenzinger Him Mark Lai / Genny Lim / Judy Yung Jerome Rothenberg Joyce Carol Thomas Leroy Quintana Lorna Dee Cervantes Ronald Phillip Tanaka Russell Banks Tato Laviera 1983 Barbara Christian Cecilia Liang Evangelina Vigil-Piñón Harriet Rohmer James D. Houston Jessica Tarahata Hagedorn John A. Williams Joy Kogawa Judy Grahn Nash Candelaria Peter Guralnick Seán Ó Tuama 1984 Cecil Brown Gary Snyder Howard Schwartz / Mark Podwal Imamu Amiri Baraka Jesús Colón Joseph Bruchac Maurice Kenny Mei-mei Berssenbrugge Miné Okubo Paule Marshall Ruthanne Lum McCunn / You-shan Tang / Ellen Lai-shan Yeung Thomas McGrath Venkatesh Kulkarni William J. Kennedy 1985 Angela Jackson Arnold Genthe / John Kuo Wei Tchen Colleen J. McElroy Gary Soto Peter Irons Keiho Soga / Taisanboku Mori / Sojin Takei / Muin Ozaki Louise Erdrich Maureen Owen May Sarton Robert Edward Duncan Ron Jones Sandra Cisneros Sonia Sanchez Julia Vinograd William Oandasan 1986 Anna Lee Walters Cherríe Moraga / Gloria E. Anzaldúa Helen Barolini Jeff Hannusch Linda Hogan Miguel Algarín Natasha Borovsky Raymond Federman Susan Howe Terence Winch Toshio Mori 1987 Ai Ana Castillo Cyn Zarco Daniel McGuire Dorothy Bryant Etheridge Knight Gary Giddins Harvey Pekar James Welch John Wieners Juan Felipe Herrera Lucia Chiavola Birnbaum Michael Mayo Septima Poinsette Clark / Cynthia Stokes Brown Terry McMillan 1988 Allison Blakely Charles Olson Daisy Bates David Halberstam Edward Sanders Gerald Vizenor Jimmy Santiago Baca Kesho Y. Scott / Cherry Muhanji / Egyirba High Marlon K. Hom Benjamin Hoff Ronald Sukenick Salvatore La Puma Toni Morrison Wing Tek Lum / Tek Lum Lum 1989 Alma Luz Villanueva Askia M. Touré Audre Lorde Carolyn Lau Emory Elliott Eduardo Galeano Frank Chin Henry Louis Gates Isabel Allende J. California Cooper Jennifer Stone Josephine Gattuso Hendin Leslie Scalapino Shuntaro Tanikawa Charles Fanning William Minoru Hohri 1990 Adrienne Kennedy Barbara Grizzuti Harrison Daniela Gioseffi Elizabeth Woody Hualing Nieh Itabari Njeri James M. Freeman John C. Walter / J. Raymond Jones John Norton José Emilio González Sergei Kan Lloyd A. Thompson Martin Bernal Michelle T. Clinton / Sesshu Foster Miles Davis Paula Gunn Allen Shirley Geok-lin Lim / Mayumi Tsutakawa / Margarita Donnelly 1991 Alejandro Murguía bell hooks Bruce Wright Charley Trujillo D. H. Melhem Deborah Keenan Jessica Hagedorn John Edgar Wideman Joy Harjo Karen Tei Yamashita Lucia Berlin Mary Crow Dog Meridel Le Sueur Mill Hunk Herald Collective Nora Marks Dauenhauer / Richard Dauenhauer R. Baxter Miller Thomas Centolella 1992 A'Lelia Perry Bundles Art Spiegelman Benjamin Alire Sáenz Donna J. Haraway Fritjof Capra José Antonio Burciaga Keith Gilyard Lucy Thompson Norma Field Peter Bacho Peter Kalifornsky Raymond Andrews Sandra Scofield Sheila Hamanaka Verlyn Klinkenborg William B. Branch / Amiri Baraka / August Wilson 1993 Asake Bomani / Belvie Rooks Christopher Mogil / Peter Woodrow Cornel West Denise Giardina Diane Glancy Eugene B. Redmond Francisco X. Alarcón Gerald Graff Jack Beatty Leroy V. Quintana Katherine Peter Nelson George Ninotchka Rosca 1994 Giose Rimanelli Eric Drooker Graciela Limón Gregory J. Reed Janet Campbell Hale Jill Nelson Lawson Fusao Inada Nicole Blackman Paul Gilroy Ronald Takaki Rose L. Glickman Tino Villanueva Virginia L. Kroll 1995 Abraham Rodriguez Herb Boyd / Robert L. Allen Denise Chavez John Egerton John Ross Thomas Avena Linda Raymond Li-Young Lee Marianna De Marco Torgovnick Marnie Mueller Peter Quinn Sandra Martz Gordon Henry Jr.

Tricia Rose 1996 Agate Nesaule Arthur Sze Chang-Rae Lee Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni E.J. Miller Laino Glenn C. Loury James W. Loewen Joe Sacco / Edward Said Kimiko Hahn Maria Espinosa Robert Viscusi Sherman Alexie Ron Sakolsky / Fred Weihan Ho Stephanie Cowell William H. Gass 1997 Alurista Derrick Bell Dorothy Barresi Guillermo Gómez-Peña Louis Owens Martín Espada Montserrat Fontes Noel Ignatiev Shirley Geok-lin Lim Sunaina Maira Thulani Davis Tom De Haven William M. Banks Brenda Knight 1998 Allison Adelle Hedge Coke Angela Y. Davis Brenda Marie Osbey Don DeLillo Jim Barnes John A. Williams Nancy Rawles Nora Okja Keller Sandra Benitez Scott DeVeaux Thomas Lynch 1999 Alice McDermott Anna Linzer Brian Ward Chiori Santiago E. Donald Two-Rivers Edwidge Danticat Judith Roche / Meg McHutchison Gioia Timpanelli Gloria Naylor James D. Houston Jerry Lipka / Gerald V. Mohatt / Ciulistet Group Trey Ellis Josip Novakovich Lauro Flores Luís Alberto Urrea Nelson George Speer Morgan Gary Gach Chiori Santiago / Judith Lowry Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project MathSciNet Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fritjof_Capra&oldid=1304264644 " Categories : 20th-century American physicists 21st-century American physicists Austrian physicists American particle physicists American systems scientists Deep ecologists New Age writers Writers about religion and science 20th-century American science writers American spiritual writers Leonardo da Vinci scholars Writers from the San Francisco Bay Area American Book Award winners Scientists from Vienna 1939 births Living people Quantum mysticism advocates 21st-century American science writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from August 2017 All BLP articles lacking sources Pages using embedded infobox templates with the title parameter Articles with hCards All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2017 This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 00:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fritjof Capra 34 languages Add topic

