Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Signs and symptoms Toggle Signs and symptoms subsection 1.1 Seizures 2 Mechanism 3 Diagnosis 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Somatosensory disorder 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medical condition Somatosensory disorder Specialty Neurology A somatosensory disorder is an impairment of the somatosensory system .

Signs and symptoms [ edit ] People may experience numbness, prickling or tingling sensations ( paresthesias ), or the feeling a limb has "fallen asleep" (an indicator of nerve compression ), burning, cutting or other sensations.

[ 1 ] Seizures [ edit ] Certain types of seizures are associated with the somatosensory system. Cortical injury may lead to loss of thermal sensation or the ability to discriminate pain. An aura involving thermal and painful sensations is a phenomenon known to precede the onset of an epileptic seizure or focal seizure. Another type of seizure, called a sensory Jacksonian seizure involves an abnormal, localizable, cutaneous sensation but does not have apparent stimulus. This sensation may progress along a limb or to adjacent cutaneous body areas, reflecting abnormal neuronal firing in the postcentral gyrus where an epileptic discharge is propagated. These episodes in which patients are consciously aware during a seizure have been useful for identifying problems associated with the somatosensory cortex. Patients can describe the nature of the seizure and how they feel during it.

[ 2 ] Mechanism [ edit ] The absence of proprioception or two-point tactile discrimination on one side of the body suggests injury to the contralateral side of the primary somatosensory cortex. However, depending on the extent of the injury, damage can range in loss of proprioception of an individual limb or the entire body. A deficit known as cortical astereognosis of the receptive type describes an inability to make use of tactile sensory information for identifying objects placed in the hand. For example, if this type of injury effects the hand region in the primary somatosensory cortex for one cerebral hemisphere, a patient with closed eyes cannot perceive the position of the fingers on the contralateral hand and will not be able to identify objects such as keys or a cell phone if they are placed into that hand.

[ 2 ] Diagnosis [ edit ] Evaluation of any suspected disease of the somatosensory system is included in a neurological examination of the peripheral nervous system . Modern techniques for testing somatosensory function are still quite crude compared to testing motor function.

[ 1 ] Evaluation of somatosensory stimuli are limited by the patient's interpretation of sensation in response to testing.

Tactile sensation is tested with a cotton wisp or light touch with a finger. Pain is assessed by pinprick or pinwheel ( Wartenberg wheel ). A 128 Hz tuning fork is used for testing vibrations .

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ a b H., Ropper, Allan (2014-05-16).

Adams and Victor's principles of neurology . Samuels, Martin A.,, Klein, Joshua (Tenth ed.). New York.

ISBN 9780071794794 .

OCLC 857402060 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Augustine, James R. (2008).

Human Neuroanatomy . San Diego, CA: Academic Press. p. 360.

ISBN 978-0-12-068251-5 .

External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 10 : R20 ICD - 9-CM : 782.0 MeSH : D020886 v t e Signs and symptoms relating to skin and subcutaneous tissue Disturbances of skin sensation Hypoesthesia Paresthesia Formication Hyperesthesia Hypoalgesia Hyperalgesia Circulation Cyanosis Pallor Livedo Livedo reticularis Flushing Petechia Blanching Edema Peripheral edema Anasarca Other Rash Desquamation Induration Diaphoresis Mass Neck mass Skin Asboe-Hansen sign Auspitz's sign Borsari's sign Braverman's sign Crowe sign Dennie–Morgan fold Darier's sign Fitzpatrick's sign Florid cutaneous papillomatosis Gottron's sign Hutchinson's sign Janeway lesion Kerr's sign Koebner's phenomenon Koplik's spots Leser-Trelat sign Nikolsky's sign Pastia's sign Russell's sign Wickham striae Wolf's isotopic response Munro's microabscess Nails Aldrich-Mees' lines Beau's lines Muehrcke's lines Terry's nails Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Somatosensory_disorder&oldid=1183745305 " Category : Somatosensory system Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 This page was last edited on 6 November 2023, at 06:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Somatosensory disorder 1 language Add topic

