Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meaning 2 Origin and inspiration 3 Other applications 4 Rhetorical use in the German election of November 1933 5 Criticism 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Dasein 27 languages Afrikaans العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term in Martin Heidegger's philosophy Dasein ( / ˈ d ɑː z aɪ n / ; [ 1 ] German: [ˈdaːzaɪn] ) is a term in the philosophy of Martin Heidegger . Adopted from the ordinary German word Dasein meaning "existence", [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Heidegger used it to refer to the mode of being that he believed is particular to human beings . A being that is aware of and must confront such issues as personhood , mortality , and the dilemma or paradox of living in relationship with other humans while being ultimately alone with oneself.

Meaning [ edit ] In German, Dasein is the vernacular term for "existence". It is derived from da-sein , which literally means "being-there" or "there-being".

[ 4 ] In a philosophical context, it was first used by Leibniz and Wolff in the 17th century, as well as by Kant and Hegel in the 18th and 19th; however, Heidegger's later association of the word with human existence was uncommon and not of special philosophical significance during this period.

[ 5 ] Dasein [ 6 ] for Heidegger is a mode of being involved with and caring for the immediate world in which one lives, while always remaining aware of the contingent element of that involvement, of the priority of the world to the self, and of the evolving nature of the self itself.

[ 4 ] The opposite of this authentic self is everyday and inauthentic Dasein, the forfeiture of one's individual meaning, destiny and lifespan, in favour of an (escapist) immersion in the public everyday world—the anonymous, identical world of the They and the Them.

[ 7 ] : 64–81 In harmony with Nietzsche 's critique of the subject , as something definable in terms of consciousness, Heidegger distinguished Dasein from consciousness in order to emphasize the way that "Being" shapes our entire understanding and interpretation of the world.

"This entity which each of us is himself...we shall denote by the term 'Dasein ' " (Heidegger, trans. 1927/1962, p.27).

[ 8 ] "[Dasein is] that entity which in its Being has this very Being as an issue..." (Heidegger, trans. 1927/1962, p.68).

[ 8 ] Heidegger sought to use the concept of Dasein to uncover the primal nature of " Being " ( Sein ), agreeing with Nietzsche and Dilthey [ 9 ] : 48 that Dasein is always a being engaged in the world: neither a subject, nor the objective world alone, but the coherence of being-in-the-world . This ontological basis of Heidegger's work thus opposes the Cartesian "abstract agent" in favour of practical engagement with one's environment.

[ 10 ] : 61 Dasein is revealed by projection into, and engagement with, a personal world [ 11 ] : 220 —a never-ending process of involvement with the world as mediated through the projects of the self.

[ 4 ] Heidegger considered that language, everyday curiosity, logical systems , and common beliefs obscure Dasein's nature from itself.

[ 12 ] : 69–70 Authentic choice means turning away from the collective world of Them, to face Dasein, one's individuality, one's own limited life-span, one's own being.

[ 13 ] : 81–89 Heidegger thus intended the concept of Dasein to provide a stepping stone in the questioning of what it means to be —to have one's own being, one's own death, one's own truth.

[ 14 ] Heidegger also saw the question of Dasein as extending beyond the realms disclosed by positive science or in the history of metaphysics .  "Scientific research is not the only manner of Being which this entity can have, nor is it the one which lies closest. Moreover, Dasein itself has a special distinctiveness as compared with other entities; [...] it is ontically distinguished by the fact that, in its very Being, that Being is an issue for it." [ 15 ] Being and Time stressed the ontological difference between entities and the being of entities: "Being is always the Being of an entity." [ 16 ] Establishing this difference is the general motif running through Being and Time .

Some scholars disagree with this interpretation, however, arguing that for Heidegger Dasein denoted a structured awareness or an institutional "way of life".

[ 17 ] Others suggest that Heidegger's early insistence on the ontological priority of Dasein was muted in his post-war writings.

[ 11 ] : 44 Origin and inspiration [ edit ] See also: Buddhism and Western philosophy § Heidegger Some have argued for an origin of Dasein in Chinese philosophy and Japanese philosophy : according to Tomonobu Imamichi , Heidegger's concept of Dasein was inspired—although Heidegger remained silent on this—by Okakura Kakuzo 's concept of das-in-der-Welt-sein (being in the world) expressed in The Book of Tea to describe Zhuangzi 's Taoist philosophy, which Imamichi's teacher had offered to Heidegger in 1919, after having followed lessons with him the year before.

[ 18 ] Parallel concepts are also found in Indian philosophy [ 19 ] [ 20 ] and in Native American lore.

[ 21 ] Other applications [ edit ] Eero Tarasti considered Dasein very important in Existential Semiotics . In Tarasti's view the term Dasein has been given a "broader" meaning, has stopped meaning the condition of an individual being flung into the world, having instead come to signify an "existential phase" with the sociohistoric characteristics from which signs extensively emerge.

[ 22 ] : 24–30 From this point of view, transcendence is the desire to surpass realist acceptance of the world as it is and to move towards a political, ethical and planned reality of subjectivity in semiotic relations with the world.

Jacques Lacan turned in the 1950s to Heidegger's Dasein for his characterisation of the psychoanalyst as being-for-death ( être-pour-la-mort ).

[ 23 ] Similarly, he saw the analyst as searching for authentic speech, as opposed to "the subject who loses his meaning in the objectifications of discourse...[which] will give him the wherewithal to forget his own existence and his own death".

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] : 60 Alfred Schütz distinguished between direct and indirect social experience, emphasising that in the latter, "My orientation is not toward the existence ( Dasein ) of a concrete individual Thou. It is not toward any subjective experiences now being constituted in all their uniqueness in another's mind".

[ 26 ] : 183 Aleksandr Dugin uses Dasein as the foundation for the Fourth Political Theory , emphasizing Dasein and its role in Russian society. He puts this in opposition to Western (more specifically American) society, which is far too individualistic with an inauthentic view of individuality.

[ 27 ] Rhetorical use in the German election of November 1933 [ edit ] Heidegger used the concept of Dasein to discuss Nazi ideology, and to advocate support for Hitler . In the context of the German election of November 1933 – in which the electorate was presented with a single Nazi-approved list of candidates – he said the following: The German people has been summoned by the Führer to vote; the Führer, however, is asking nothing from the people; rather, he is giving the people the possibility of making, directly, the highest free decision of all: whether it – the entire people – wants its own existence ( Dasein ), or whether it does not want it. [...] On November 12, the German people as a whole will choose its future, and this future is bound to the Führer. [...] There are not separate foreign and domestic policies. There is only one will to the full existence ( Dasein ) of the State. The Führer has awakened this will in the entire people and has welded it into a single resolve.

[ 28 ] Criticism [ edit ] Theodor W. Adorno criticised Heidegger's concept of Dasein as an idealistic retreat from historical reality.

[ 29 ] Richard Rorty considered that with Dasein, Heidegger was creating a conservative myth of being, complicit with the Romantic elements of Nazism .

[ 30 ] According to Julian Wolfreys, "There is no direct 'face'-to-'face' relation for Heidegger; despite his invaluable critique of ontology, he still reduces the relation between Dasein and Dasein as mediated by the question and problematic of being." [ 31 ] : 110–111 See also [ edit ] Being Face-to-face (philosophy) Existenz Generalised other Heideggerian terminology Nihilism Pre-Socratics Sartre Self-awareness Soul Thing-in-itself True self and false self References [ edit ] ^ "Dasein" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ Literally 'being there' or 'presence', from da 'there' + sein 'to be'. After the publication of Being and Time , Heidegger came to prefer to hyphenate the term as Da-sein ^ Stambaugh, Joan (1996). "Translator's Introduction".

Being and Time . State University of New York Press. p. xiv.

^ a b c J. Childers/G. Hentzi eds., The Columbia Dictionary of Modern Literary and Cultural Criticism (1995) p. 70 ^ Inwood, Michael (1992).

A Hegel Dictionary .

Blackwood . p. 93.

^ Because Heidegger's usage is non-standard and difficult to pin down, it has been incorporated into the English literature as a term. Both translations of Being and Time (John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson [1962] and Joan Stambaugh [1992, revised 2010]) retain the German as a term produced in Roman font, not foreign-language italics.

^ Collins, J.; Selina, H.; & Appignanesi, R.

(1998).

Heidegger for Beginners (Duxford, Cambridge: Icon Books), pp. 64–81.

^ a b Heidegger, M. (1962).

Being and Time , Translated by John Macquarrie & Edward Robinson . London: S.C.M. Press.

^ Collins, J.; Selina, H.; & Appignanesi, R. (1998).

Heidegger for Beginners (Duxford, Cambridge: Icon Books), p. 48.

^ Collins, J.; Selina, H.; & Appignanesi, R. (1998).

Heidegger for Beginners (Duxford, Cambridge: Icon Books), p. 61.

^ a b Philipse, Herman (2021-05-11).

Heidegger's Philosophy of Being: A Critical Interpretation .

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 978-1-4008-2295-9 .

^ Collins, J.; Selina, H.; & Appignanesi, R. (1998).

Heidegger for Beginners (Duxford, Cambridge: Icon Books), pp. 69–70.

^ Collins, J.; Selina, H.; & Appignanesi, R. (1998).

Heidegger for Beginners (Duxford, Cambridge: Icon Books), pp. 81–89.

^ Roudinesco, E.

, Jacques Lacan: An Outline of a Life and History of a System of Thought ( Cambridge : Polity Press , 1999), p. 96.

^ Heidegger, Martin. "The Ontological Priority of the Question of Being." Being and Time / Translated by John Macquarrie & Edward Robinson. London: S.C.M., 1962. 32 ^ Heidegger, Martin. "The Ontological Priority of the Question of Being." Being and Time / Translated by John Macquarrie & Edward Robinson. London: S.C.M., 1962. 29.

^ See John Haugeland's article "Reading Brandom Reading Heidegger".

"Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-01-07 . Retrieved 2009-06-09 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) .

^ Tomonobu Imamichi (2004).

In Search of Wisdom: One Philosopher's Journey . LTCB international library selection. Vol. 15. Translated by Mary E. Foster. International House of Japan.

ISBN 9784120029868 .

^ Mehta, J. L.

(1992) [1987].

"Heidegger and Vedānta: reflections on a questionable theme" . In Parkes, Graham (ed.).

Heidegger and Asian Thought (First Indian ed.).

Motilal Banarsidass . pp.

15–46 .

ISBN 81-208-0802-9 .

For any one in search of "philosophemes" common to Heidegger and Vedanta, or of similar-looking ideas in them, there is a great deal to be found regarding man's nature, the world, and man's relationship to it, the unity of Being, the identity between man and Being. (p. 30) ^ Correya, Bosco (2018-03-25).

"Heideggerian Seinsdenken and Advaita Vedata of Sankara" . St. Pius X Province.

^ Elgin, Duane (2009).

The Living Universe: Where Are We? Who Are We? Where Are We Going?

. Berrett-Koehler Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-60509-904-0 .

American Indian lore speaks of three miracles. The first miracle is that anything exists at all. The second miracle is that living things exist. The third miracle is that living things exist that know they exist. As human beings conscious of ourselves, we represent the third miracle. (Ch. 1 ¶ 1) ^ Tarasti, Eero (2000).

Existential Semiotics . Advances in Semiotics.

Indiana University Press . pp.

24–30 .

ISBN 978-0-253-33722-1 .

^ Roudinesco, É.

, Jacques Lacan (1999) p. 249-50 ^ Jacques Lacan, Ecrits (1997) p. 70 ^ Pettigrew, David; Raffoul, François (1996-01-01).

Disseminating Lacan .

SUNY Press .

ISBN 978-0-7914-2785-9 .

^ Schutz, Alfred (1967).

The Phenomenology of the Social World .

Evanston, IL : Northwestern University Press . p.

183 .

ISBN 978-0-8101-0390-0 .

^ Dugin, Alexander (2012).

The Fourth Political Theory . Translated by Sleboda, Mark; Millerman, Michael. Arktos Media. pp.

1– 50.

^ Heidegger, M., "German Men and Women!" , a speech delivered on 10 November 1933 at the University of Freiburg ; printed in the Freiburger Studentenzeitung , November 10, 1933. English translation in R. Wolin , ed., The Heidegger Controversy (MIT Press, 1993), chapter 2.

^ Jameson, Fredric (2005).

Michael Hardt ; Kathi Weeks (eds.).

The Jameson Reader .

Blackwell Publishers . p. 75.

ISBN 978-0-631-20269-1 .

OCLC 864874128 .

^ Collins, Jeff; Selina, Howard; Appignanesi, Richard (1998).

Heidegger for Beginners . Icon Books. pp. 170, 110.

ISBN 1-84046-003-2 .

OCLC 722818057 .

^ Wolfreys, Julian (2015-03-08).

Introducing Criticism in the 21st Century .

Edinburgh University Press .

ISBN 978-0-7486-9531-7 .

External links [ edit ] Martin Heidegger ( Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ) v t e Martin Heidegger Philosophy Aletheia Dasein Ekstase Fundamental ontology Gestell Hermeneutic circle " Language speaks " Metaphysics of presence Ontic Terminology Thrownness World disclosure Works Being and Time (1927) " What Is Metaphysics?

" (1929) Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics (1929) " Introduction to Metaphysics " (1935) Black Notebooks (1931–41) " The Age of the World Picture " (1938) Contributions to Philosophy (1936–1938) " Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister" " (1942) " Letter on Humanism " (1947) The Question Concerning Technology (1949) " The Origin of the Work of Art " (1950) What Is Called Thinking?

(1951–2) What Is Philosophy?

(1955) " Only a God Can Save Us " (1966) Heidegger Gesamtausgabe Film and TV Der Zauberer von Meßkirch (1989) Human, All Too Human (1999) The Ister (2004) Being in the World (2010) Related topics Heidegger scholars Heidegger Studies Studia Heideggeriana Relationship with Nazism Cassirer–Heidegger debate Thing theory v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Existentialism Variants Atheistic Christian Jewish Islamic Nihilist Phenomenological Concepts Abandonment Absurdism Angst Authenticity Bad faith Being in itself Dasein Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Leap of faith Meaning Nihilism Other Ressentiment Thrownness People Artists Beckett Buzzati Camus Cioran Dostoevsky Ellison Fondane Giacometti Ionesco Kafka Mahfouz Marcel Sartre Unamuno Wilson Wright Philosophers Abbagnano Arendt Barth Berdyaev Buber Bultmann Camus Carlyle Cioran Beauvoir Fanon Flusser Fondane Heidegger Husserl James Jaspers Kaufmann Kierkegaard Levinas Marcel May Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rosenzweig Sartre Shestov Soloveitchik Tillich Unamuno Wilson Wright Zapffe Related Continental philosophy German idealism Marxist humanism Phenomenology Transcendentalism Western Marxism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dasein&oldid=1306386458 " Categories : Ontology Phenomenology Existentialist concepts 20th century in philosophy German philosophy Philosophy of Martin Heidegger Hidden categories: Articles containing German-language text CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with German IPA Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 13:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dasein 27 languages Add topic

