Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Duties 2 Administration Toggle Administration subsection 2.1 Leadership 2.2 Offices 3 Programs 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Washington State Department of Ecology 3 languages فارسی Français Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Washington Department of Ecology ) Environmental protection agency for Washington State, United States of America Department of Ecology Agency overview Formed February 23, 1970 ( 1970-02-23 ) Headquarters 300 Desmond Drive Southeast Lacey, Washington , U.S.

Employees approx.

2,100 (2023) [ 1 ] Annual budget $2.8 billion (2023-2025) [ 1 ] Agency executive Casey Sixkiller, Director Website ecology .wa .gov The Washington State Department of Ecology (sometimes referred to simply as " Ecology ") is the state of Washington 's environmental regulatory agency. Created on February 23, 1970, it was the first environmental regulation agency in the United States , predating the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) by several months.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The department administers laws and regulations pertaining to the areas of water quality , water rights and water resources, shoreline management, toxics clean-up, nuclear waste, hazardous waste, and air quality. It also conducts monitoring and scientific assessments.

[ 4 ] The Department of Ecology has a $2.8 billion budget for the 2023–25 biennium and approximately 2,100 full-time employees.

[ 5 ] [ 1 ] Duties [ edit ] The department's authorizing statute is RCW 43.21A.

[ 6 ] It is responsible for administering the Shoreline Management Act (RCW 90.58), the Water Code (RCW 90.03), the state Water Pollution Control Act (RCW 90.48), the state Clean Air Act (RCW 70.94), and the Model Toxics Control Act.

Appeals of Ecology's decisions are made to the Environmental Hearings office, which includes the Pollution Control Hearings Board and the Shoreline Hearings Board, as well as several boards that address appeals of decisions by the state Department of Fish and Wildlife and the Department of Natural Resources.

Administration [ edit ] Leadership [ edit ] The Director of the Department of Ecology is appointed by the Governor and subject to confirmation by the State Senate . The current director is Casey Sixkiller, who replaced Laura Watson in 2025.

[ 7 ] Offices [ edit ] The department has its headquarters office in Lacey, Washington , near the campus of St. Martin's University ; four regional offices located in Lacey (Southwest Region), Union Gap (Central Region), Shoreline (Northwest Region) and Spokane (Eastern Region); and field offices in Port Orchard , Manchester , Bellingham , Mount Vernor , Richland , [ 8 ] and Vancouver .

[ 9 ] Programs [ edit ] The Ecology Youth Corps is a summer jobs program for teenagers in Washington that is managed by the Department of Ecology. Established in 1975, the program is tasked with cleaning litter on state highways and pays hired teenagers a minimum wage.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The Department of Ecology began a vehicle inspection program in 1982, requiring vehicles registered within the state to be inspected for emissions quality. The program ended on December 31, 2019, following a 14-year phase-out approved by the state legislature in 2005 as air quality in Washington cities had improved to above federal standards.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Some emissions testing facilities, including two in Seattle, were repurposed as drive-thru COVID-19 testing sites during the 2020 pandemic .

[ 14 ] The department, via its Office of Chehalis Basin (OCB) and the Chehalis River Basin Flood Authority , oversees and funds flood control programs and initiatives, as well as habitat concerns, for the Chehalis River and its watershed.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] PUD No. 1 of Jefferson County v. Washington Department of Ecology References [ edit ] ^ a b c "2023-25 Budget - Washington State Department of Ecology" . Washington State Department of Ecology . Retrieved June 22, 2025 .

^ "Our history - Washington State Department of Ecology" . Washington State Department of Ecology . Retrieved June 22, 2025 .

^ Blecha, Peter (February 1, 2011).

"Washington State Department of Ecology is authorized on February 12, 1970" .

HistoryLink . Retrieved July 21, 2020 .

^ "Our programs - Washington State Department of Ecology" . Washington State Department of Ecology . Retrieved June 22, 2025 .

^ "Meet our director - Washington State Department of Ecology" . Washington State Department of Ecology . Retrieved June 22, 2025 .

^ "Chapter 43.21A RCW: DEPARTMENT OF ECOLOGY" .

app.leg.wa.gov . Retrieved June 22, 2025 .

^ Walker, Richard.

"Big roles in Washington state for two Native leaders" .

Cherokee Phoenix . Retrieved February 5, 2025 .

^ "Washington State Department of Ecology - Hanford cleanup" . Washington State Department of Ecology.

^ "Contact Us - Washington State Department of Ecology" . Washington State Department of Ecology . Retrieved June 22, 2025 .

^ Sullivan, Olivia (September 5, 2019).

"King County teens clean up roadside litter" .

Seattle Weekly . Retrieved July 21, 2020 .

^ "Ecology Youth Corps" . Washington State Department of Ecology . Retrieved July 21, 2020 .

^ Clarridge, Christine (January 30, 2019).

"The end is near for emissions testing in Washington state" .

The Seattle Times . Retrieved July 23, 2020 .

^ Gilmore, Susan (August 18, 2011).

"State phasing out vehicle-emission testing" .

The Seattle Times . Retrieved July 23, 2020 .

^ O'Sullivan, Joseph (June 4, 2020).

"With more test supplies on hand, Inslee announces expanded testing for new coronavirus" .

The Seattle Times . Retrieved July 23, 2020 .

^ The Chronicle staff (December 1, 2023).

"Strategy in review: Chehalis Basin Flood Warning System wins National Operational Excellence Award" .

The Chronicle . Retrieved May 16, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Washington State Department of Ecology Washington State Environmental and Land Use Hearings Office v t e State of Washington Olympia (capital) Topics Outline Climate change Municipalities Census-designated places Federal lands Indian reservations Geography Earthquakes History Highways Music Parks People Symbols Tourist attractions Society Abortion Cannabis Crime Culture Demographics Economy Agriculture Education Gun laws Homelessness LGBT rights Politics Politics Government Law Constitution Governors Legislature Legislative districts House Senate Ballot measures Congressional delegations Congressional districts City governments State agencies Agriculture Archaeology and Historic Preservation Commerce Corrections Early Learning Ecology Employment Security Enterprise Services Financial Institutions Fish and Wildlife Health Information Services Labor and Industries Licensing Liquor and Cannabis Board Military Natural Resources Parks Institute for Public Policy Public Disclosure Commission Public Stadium Authority Retirement Systems Revenue Services for the Blind Social and Health Services State Patrol Student Achievement Council Transportation Utilities and Transportation Regions Western Kitsap Peninsula Long Beach Peninsula Olympic Peninsula Puget Sound San Juan Islands Skagit Valley Eastern / Inland Central Washington Columbia Plateau Methow Valley Okanogan Country Palouse Yakima Valley Shared Cascade Range Columbia Gorge Columbia River Largest cities Seattle Spokane Tacoma Vancouver Bellevue Kent Everett Renton Spokane Valley Federal Way Yakima Kirkland Bellingham Auburn Kennewick Pasco Redmond Marysville Sammamish Lakewood Richland Shoreline Olympia Lacey Burien Metropolitan areas Greater Seattle Greater Spokane Tri-Cities metropolitan area Wenatchee metropolitan area Greater Portland and Vancouver Counties Adams Asotin Benton Chelan Clallam Clark Columbia Cowlitz Douglas Ferry Franklin Garfield Grant Grays Harbor Island Jefferson King Kitsap Kittitas Klickitat Lewis Lincoln Mason Okanogan Pacific Pend Oreille Pierce San Juan Skagit Skamania Snohomish Spokane Stevens Thurston Wahkiakum Walla Walla Whatcom Whitman Yakima Washington (state) portal Pacific Northwest portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Washington_State_Department_of_Ecology&oldid=1303035587 " Categories : State agencies of Washington (state) State environmental protection agencies of the United States Subnational environment ministries Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2025 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 19:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Washington State Department of Ecology 3 languages Add topic

