Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Godliness 3 Five supreme beings 4 Arihant 5 Tīrthaṅkara 6 Siddhas 7 Devas 8 Jain opposition to creationism 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents God in Jainism 8 languages العربية বাংলা भोजपुरी Español فارسی हिन्दी मैथिली اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia God in Jain religion Part of a series on Jainism Jains History Timeline Index Philosophy Anekantavada Cosmology Ahimsa Karma Dharma Mokṣa Kevala Jnana Dravya Tattva Brahmacarya Aparigraha Gunasthana Saṃsāra Ethics Ethics of Jainism Mahavratas (major vows) Ahiṃsā (non-violence) Satya (truth) Asteya (non-stealing) Brahmacarya (chastity) Aparigraha (non-possession) Anuvratas (further vows) Sāmāyika Sallekhana Jain prayers Bhaktamara Stotra Micchami Dukkadam Navkar Mantra Ṇamōkāra mantra Jai Jinendra Major figures The 24 Tirthankaras Rishabha Pārśva Mahavira Arihant Ganadhara Kundakunda Siddhasenadivākarasuri Samantabhadra Haribhadra Yashovijaya Major sects Schools and Branches Digambara Śvetāmbara Jain literature Samayasāra (Digambara) Pravachanasara (Digambara) Agama (Śvetāmbara) Tattvartha Sutra Dravyasamgraha (Digambara) Kalpa Sūtra (Śvetāmbara) Uttaradhyayana (Śvetāmbara) Cīvaka Cintāmaṇi Silappatikaram Valayapathi Festivals Diwali Mahavir Janma Kalyanak Paryushana Samvatsari Pilgrimages Tirth Abu Palitana Girnar Shikharji Shravanabelagola Other Ekendriya Temples Jain flag Jain symbols Parasparopagraho Jivanam Topics list Religion portal v t e Part of a series on Theism Types of faith Agnosticism Apatheism Atheism Classical theism Deism Henotheism Ietsism Ignosticism Monotheism Monism Dualism Monolatry Kathenotheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Specific conceptions Brahman Creator Demiurge Deus Father Form of the Good God Great Architect Monad Mother Summum bonum Supreme The Lord Trinity Tawhid Ditheism Monism Personal Unitarianism In particular religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Baháʼí Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Samaritanism Indo-Iranian Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Zoroastrianism Chinese Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Attributes Eternalness Existence Gender Names ( "God" ) Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Aseity Transcendence Experiences Practices Belief Esotericism Faith Fideism Gnosis Hermeticism Metaphysics Mysticism Prayer Revelation Worship Related topics Euthyphro dilemma God complex God gene Theology Ontology Problem of evil ( theodicy ) Religion philosophy texts Portrayals of God in popular media Religion portal v t e In Jainism , godliness is said to be the inherent quality of every soul . This quality, however, is subdued by the soul's association with karmic matter. All souls who have achieved the natural state of unlimited bliss, unlimited knowledge ( kevala jnana ), unlimited power and unlimited perception are regarded as God in Jainism . Jainism rejects the idea of a creator deity responsible for this universe's manifestation, creation, or maintenance. Instead, souls (in this case, devis or devas ) who have reached Heaven for their merits and deeds influence the Universe for a fixed period until they undergo reincarnation and continue the cycle of enlightenment. According to Jain doctrine, the universe and its constituents (namely, soul, matter, space, time, and principles of motion) have always existed . All constituents and actions are governed by universal natural laws and a "perfect soul" (an immaterial entity that cannot create or affect a material entity like the universe).

[ 1 ] Definition [ edit ] From the essential perspective, the soul of every living organism is perfect in every way, is independent of any actions of the organism, and is considered God or to have godliness; the epithet of God is given to the soul whose properties manifest in accordance with its inherent nature. There are countably infinite souls in the universe.

According to Ratnakaranda śrāvakācāra (a major Jain text): [ 2 ] आप्तेनो च्छिनदोषेण सर्वज्ञेनागमेशिना । भवितव्यं नियोगेन नान्यथा ह्याप्तता भवेत् ॥५॥ In the nature of things the true God should be free from the faults and weaknesses of the lower nature; [he should be] the knower of all things and the revealer of dharma; in no other way can divinity be constituted.

क्षुत्पिपासाजराजरातक्ड जन्मान्तकभयस्मयाः । न रागद्वेषमोहाश्च यस्याप्तः स प्रकीर्त्यते ॥६॥ He alone who is free from hunger, thirst, senility, disease, birth, death, fear, pride, attachment, aversion, infatuation, worry, conceit, hatred, uneasiness, sweat, sleep and surprise is called a God.

Godliness [ edit ] In Jainism, godliness is said to be an inherent quality of every soul (or every living organism), characterized by infinite bliss, infinite power, Kevala Jnana (pure infinite knowledge), [ 3 ] infinite perception, and perfect manifestation of infinite, though countable, other attributes. There are two possible views after this point: One is to look at the soul from the soul's perspective. This entails explanations of the properties of the soul, its exact structure, composition, and nature, the nature of various states that arise from it and their source attributes as is done in the deep and arcane texts of Samayasāra , Niyamasara and Pravachanasara . Another view is to consider things apart from the soul and their relationships with the soul. According to this view, the qualities of a soul are subdued due to karmas of the soul. In Jainism, karmas are the fundamental particles of nature. A god can be termed one who achieves soul-perfection through Ratnatraya .

This soul perfection is called Kevalin . A god thus becomes a liberated soul: liberated from miseries, cycles of rebirth, the world, karmas , and the body, as well. The liberated soul has achieved nirvana or moksha .

Jainism does not posit the dependency on any supreme being for enlightenment . The Tirthankara is a guide and teacher who points the way to enlightenment, but the struggle for enlightenment is one's own. Moral rewards and sufferings are not the work of a divine being but a result of an innate moral order in the cosmos , a self-regulating mechanism whereby the individual reaps the fruits of his own actions through the workings of the karmas .

Jains believe that to attain enlightenment and ultimately liberation from all karmic bonding, one must practice the ethical principles not only in thought but also in words (speech) and action. Such a practice through lifelong work towards oneself is regarded as observing the Mahavrata ("Great Vows").

Thus, Gods can be categorized into embodied gods, also known as Arihantas , and non-embodied formless gods, called Siddhas . Jainism considers devis and devas to be souls who dwell in the heavens owing to meritorious deeds in their past lives. These souls are in Heaven for a fixed lifespan, and even they must undergo reincarnation as humans to achieve moksha .

Thus, there are infinite gods in Jainism: all equivalent, liberated, and limitless in the manifestation of all attributes.

[ citation needed ] The Self and karmas are separate substances in Jainism, the former living and the latter non-living. The attainment of enlightenment and the one who exists in such a state, and those who have achieved such a state, can be termed "gods". Therefore, beings who have attained omniscience ( kevala jnana ) are worshipped as gods (Arihants). The quality of godliness is one and the same in all of them. Jainism is sometimes regarded as a transtheistic religion, [ 4 ] though it can be atheistic or polytheistic based on the way one defines "God".

Five supreme beings [ edit ] Main article: Pañca-Parameṣṭhi Stella depicting Pañca-Parameṣṭhi (five supreme beings) worthy of veneration as per Jainism In Jainism, the Pañca-Parameṣṭhi (Sanskrit for "five supreme beings") are a fivefold hierarchy of religious authorities worthy of veneration. The five supreme beings are: Arihant Siddha Acharya (Head of the monastic order) Upadhyaya ("Preceptor of less advanced ascetics") Muni or Jain monks Arihant [ edit ] Main article: Arihant (Jainism) A human being who conquers all inner passions and possesses infinite right knowledge ( Kevala Jnana ) is revered as an arihant in Jainism .

[ 5 ] They are also called Jinas (conquerors) or Kevalin (omniscient beings). An arihant is a soul who has destroyed all passions, is totally unattached and without any desire and hence is able to destroy the four ghātiyā karmas and attain kevala jñāna , or omniscience. Such a soul still has a body and four aghātiyā karmas .

Arihantas , at the end of their human life-span, destroy all remaining aghātiyā karmas and attain Siddhahood. There are two kinds of kevalin or arihant : [ 6 ] Sāmānya Kevalin –Ordinary victors, who are concerned with their own salvation.

Tirthankara Kevalin –Twenty-four human spiritual guides (teaching gods), who show the true path to salvation.

[ 7 ] The Dravyasaṃgraha , a major Jain text , states: Having destroyed the four inimical varieties of karmas ( ghātiyā karmas ), possessed of infinite faith, happiness, knowledge and power, and housed in most auspicious body ( paramaudārika śarīra ), that pure soul of the World Teacher (Arihant) should be meditated on.

— Dravyasaṃgraha (50) [ 8 ] Tīrthaṅkara [ edit ] Main article: Tirthankara Image of Vardhamana Mahavira, the 24th and last Tirthankara (Photo: Samanar Hills ) The word Tīrthaṅkara signifies the founder of a tirtha which means a fordable passage across a sea. The Tirthankara show the "fordable path" across the sea of interminable births and deaths.

[ 9 ] Jain philosophy divides the wheel of time in two halves, Utsarpiṇī or ascending time cycle and avasarpiṇī , the descending time cycle. Exactly 24 Tirthankara are said to grace each half of the cosmic time cycle.

[ 10 ] Rishabhanatha was the first Tirthankara and Mahavira was the last Tirthankara of avasarpiṇī .

[ 10 ] Tirthankara revive the fourfold order of Shraman, Shramani, Śrāvaka , and Śrāvika called sangha .

Tirthankara can be called teaching gods who teach the Jain philosophy . However it would be a mistake to regard the tirthankara as gods analogous to the gods of the Hindu pantheon despite the superficial resemblances between Jain and Hindu ways of worship.

[ 11 ] Tirthankara , being liberated, are beyond any kind of transactions with the rest of the universe. They are not the beings who exercise any sort of creative activity or who have the capacity or ability to intervene in answers to prayers.

Tirthamkara-nama-karma is a special type of karma , bondage of which raises a soul to the supreme status of a tirthankara .

[ 12 ] Siddhas [ edit ] Main article: Siddha Although the siddhas (the liberated beings) are formless and without a body, this is how the Jain temples often depict them.

Ultimately all arihantas become siddhas , or liberated souls, at the time of their nirvana . A siddha is a soul who is permanently liberated from the transmigratory cycle of birth and death . Such a soul, having realized its true self, is free from all the Karmas and embodiment. They are formless and dwell in Siddhashila (the realm of the liberated beings) at the apex of the universe in infinite bliss, infinite perception, infinite knowledge and infinite energy.

The Ācārāṅga Sūtra 1.197 describes siddhas in this way: The liberated soul is not long nor small nor round nor triangular nor quadrangular nor circular; it is not black nor blue nor red nor green nor white; neither of good nor bad smell; not bitter nor pungent nor astringent nor sweet; neither rough nor soft; neither heavy nor light; neither cold nor hot; neither harsh nor smooth; it is without body, without resurrection, without contact (of matter), it is not feminine nor masculine nor neuter. The siddha perceives and knows all, yet is beyond comparison. Its essence is without form; there is no condition of the unconditioned. It is not sound, not colour, not smell, not taste, not touch or anything of that kind. Thus I say.

[ 13 ] Siddhashila as per the Jain cosmology Siddhahood is the ultimate goal of all souls. There are infinite souls who have become siddhas and infinite more who will attain this state of liberation.

[d] According to Jainism, Godhood is not a monopoly of some omnipotent and powerful being(s). All souls, with right perception, knowledge and conduct can achieve self-realisation and attain this state. Once achieving this state of infinite bliss and having destroyed all desires, the soul is not concerned with worldly matters and does not interfere in the working of the universe, as any activity or desire to interfere will once again result in influx of karmas and thus loss of liberation.

Jains pray to these passionless Gods not for any favors or rewards but rather pray to the qualities of the God with the objective of destroying the karmas and achieving the Godhood. This is best understood by the term vandetadgunalabhdhaye – i.e. "we pray to the attributes of such Gods to acquire such attributes" [f] [ 14 ] According to Anne Vallely: Jainism is not a religion of coming down. In Jainism it is we who must go up. We only have to help ourselves. In Jainism we have to become God. That is the only thing.

[ 15 ] According to Jains, siddhas have eight specific characteristics or qualities . Ancient Tamil Jain Classic 'Choodamani Nigandu' describes the eight characteristics in a poem, which is given below.

[ 16 ] கடையிலா ஞானத்தோடு காட்சி வீரியமே இன்ப மிடையுறு நாமமின்மை விதித்த கோத்திரங்களின்மை அடைவிலா ஆயுஇன்மை அந்தராயங்கள் இன்மை உடையவன் யாவன் மற்று இவ்வுலகினுக்கு இறைவனாமே The soul that has infinite knowledge (Ananta jnāna, கடையிலா ஞானம்), infinite vision or wisdom (Ananta darshana, கடையிலா காட்சி), infinite power (Ananta labdhi, கடையிலா வீரியம்), infinite bliss (Ananta sukha, கடையிலா இன்பம்), without name (Akshaya sthiti, நாமமின்மை), without association to any caste (Being vitāraga, கோத்திரமின்மை), infinite life span (Being arupa, ஆயுள் இன்மை) and without any change (Aguruladhutaa, அழியா இயல்பு) is God.

Devas [ edit ] Main article: Deva (Jainism) Idol of Padmāvatī devī, śāsanadevī of Lord Parshvanatha at Walkeshwar Temple. According to Digambar Terapanth, worship of such deities is considered as mithyātva or wrong belief. However, in the Bispanthi Digambar tradition and the Shwetambar tradition, Padmavati is a popular Jain goddess.

Jain cosmology offers an elaborate description of heavenly beings ( devas ), but these beings are neither viewed as creators nor are they immortal; they are subject to suffering and change like all other living beings, and must eventually die. In this way, they are similar to the devas of Buddhism . English-language material tends to retain the term "deva" or describe these beings as "deities", "gods" and "goddesses." [ 17 ] Jainism describes existence of śāsanadevatās and śāsanadevīs , the attendants of a Tirthankara , who create the samavasarana or the divine preaching assembly of a Tirthankara . Such heavenly beings are classified as:- Bhavanapatis – Devas dwelling in abodes Vyantaras – Intermediary devas Jyotiṣkas – Luminaries Vaimānikas – Astral devas The souls on account of accumulation of meritorious karmas reincarnate in heavens as devas. Although their life span is quite long, after their merit karmas are exhausted, they once again have to reincarnate back into the realms of humans, animals or hells depending on their karmas. As these devas themselves are not liberated, they have attachments and passions and hence not worthy of worship.

Ācārya Hemachandra decries the worship of such devas: These heavenly beings (devas above) tainted with attachment and passion; having women and weapons by their side, favour some and disfavour some; Such heavenly beings (devas) should not be worshipped by those who desire emancipation [ 18 ] Worship of such devas is considered as mithyatva or wrong belief leading to bondage of karmas.

Jain opposition to creationism [ edit ] Main article: Jainism and non-creationism Jain scriptures reject God as the creator of the universe. Further, it asserts that no god is responsible or causal for actions in the life of any living organism. Ācārya Hemacandra in the 12th century put forth the Jain view of the universe in the Yogaśāstra : [ 19 ] This universe is not created nor sustained by anyone;
It is self-sustaining, without any base or support Besides scriptural authority, Jains also resorted to syllogism and deductive reasoning to refute the creationist theories. Various views on divinity and the universe held by the Vedics , samkhyas , mīmāṃsās , Buddhists and other schools of thought were analyzed, debated and repudiated by various Jain Ācāryas. However, the most eloquent refutation of this view is provided by Ācārya Jinasena in Mahāpurāna , [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] which was quoted by Carl Sagan in his 1980 book Cosmos .

[ 23 ] Some foolish men declare that creator made the world. The doctrine that the world was created is ill advised and should be rejected.

If God created the world, where was he before the creation? If you say he was transcendent then and needed no support, where is he now?
How could God have made this world without any raw material? If you say that he made this first, and then the world, you are faced with an endless regression.

If you declare that this raw material arose naturally you fall into another fallacy, for the whole universe might thus have been its own creator, and have arisen quite naturally.

If God created the world by an act of his own will, without any raw material, then it is just his will and nothing else — and who will believe this silly nonsense?

If he is ever perfect and complete, how could the will to create have arisen in him? If, on the other hand, he is not perfect, he could no more create the universe than a potter could.

If he is form-less, action-less and all-embracing, how could he have created the world? Such a soul, devoid of all modality, would have no desire to create anything.

If he is perfect, he does not strive for the three aims of man, so what advantage would he gain by creating the universe?

If you say that he created to no purpose because it was his nature to do so, then God is pointless. If he created in some kind of sport, it was the sport of a foolish child, leading to trouble.

If he created because of the karma of embodied beings (acquired in a previous creation), then he is not the Almighty Lord, but subordinate to something else.

If out of love for living beings and need of them he made the world, why did he not make creation wholly blissful free from misfortune?

If he were transcendent he would not create, for he would be free: Nor if involved in transmigration, for then he would not be almighty. Thus the doctrine that the world was created by God makes no sense at all.

And God commits great sin in slaying the children whom he himself created. If you say that he slays only to destroy evil beings, why did he create such beings in the first place?

Good men should combat the believer in divine creation, maddened by an evil doctrine. Know that the world is uncreated, as time itself is, without beginning or end, and is based on the principles, life and rest. Uncreated and indestructible, it endures under the compulsion of its own nature.

— Mahapurana (Jainism) (The Great legend), Jainasena (India, ninth century) See also [ edit ] Nontheistic religions Jainism Notes [ edit ] ^ The Perfect Law Archived 20 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine Jainworld.org ^ Jain, Champat Rai (1917), The Ratna Karanda Sravakachara , The Central Jaina Publishing House, p. 3 Alt URL ^ Sangave 2001 , p. 164.

^ Zimmer 1953 , p. 182.

^ Sangave 2001 , p. 15.

^ Sangave 2001 , p. 16.

^ Rankin 2013 , p. 40.

^ Jain 2013 , p. 177.

^ Jain, Champat Rai (1930), Jainism, Christianity and Science , The Indian Press, Allahabad Alt URL ^ a b Sangave 2001 , p. 16–17.

^ Thrower (1980), p. 93 ^ Jain 1917 , p. 48.

^ Jacobi (1884) Retrieved on : 25 May 2007 ^ Nayanar (2005b), p. 35 Gāthā 1.29 ^ Vallely, Anne (1980).  In: Guardians of the Transcendent: An Ethnology of a Jain Ascetic Community . University of Toronto Press: Toronto. p. 182 ^ Srichandran (1981) , p. 18.

^ "Article: Deities" , Jainpedia , retrieved 16 November 2019 ^ Gopani (1989), emended ^ Hemacandra; Bothara, Surendra.; Gopani, A. S.; Jaina Śve. Nākoṛā Pārśvanātha Tīrtha.; Prākr̥ta Bhāratī Akādamī. (10 February 1989), The Yoga shastra of Hemchandracharya: a 12th century guide to Jain Yoga , Yogaśāstra.English & Sanskrit, Prakrit Bharti Academy; Shri Jain Swetamber Nakoda Parshwanath Teerth – via Hathi Trust ^ Afterword on Jinasena , D. Lakey, The Philosophical Forum , Volume 33 Issue 3 Page 343-344 - Fall 2002 ^ Barbara Sproul, Primal Myths: Creating the World ^ PDF of the text ^ [1] on page 140 References [ edit ] Jain, Vijay K. (2013).

Ācārya Nemichandra's Dravyasaṃgraha . Vikalp Printers.

ISBN 9788190363952 .

Sangave, Vilas Adinath (2001), Aspects of Jaina religion (3rd ed.), Bharatiya Jnanpith, ISBN 81-263-0626-2 Rankin, Aidan (2013), "Chapter 1. Jains Jainism and Jainness", Living Jainism: An Ethical Science , John Hunt Publishing, ISBN 978-1780999111 Zimmer, Heinrich (1953) [April 1952], Campbell, Joseph (ed.), Philosophies Of India , London : Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd, ISBN 978-81-208-0739-6 , This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

{{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Jain, Champat Rai (1917), The Practical Path Srichandran, J. (1981).

ஜைன தத்துவமும் பஞ்ச பரமேஷ்டிகளும் . Chennai: Vardhamanan Padhipakam.

External links [ edit ] Media related to God in Jainism at Wikimedia Commons Jaina Atheism , Surendranath Dasgupta, 1940 v t e God in Jainism Arihant ; Siddha ; Pañca-Parameṣṭhi Tirthankara Rishabhanatha Ajitanatha Sambhavanatha Abhinandananatha Sumatinatha Padmaprabha Suparshvanatha Chandraprabha Pushpadanta Shitalanatha Shreyansanatha Vasupujya Vimalanatha Anantanatha Dharmanatha Shantinatha Kunthunatha Aranatha Mallinatha Munisuvrata Naminatha Neminatha Parshvanatha Mahavira Simandhar Swami (other world) Samanya Bahubali Bharata Chakravartin Ganadhara Indrabhuti Gautama Sudharmaswami Jambuswami Nabhi Samudravijaya v t e Jainism topics Gods Arihant Ganadhara Tirthankara Mahavira Rishabhanatha Philosophy Five Vows Ahimsa Anekantavada Cosmology Deva Naraka Siddhashila Death Dravya Jīva Ajiva Pudgala Dharma Epistemology Kevala Jnana Gunasthana Karma Causes Types Kashaya Ratnatraya Samsara Tattva Asrava Bandha Moksha Nirjara Samvara Branches Digambara Bispanthi Kanji Panth Mula Sangha Balatkara Gana Kashtha Sangha Taran Panth Terapanth Svetambara Murtipujaka Gaccha Kharatara Tapa Tristutik Sthanakavasi Practices Fasting Festivals Paryushana Kshamavani Mahamastakabhisheka Meditation Monasticism Pratikramana Samayika Rituals Sallekhana Tapas Upadhan Vegetarianism Literature Agama Aptamimamsa Bhaktamara Stotra Civaka Cintamani Culamani Kalpa Sūtra Kasayapahuda Naga Kumara Kaviyam Neelakesi Namokar Mantra Pravachanasara Samayasāra Shatkhandagama Tattvartha Sutra Uttaradhyayana Udayana Kumara Kaviyam Valayapathi Yashodhara Kaviyam Symbols Ashtamangala Auspicious dreams Jain flag Siddhachakra Shrivatsa Nandavarta Swastika Ascetics Acharya Aryika Digambara monk Kshullak Pattavali Scholars Bal Patil Champat Rai Jain Chandabai Colette Caillat Hampana Hermann Jacobi Jeffery D. Long John E. Cort Nalini Balbir Padmanabh Jaini Paul Dundas Virchand Gandhi Community Sravaka Sarak Tamil Jain Organisations Digambar Jain Mahasabha JAINA Vishwa Jain Sangathan Jainism in India Bundelkhand Delhi Goa Gujarat Haryana Karnataka North Kerala Maharashtra Mumbai Rajasthan Tamil Nadu Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Overseas Africa Australia Belgium Canada Europe Hong Kong Japan Pakistan Singapore Southeast Asia United States Jainism and Buddhism Hinduism Islam Non-creationism Sikhism Dynasties and empires Chalukya Ganga Hoysala Ikshvaku Kadamba Kalinga Maurya Pandya Rashtrakuta Santara Related Art Ekendriya History Timeline Law Mathematics Panca-Paramesthi Nigoda Panch Kalyanaka Pratima Salakapurusa Samavasarana Sexual differences Statue of Ahimsa Sculpture Stupa Temple Terms and concepts Tirtha Vira Nirvana Samvat Samvatsari Lists Jains Jain temples Jain ascetics Digambar Topics Navboxes Gods Literature Monks & nuns Scholars Temples America Bengal Religion portal v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐xk5sh
Cached time: 20250814220831
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.709 seconds
Real time usage: 0.896 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3790/1000000
Revision size: 23690/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 186516/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8256/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 101666/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.430/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20934390/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  729.155      1 -total
 15.27%  111.309      8 Template:Citation
 15.02%  109.500      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.99%  109.314      1 Template:Reflist
 14.32%  104.409      4 Template:Lang
 13.15%   95.915      1 Template:Jainism
  8.92%   65.032      1 Template:Short_description
  7.92%   57.738     10 Template:Navbox
  6.53%   47.616      9 Template:Sfn
  5.35%   39.000      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2938712:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220831 and revision id 1300317831. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=God_in_Jainism&oldid=1300317831 " Categories : God in Jainism Jain philosophical concepts Transtheism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2015 Use Indian English from December 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles containing Sanskrit-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Source attribution CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 16:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents God in Jainism 8 languages Add topic

