Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Leonardo (journal) 5 languages Català Español Français Português Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American peer-reviewed academic journal For the music journal, see Leonardo Music Journal .

Academic journal Leonardo Discipline Arts Language English Edited by Roger F. Malina Publication details History 1968–present Publisher MIT Press for Leonardo, the International Society for the Arts, Sciences and Technology (United States) Frequency 6/year (including Leonardo Music Journal ) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Leonardo Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 0024-094X (print) 1530-9282 (web) JSTOR 0024094X OCLC no.

1755782 Links Journal homepage Online access Leonardo is a peer-reviewed academic journal published by the MIT Press covering the application of contemporary science and technology to the arts and music.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The journal, Leonardo , was established in 1968 by artist and scientist Frank Malina in Paris , France .

[ 2 ] Since 1968, Leonardo has published writings by artists who work with science- and technology-based art media.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Journal operations were moved to the San Francisco Bay Area by Frank's son Roger Malina , an astronomer and space scientist, who took over operations of the journal upon Frank Malina's death in 1981. In 1982, the International Society for the Arts Sciences and Technology ( Leonardo/ISAST ) was founded to further the aims of Leonardo by providing avenues of communication for artists working in contemporary media. The society also publishes Leonardo Music Journal , the Leonardo Electronic Almanac , Leonardo Reviews , and the Leonardo Book Series . All publications are produced in collaboration with the MIT Press .

Other activities of the organization include an awards program and participation in annual conferences and symposiums such as the Space and the Arts Workshop and the annual College Art Association conference. Leonardo has a sister organization in France, the Association Leonardo , that publishes the Observatoire Leonardo website. While encouraging the innovative presentation of technology-based arts, the society also functions as an international meeting place for artists, educators, students, scientists, and others interested in the use of new media in contemporary artistic expression.

The aims of the organization include the documentation of personal and innovative technologies developed by artists, similar to the way in which findings of scientists are documented in journal publications.

[ 5 ] An example of scientific and technical studies interacting with those of art is the publication in Leonardo of the realization of significant historical precedence in physics being demonstrated among the pages of notes by Leonardo that went unnoticed until a physicist examined pages that traditionally have been the subject of review regarding his art. The physicist recognized that sketches by Leonardo in the margins documented experiments he conducted that explained gravity and explored its dynamics much earlier than those credited with the discoveries related to it, [ 6 ] and his insight into the significance of Leonardo's graphic details of his experiment was published in the journal in 2023.

See also [ edit ] New Media Caterina Verde , contributing artist References [ edit ] ^ About Leonardo ^ History of Leonardo ^ Thomas, Jessica (2018-12-12).

"Arts & Culture: A Journal for the Polymath" .

Physics .

11 : 128.

Bibcode : 2018PhyOJ..11..128.

^ Kunzru, Hari (1996-06-01).

"Art and Invention" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 . Retrieved 2019-08-08 .

^ Leonardo de Cardoso: Visual Music: An Ethnography of an Experimental Art in Los Angeles , Master's Thesis, University of Texas at Austin, May 2010, p. 39 ^ Lawson-Tancred, Jo, Marginalia Uncovered in Leonardo's Famous Codex Arundel Suggests the Renaissance Polymath Theorized Gravity Before Galileo , ArtNet News , February 20, 2023 External links [ edit ] Official website Leonardo on the MIT Press website Leonardo Electronic Almanac (LEA) v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leonardo_(journal)&oldid=1184031994 " Categories : Academic journals established in 1968 MIT Press academic journals English-language journals Arts journals Bimonthly journals Academic journals associated with learned and professional societies 1968 establishments in France Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Bimonthly journals (infobox) Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 7 November 2023, at 22:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leonardo (journal) 5 languages Add topic

