Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uses 2 Prediction markets 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Foresight (psychology) 8 languages العربية Чӑвашла Čeština Македонски Nederlands Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Behavior-based backcasting & forecasting factors Foresight is the ability to predict, or the action of predicting, what will happen or what is needed in the future. Studies suggest that much of human thought is directed towards potential future events. Because of this, the nature and evolution of foresight is an important topic in psychology .

[ 1 ] Thinking about the future is studied under the label prospection .

[ 2 ] Neuroscientific , developmental , and cognitive studies have identified many similarities to the human ability to recall past episodes .

[ 3 ] Science magazine selected evidence for such similarities as one of the top ten scientific breakthroughs of 2007.

[ 4 ] However, fundamental differences separate mentally travelling through time into the future (i.e., foresight) versus mentally travelling through time into the past (i.e., episodic memory).

[ 5 ] Uses [ edit ] Foresight has been classified as a behaviour (covert and/or overt) in management. Review, analysis , and synthesis of past definitions and usages of the foresight concept attempted to establish a generic definition, in order to make the concept measurable.

[ 6 ] Specifically, foresight has been defined as: "Degree of analyzing present contingencies and degree of moving the analysis of present contingencies across time, and degree of analyzing a desired future state or states a degree ahead in time with regard to contingencies under control, as well as degree of analyzing courses of action a degree ahead in time to arrive at the desired future state." [ 6 ] Prediction markets [ edit ] Prediction markets are exchange-traded markets created for the purpose of trading on the possible outcomes of events. This information-revealing mechanism is credited to economists Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek . Prediction markets allow people to aggregate information and make predictions.

See also [ edit ] Psychology portal Future-oriented therapy Future orientation Future self – Research that examines the processes of thinking of oneself in the future Futures techniques – Futures studies lessons learned methods Goal orientation – Social-cognitive motivational disposition Goal setting – Development of an action plan in order to achieve a goal Prospection – Generation and evaluation of mental representations of possible futures Retrocognition – Concept in parapsychology Vision (spirituality) – Something seen in a dream, trance, or religious ecstasy References [ edit ] ^ Suddendorf T, Corballis M (2007). "The evolution of foresight: What is mental time travel and is it uniquely human?".

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

30 (3): 299– 313.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X07001975 .

PMID 17963565 .

^ Suddendorf T, Bulley A, Miloyan B (December 2018). "Prospection and natural selection".

Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences .

24 : 26– 31.

doi : 10.1016/j.cobeha.2018.01.019 .

S2CID 53180176 .

^ Addis DR, Wong AT, Schacter DL (2007).

"Remembering the Past and Imagining the Future: Common and Distinct Neural Substrates During Event Construction and Elaboration" .

Neuropsychologia .

45 (7): 1363– 1377.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.10.016 .

PMC 1894691 .

PMID 17126370 .

Hassabis D, Kumaran D, Vann SD, Maguire EA (2007).

"Patients with Hippocampal Amnesia Cannot Imagine New Experiences" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

104 (5): 1726– 1731.

Bibcode : 2007PNAS..104.1726H .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0610561104 .

PMC 1773058 .

PMID 17229836 .

^ News Staff, T. (21 December 2007).

"Breakthrough of the Year: The Runners-Up" .

Science .

318 (5848): 1844– 1849.

doi : 10.1126/science.318.5858.1844a .

PMID 18096772 .

^ Suddendorf T (2010). "Episodic Memory Versus Episodic Foresight: Similarities and Differences".

Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science .

1 : 99– 107.

doi : 10.1002/wcs.23 .

^ a b Amsteus M (2008). "Managerial foresight: concept and measurement".

Foresight: The Journal for Future Studies, Strategic Thinking and Policy .

10 (1): 53– 66.

v t e Mental processes Cognition Association Awareness Cognitive flexibility Cognitive liberty Forecasting affective Foresight Comprehension Consciousness Critical thinking Decision-making Imagination Intuition Problem solving methods strategies Prospection Perception Amodal Color RGB model Depth Form Haptic ( Touch ) Perception as interpretation Peripheral Social Sound Harmonics Pitch Speech Visual Memory Consolidation Encoding Storage Recall Other Attention Experiential avoidance Higher nervous activity Intention Ironic process theory Learning Mental fatigue Relational frame theory Mental set Thinking Thought suppression Volition Category v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Foresight_(psychology)&oldid=1281732988 " Categories : Cognitive psychology Management Prediction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 22 March 2025, at 03:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Foresight (psychology) 8 languages Add topic

