Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works 2 Influence 3 In popular culture 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Mary Anne Atwood 6 languages Deutsch Español Euskara Français ಕನ್ನಡ Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English writer (1817–1910) Mary Anne Atwood (née South ) (1817 – 1910) was an English writer on hermeticism and spiritual alchemy .

Atwood was born in Dieppe , France but grew up in Gosport , Hampshire . Her father, Thomas South, was a researcher into the history of spirituality, and she assisted and collaborated with her father from her youth. Mary Anne married the Anglican Reverend Alban Thomas Atwood in 1859, and moved to his parish near Thirsk in North Yorkshire where she spent the rest of her life. She continued private correspondence with several influential Theosophists until her death in 1910.

[ 1 ] Her final words were "I cannot find my centre of gravity." She is buried at Leake Church in Yorkshire .

Works [ edit ] Atwood's first publication, Early Magnetism in its higher relations to humanity (1846), was issued pseudonymously as the work of Θυος Μαθος (Gk.

thuos mathos ), an anagram of Thomas South.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery (1850) [ 3 ] was written by Atwood at her father's request, and in parallel with his own composition of a lengthy poem on the same subject. Thomas South paid for the book to be published anonymously in 1850, but without having read it, trusting his daughter's judgement. Reading it after publication, he believed Mary Anne had revealed many hermetic secrets that were better left unpublished, and therefore bought up the remaining stock and, with his daughter, burnt them, along with the unfinished manuscript of his poem. Only a few copies of the book survived.

Atwood published nothing after A Suggestive Inquiry .

Walter Leslie Wilmshurst , in his 1918 introduction to the reissue, laments that the thoughts of her later years did not find fruition in another work. He claims, however, that there is much to be found in her papers, of which he was then in possession. These have not yet been published. The special collections archive of the Brown University library currently holds around 700 of Ms. Atwood's letters.

Influence [ edit ] A Suggestive Inquiry was reissued in 1918 under Mary Anne's married name, with an appendix containing her table talk and memorabilia, and with an extensive biographical and philosophical introduction by Walter Leslie Wilmshurst .

[ 4 ] Principe and Newman (2001) considered A Suggestive Inquiry to be one of three books which started the influence of the spiritual interpretation of alchemy in early modern Europe .

[ 5 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Further information: Alchemy in art and entertainment The writer Lindsay Clarke used the story of Thomas South and Mary Anne Atwood as a basis for his novel The Chymical Wedding (1989).

[ 6 ] The book A Suggestive Inquiry...

was being read by Pink in the music video for the single U + Ur Hand .

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Isabelle de Steiger References [ edit ] ^ a b Greer, John Michael.

The New Encyclopedia of the Occult . p. 50.

^ Θυος Μαθος [anagram of Thomas South] (1846).

Early Magnetism in its higher relations to humanity, as veiled in the Poets and the Prophets . London: H. Baillière. pp. viii. 127.

^ [South, later Atwood, Mary Ann] (1850).

A Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery With a Dissertation on the More Celebrated of the Alchemical Philosophers, being an attempt towards the recovery of the ancient experiment of Nature . London: Trelawny Saunders. pp. xxv, 531.

^ [South, later Atwood, Mary Ann] (1918).

A Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery With a Dissertation on the More Celebrated of the Alchemical Philosophers, being an attempt towards the recovery of the ancient experiment of Nature. A new edition: with an introduction by Walter Leslie Wilmshurst . Belfast: William Tait. pp. (64) xxv, 596.

(Introduction preview at https://www.amazon.com/Suggestive-Dissertation-Celebrated-Alchemical-Philosophers/dp/0766108112 ) ^ Principe, L. M., Newman, W. R. (2001).

Some Problems with the Historiography of Alchemy.

In: Newman, W. R., Grafton, A (eds). (2001) Secrets of Nature: Astrology and Alchemy in Early Modern Europe. (Transformations: Studies in the History of Science and Technology) Cambridge:MIT Press.

^ Lambert, Alexandra (2004).

The Heritage of Hermes: Alchemy in Contemporary British Literature . Glienicke, Berlin; Madison, Wisconsin: Galda + Wilch. p. 101.

ISBN 1931255164 .

As Clarke acknowledges in the notes accompanying his novel, Louisa Agnew is modelled on the historical person of Mary Anne Atwood, a hermetic writer from the 19th century.

^ MTV news: What's Up With The Black Magic And Biker Outfits In Pink's New Video?

Further reading [ edit ] Gilbert, R. A. "Atwood [née South], Mary Anne".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/53866 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) External links [ edit ] Rexresearch.com: Hermetic Philosophy & Alchemy: A Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery , HTML online text Mary Anne Atwood Papers1882-1910 John Hay Library Special Collections, Brown University v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Netherlands People Trove Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mary_Anne_Atwood&oldid=1288825688 " Categories : 1817 births People from Dieppe, Seine-Maritime Writers from Normandy 1910 deaths 19th-century alchemists 20th-century alchemists English alchemists Hermeticists Pseudonymous women writers 19th-century English women writers 19th-century English writers 20th-century English women 20th-century English writers 19th-century pseudonymous writers 20th-century pseudonymous writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2016 Use British English from October 2016 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 23:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mary Anne Atwood 6 languages Add topic

