Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formations Toggle Formations subsection 1.1 Sea level changes 1.2 Tectonic activity 1.3 Tsunamis 2 Examples 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Ghost forest 3 languages Deutsch فارسی Македонски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Areas of dead trees in former forests This article may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( May 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ghost forest in the Nags Head Woods ecological preserve, North Carolina Ghost forests are areas of dead trees in former forests, typically in coastal regions where rising sea levels or tectonic shifts have altered the height of a land mass.

[ 1 ] Forests located near the coast or estuaries may also be at risk of dying through saltwater poisoning, if invading seawater reduces the amount of freshwater that deciduous trees receive for sustenance .

[ 2 ] Phantom forests refer to a different issue with forests.

Formations [ edit ] Sea level changes [ edit ] Forest immersed in water at Inks Lake State Park , Texas, USA When there is a change in sea level, coastal regions may become inundated with sea water. This can alter coastal areas and kill large areas of trees, leaving behind what is called a “ghost forest.” [ 3 ] This type of ghost forest may develop in a variety of environments and in many different places. In the southern US , coastal marshes are expanding into dry wooded areas, killing trees and leaving behind areas of dead trees called snags . 
Regions of the US at or below sea level are more susceptible to tides. Coastal features affected by changing sea levels are indirectly affected by climate change. With global sea-level rise, the coastlines in the southern US are being altered and leaving behind salt marshes filled with dead and dying trees in some areas.

[ 4 ] Tectonic activity [ edit ] Ghost forest in winter, at the former site of Portage, Alaska , which was destroyed by the 1964 Alaska earthquake .

Ghost forests can also result from tectonic activity. In the Pacific Northwest , there is a large, active subduction zone called the Cascadia Subduction Zone . Here, there is a convergent plate boundary where the Gorda Plate , the Juan de Fuca Plate , and the Explorer Plate are being subducted underneath the North American plate.

[ 5 ] As these plates attempt to slide past one another, they often become stuck. For several hundred years, the plates will be locked in place and the tension builds. As a result of this tension, there is an orogenic uplift . This is where the tension building between two converging plates gets translated into the vertical uplift of the mountains on the coast. Orogenic uplift is usually associated with earthquakes and mountain buildings.

[ 6 ] But then, every 500+ years, there is a large earthquake in the Cascadia Subduction Zone and all that built-up tension is released. The release of this tension results in what is called subsidence .

[ 7 ] And with subsidence the once elevated coastline drops down several meters to below sea level. Here, sea level has not changed, but the coastline has been deformed, making it susceptible to tides. Areas of the coastline can be inundated with sea water, creating marshes and leaving behind ghost forests.  
The Cascadia event was documented by geologist Brian Atwater in his book, The Orphan Tsunami . Gathering evidence from both the trees and the ground, he determined that the earthquake and tsunami had occurred sometime between 1680 and 1720, but he could not pinpoint the exact date. Japanese scientists, who had extensive records of tsunamis dating back to 684 AD, read the report, and told Atwater that they knew the date and even the precise time: January 26, 1700 at 9:00 p.m.

Several hours after the earthquake, tsunami waves had crossed the ocean and wiped out a fishing village.  The Japanese were baffled because there was no earthquake anywhere near Japan to account for the tsunami. The ghost forest in Washington thus provided the evidence for its origin.

[ 8 ] Tsunamis [ edit ] Neskowin Ghost Forest In addition to subsidence, large earthquakes can also cause tsunamis . It is possible to determine that ghost forests in the Pacific Northwest were created by earthquakes and subsidence by looking at the stratigraphic record . Digging down into the earth, adjacent to a ghost forest, different layers of sediment can reveal the stratigraphy in a ghost forest.  Layers of material filled with organic material can indicate where the old forest floor was located prior to subsidence. On top of the layer, there will often be a large sandy deposit. This layer represents the tsunami event, where the coast was flooded with sea water that is filled with sandy sediment. Superimposed on top of the tsunami deposit will be a muddy deposit, representative of an area subjected to ocean tides.

[ 7 ] Examples [ edit ] Lake Washington sunken forests Neskowin Ghost Forest Pett#Sunken forest Sunken Forests of New Hampshire See also [ edit ] Petrified wood § Occurrences — trees preserved through mineralisation in death (though not necessarily due to salinity), sometimes in large stands References [ edit ] ^ " "Ghost forests": What they are and why they're becoming more common" .

CBS News . 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 7 January 2018 .

^ "What is a ghost forest?" .

National Ocean Service . 26 October 2017 . Retrieved 7 January 2018 .

^ "Ghost forests are eerie evidence of rising seas" .

Grist.org . 18 September 2016 . Retrieved 2017-05-17 .

^ "How Rising Seas Are Killing Southern U.S. Woodlands - Yale E360" .

e360.yale.edu . Retrieved 2017-05-17 .

^ "Living with Earthquakes in the Pacific Northwest" .

Oregonstate.edu .

doi : 10.1029/2001JB001710 . Retrieved 2017-05-17 .

^ "uplift | geology" .

Britannica.com . Retrieved 2017-05-17 .

^ a b "Cascadia subduction zone: Tectonic Earthquakes of the Pacific Northwest" .

Earthjay.com . Retrieved 2017-05-17 .

^ Schulz, Kathryn (2015-07-13).

"The Earthquake That Will Devastate the Pacific Northwest" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ghost_forest&oldid=1296196393 " Category : Forestry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2017 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 13:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ghost forest 3 languages Add topic

