Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 2.1 Alchemy 2.2 Astrology 2.3 Tides and the Moon 2.4 Matter and form 2.5 Music 2.6 Metaphysics of morals 2.7 Natural law 2.8 Friendship 3 Cultural references 4 Influence and tribute 5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 5.1 Translations 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Albertus Magnus 74 languages Afrikaans العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German Dominican friar and saint (c. 1200 – 1280) "Albertus" redirects here. For other uses, see Albertus (disambiguation) .

"Albert the Great" redirects here. For the American Thoroughbred racehorse, see Albert the Great (horse) .

For the asteroid, see 20006 Albertus Magnus .

Saint Albertus Magnus OP The Apparition of the Virgin to Saint Albert the Great by Vicente Salvador Gomez Bishop of Regensburg Doctor of the Church Born c.

1200 [ 1 ] Lauingen , Duchy of Bavaria Died 15 November 1280 Cologne , Holy Roman Empire Venerated in Catholic Church Beatified 1622, Rome , Papal States by Pope Gregory XV Canonized 16 December 1931, Vatican City by Pope Pius XI Major shrine St. Andrew's Church, Cologne Feast 15 November Attributes Dominican habit , mitre , book , and quill Patronage Those who cultivate the natural sciences , medical technicians, philosophers , and scientists Other names Albertus Teutonicus, Albertus Coloniensis, Albert the Great, Albert of Cologne Alma mater University of Padua Known for Teaching of theology Pioneering scholar of Aristotle Systematic study of minerals Discovery of the element arsenic Scientific career Fields Natural science Alchemy Jurisprudence Diplomacy Theology Natural philosophy Doctoral advisor Jordan of Saxony Philosophical work Era Medieval philosophy Region Western philosophy School Scholasticism Aristotelianism Medieval realism [ 2 ] Institutions University of Paris Notable students Thomas Aquinas , Petrus Ferrandi Hispanus Main interests Philosophy physiology mineralogy astrology geography astronomy music theory natural science alchemy jurisprudence diplomacy theology natural philosophy Notable ideas Natural law Aevum [ 3 ] Ecclesiastical career Religion Christianity Church Catholic Church Offices held Bishop of Regensburg Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Albertus Magnus [ a ] OP ( c.

1200 – 15 November 1280), also known as Saint Albert the Great , Albert of Swabia, [ 4 ] Albert von Bollstadt, or Albert of Cologne , was a German Dominican friar , philosopher, scientist, and bishop . He is considered one of the greatest medieval philosophers and thinkers.

[ 5 ] Canonized in 1931, he was known during his lifetime as Doctor universalis and Doctor expertus ; late in his life the sobriquet Magnus was appended to his name.

[ 6 ] Scholars such as James A. Weisheipl and Joachim R. Söder have referred to him as the greatest German philosopher and theologian of the Middle Ages .

[ 7 ] The Catholic Church distinguishes him as one of the Doctors of the Church .

Biography [ edit ] It seems likely that Albertus Magnus was born sometime before 1200, given well-attested evidence that he was aged over 80 on his death in 1280.

[ 8 ] Two later sources say that Albert was about 87 on his death, which has led 1193 to be commonly given as the date of Albert's birth, but this information does not have enough evidence to be confirmed.

[ 8 ] Albert was probably born in Lauingen (now in Bavaria ), since he called himself 'Albert of Lauingen', but this might simply be a family name. Most probably his family was of ministerial class; his familial connection with (being son of the count) the Bollstädt noble family is almost certainly mere conjecture by 15th-century hagiographers .

[ 8 ] Albert was probably educated principally at the University of Padua , where he received instruction in Aristotle 's writings. A late account by Rudolph de Novamagia refers to Albertus' encounter with the Blessed Virgin Mary , who convinced him to enter Holy Orders . In 1223 (or 1229), [ 9 ] he became a member of the Dominican Order , and studied theology at Bologna and elsewhere. Selected to fill the position of lecturer at Cologne, Germany, where the Dominicans had a house, he taught for several years there, as well as in Regensburg , Freiburg , Strasbourg , and Hildesheim . During his first tenure as lecturer at Cologne, Albert wrote his Summa de bono after having a discussion with Philip the Chancellor concerning the transcendental properties of being.

[ 10 ] In 1245, Albert became master of theology under Guerric of Saint-Quentin , the first German Dominican to achieve this distinction. Following this turn of events, Albert was able to teach theology at the University of Paris as a full-time professor, holding the seat of the Chair of Theology at the College of St. James.

[ 10 ] During this time Thomas Aquinas began to study under Albertus.

[ 11 ] Bust of Albertus Magnus by Vincenzo Onofri , c.

1493 Albert was the first to comment on virtually all of the writings of Aristotle , thus making them accessible to wider academic debate. The study of Aristotle brought him to study and comment on the teachings of Muslim academics, notably Avicenna and Averroes , and this would bring him into the heart of academic debate.

In 1254, Albert was made provincial of the Dominican Order [ 11 ] and fulfilled the duties of the office with great care and efficiency. During his tenure, he publicly defended the Dominicans against attacks by the secular faculty of the University of Paris, commented on John the Evangelist , and answered what he perceived as errors of the Islamic philosopher Averroes.

In 1259, Albert took part in the General Chapter of the Dominicans at Valenciennes together with Thomas Aquinas, masters Bonushomo Britto, [ 12 ] Florentius, [ 13 ] and Peter (later Pope Innocent V ), establishing a ratio studiorum or program of studies for the Dominicans [ 14 ] that featured the study of philosophy as an innovation for those not sufficiently trained to study theology. This innovation initiated the tradition of Dominican scholastic philosophy put into practice, for example, in 1265 at the Order's studium provinciale at the convent of Santa Sabina in Rome, out of which would develop the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas , the "Angelicum".

[ 15 ] Roman sarcophagus containing the relics of Albertus Magnus in the crypt of St. Andrew's Church, Cologne , Germany In 1260, Pope Alexander IV made him bishop of Regensburg , an office from which he resigned after three years. During the exercise of his duties he enhanced his reputation for humility by refusing to ride a horse, in accord with the dictates of the Order, instead traversing his huge diocese on foot. In 1263, Pope Urban IV relieved him of the duties of bishop and asked him to preach the Eighth Crusade in German-speaking countries.

[ 16 ] After this, he was especially known for acting as a mediator between conflicting parties. In Cologne, he is known not only for being the founder of Germany's oldest university there, but also for "the big verdict" (der Große Schied) of 1258, which brought an end to the conflict between the citizens of Cologne and the archbishop. Among the last of his labors was the defense of the orthodoxy of his former pupil, Thomas Aquinas, whose death in 1274 grieved Albert (the story that he travelled to Paris in person to defend the teachings of Aquinas can not be confirmed).

Albert was a scientist, philosopher, astrologer, theologian, spiritual writer, ecumenist, and diplomat. Under the auspices of Humbert of Romans, Albert molded the curriculum of studies for all Dominican students, introduced Aristotle to the classroom and probed the work of Neoplatonists , such as Plotinus . Indeed, it was the thirty years of work done by Aquinas and himself that allowed for the inclusion of Aristotelian study in the curriculum of Dominican schools.

After suffering declining health in 1278, he died on 15 November 1280 in the Dominican convent in Cologne, Germany. His relics are located in a Roman sarcophagus in the crypt of the Dominican St. Andrew's Church in Cologne.

[ 17 ] His body was claimed to be incorrupt during an exhumation three years after his death. However, a later exhumation in 1483 found that only a skeleton remained.

[ 18 ] Albert was beatified in 1622. He was canonized and proclaimed a Doctor of the Church on 16 December 1931 by Pope Pius XI [ 16 ] [ 19 ] and the patron saint of natural scientists in 1941. St. Albert's feast day is November 15.

Among the first biographical sources, there were Heinrich von Herford [ 20 ] and Luis of Valladolid es [ 21 ] [ 22 ] and, in modern times, the study by James A. Weisheipl (1980), who reconstructs the life and works of Albertus Magnus taking into account all previous biographies and places his date of birth around 1200.

[ 23 ] Writings [ edit ] Albertus Magnus monument at the University of Cologne Saint Albertus Magnus , a fresco by Tommaso da Modena (1352), Chapter hall of convent of St. Nicholas, Treviso , Italy Albert's writings collected in 1899 went to thirty-eight volumes. These displayed his prolific habits and encyclopedic knowledge of topics such as logic , theology , botany , geography , astronomy , astrology , mineralogy , alchemy , zoology , physiology , phrenology , justice , law , friendship , and love . He digested, interpreted, and systematized the whole of Aristotle's works, gleaned from the Latin translations and notes of the Arabian commentators, in accordance with Church doctrine. Most modern knowledge of Aristotle was preserved and presented by Albert.

[ 11 ] His principal theological works are a commentary in three volumes on the Books of the Sentences of Peter Lombard ( Magister Sententiarum ), and the Summa Theologiae in two volumes. The latter is in substance a more didactic repetition of the former.

Albert's activity, however, was more philosophical than theological (see Scholasticism ). The philosophical works, occupying the first six and the last of the 21 volumes, are generally divided according to the Aristotelian scheme of the sciences, and consist of interpretations and condensations of Aristotle's relative works, with supplementary discussions upon contemporary topics, and occasional divergences from the opinions of the master. Albert believed that Aristotle's approach to natural philosophy did not pose any obstacle to the development of a Christian philosophical view of the natural order.

[ 16 ] De animalibus (c. 1450–1500, cod. fiesolano 67, Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana ) Albert's knowledge of natural science was considerable and for the age remarkably accurate. His industry in every department was great: not only did he produce commentaries and paraphrases of the entire Aristotelian corpus, including his scientific works, but Albert also added to and improved upon them. His books on topics like botany, zoology, and minerals included information from ancient sources, but also results of his own empirical investigations. These investigations pushed several of the special sciences forward, beyond the reliance on classical texts. In the case of embryology, for example, it has been claimed that little of value was written after Aristotle until Albert, who managed to identify organs within eggs.

[ 24 ] Furthermore, Albert also effectively invented entire special sciences, where Aristotle has not covered a topic. For example, prior to Albert, there was no systematic study of minerals.

[ 25 ] For the breadth of these achievements, he was bestowed the name Doctor Universalis.

Much of Albert's empirical contributions to the natural sciences have been superseded, but his general approach to science may be surprisingly modern. For example, in De Mineralibus (Book II, Tractate ii, Ch. 1) Albert claims, "For it is [the task] of natural science not simply to accept what we are told but to inquire into the causes of natural things." [ 25 ] Alchemy [ edit ] Albertus Magnus, Chimistes Celebres, Liebig's Extract of Meat Company Trading Card, 1929 In the centuries since his death, many stories arose about Albert as an alchemist and magician. "Much of the modern confusion results from the fact that later works, particularly the alchemical work known as the Secreta Alberti or the Experimenta Alberti , were falsely attributed to Albertus by their authors to increase the prestige of the text through association." [ 26 ] On the subject of alchemy and chemistry, many treatises relating to alchemy have been attributed to him, though in his authentic writings he had little to say on the subject, and then mostly through commentary on Aristotle. For example, in his commentary, De mineralibus , he refers to the power of stones, but does not elaborate on what these powers might be.

[ 27 ] A wide range of Pseudo-Albertine works dealing with alchemy exist, though, showing the belief developed in the generations following Albert's death that he had mastered alchemy, one of the fundamental sciences of the Middle Ages. These include Metals and Materials ; the Secrets of Chemistry ; the Origin of Metals ; the Origins of Compounds , and a Concordance which is a collection of Observations on the philosopher's stone ; and other alchemy-chemistry topics, collected under the name of Theatrum Chemicum .

[ 28 ] He is credited with the discovery of the element arsenic [ 29 ] and experimented with photosensitive chemicals, including silver nitrate .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] He did believe that stones had occult properties, as he related in his work De mineralibus . However, there is scant evidence that he personally performed alchemical experiments.

According to legend, Albert is said to have discovered the philosopher's stone and passed it on to his pupil Thomas Aquinas, shortly before his death. Albert does not confirm he discovered the stone in his writings, but he did record that he witnessed the creation of gold by "transmutation." [ 32 ] Given that Thomas Aquinas died six years before Albert's death, this legend as stated is unlikely.

Astrology [ edit ] Albert was deeply interested in astrology , as has been articulated by scholars such as Paola Zambelli [ 33 ] and Scott Hendrix.

[ 34 ] Throughout the Middle Ages—and well into the early modern period—astrology was widely accepted by scientists and intellectuals who held the view that life on earth is effectively a microcosm within the macrocosm (the latter being the cosmos itself). It was believed that correspondence therefore exists between the two and thus the celestial bodies follow patterns and cycles analogous to those on earth. With this worldview, it seemed reasonable to assert that astrology could be used to predict the probable future of a human being. Albert argued that an understanding of the celestial influences affecting us could help us to live our lives more in accord with Christian precepts.

[ 34 ] The most comprehensive statement of his astrological beliefs is to be found in two separate works that he authored around 1260, known as the Speculum astronomiae and De Fato .

[ 35 ] However, details of these beliefs can be found in almost everything he wrote, from his early De natura boni to his last work, the Summa theologiae .

[ 36 ] His speculum was critiqued by Gerard of Silteo .

[ 37 ] De meteoris , 1488 Tides and the Moon [ edit ] Albert considered the tides to be influenced by the moon. Based on ancient Greek theories of light and Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi 's astrological explanations, he proposed a mixed theory where the Moon doubly attracts the water by its intrinsic astrological humid nature and by the heat that the moonlight produces.

[ 38 ] Matter and form [ edit ] Albert believed that all natural things were compositions of matter and form, to which he referred as quod est and quo est . Albert also believed that God alone is the absolute ruling entity. Albert's version of hylomorphism is very similar to the Aristotelian doctrine.

Music [ edit ] Albert is known for his commentary on the musical practice of his times. Most of his written musical observations are found in his commentary on Aristotle's Poetics . He rejected the idea of " music of the spheres " as ridiculous: movement of astronomical bodies, he supposed, is incapable of generating sound. He wrote extensively on proportions in music, and on the three different subjective levels on which plainchant could work on the human soul: purging of the impure; illumination leading to contemplation; and nourishing perfection through contemplation. Of particular interest to 20th-century music theorists is the attention he paid to silence as an integral part of music.

Metaphysics of morals [ edit ] Both of his early treatises, De natura boni and De bono , start with a metaphysical investigation into the concepts of the good in general and the physical good. Albert refers to the physical good as bonum naturae . Albert does this before directly dealing with the moral concepts of metaphysics. In Albert's later works, he says in order to understand human or moral goodness, the individual must first recognize what it means to be good and do good deeds. This procedure reflects Albert's preoccupations with neo-Platonic theories of good as well as the doctrines of Pseudo-Dionysius .

[ 39 ] Albert's view was highly valued by the Catholic Church and his peers.

Natural law [ edit ] Albert devoted the last tractatus of De Bono to a theory of justice and natural law . Albert places God as the pinnacle of justice and natural law. God legislates and divine authority is supreme. Before his time, there had been no work specifically devoted to natural law written by a theologian or philosopher.

[ 40 ] Friendship [ edit ] Albert mentions friendship in his work, De bono , as well as presenting his ideals and morals of friendship in the very beginning of Tractatus II . Later in his life he published Super Ethica .

[ 41 ] With his development of friendship throughout his work it is evident that friendship ideals and morals took relevance as his life went on. Albert comments on Aristotle's view of friendship with a quote from Cicero , who writes, "friendship is nothing other than the harmony between things divine and human, with goodwill and love". Albert agrees with this commentary but he also adds in harmony or agreement.

[ 42 ] Albert calls this harmony, consensio , itself a certain kind of movement within the human spirit. Albert fully agrees with Aristotle in the sense that friendship is a virtue. Albert relates the inherent metaphysical contentedness between friendship and moral goodness. Albert describes several levels of goodness; the useful ( utile ), the pleasurable ( delectabile ) and the authentic or unqualified good ( honestum ). Then in turn there are three levels of friendship based on each of those levels, namely friendship based on usefulness ( amicitia utilis ), friendship based on pleasure ( amicitia delectabilis ), and friendship rooted in unqualified goodness ( amicitia honesti ; amicitia quae fundatur super honestum ).

[ 43 ] Cultural references [ edit ] The tympanum and archivolts of Strasbourg Cathedral , with iconography inspired by Albertus Magnus The iconography of the tympanum and archivolts of the late 13th-century portal of Strasbourg Cathedral was inspired by Albert's writings.

[ 44 ] Albert is frequently mentioned by Dante , who made his doctrine of free will the basis of his ethical system. In his Divine Comedy , Dante places Albertus with his pupil Thomas Aquinas among the great lovers of wisdom ( Spiriti Sapienti ) in the Heaven of the Sun.

In The Concept of Anxiety , Søren Kierkegaard wrote that Albert, "arrogantly boasted of his speculation before the deity and suddenly became stupid." Kierkegaard cites Gotthard Oswald Marbach whom he quotes as saying " Albertus repente ex asino factus philosophus et ex philosopho asinus " [Albert was suddenly transformed from an ass into a philosopher and from a philosopher into an ass].

[ 45 ] In Mary Shelley's Frankenstein , the titular scientist, Victor Frankenstein , studies the works of Albertus Magnus.

[ 46 ] Pastor Johann Eduard Erdmann considered Albert greater and more original than his pupil Aquinas .

[ 47 ] In Open All Hours , Arkwright invents St Albert's day so Granville can check customers' pockets.

[ 48 ] Influence and tribute [ edit ] Painting by Joos (Justus) van Gent , Urbino , c. 1475 A number of schools have been named after Albert, including Albertus Magnus High School in Bardonia, New York ; [ 49 ] Albertus Magnus Lyceum in River Forest, Illinois ; and Albertus Magnus College in New Haven, Connecticut .

[ 50 ] Albertus Magnus Science Hall at Thomas Aquinas College , in Santa Paula, California, is named in honor of Albert. The main science buildings at Providence College and Aquinas College in Grand Rapids, Michigan, are also named after him.

The central square at the campus of the University of Cologne features a statue of Albert and is named after him. Made by Gerhard Marcks around 1950s, this statue is one of four replicas found in different places around the world (along with University of Jena , [ 51 ] University of the Andes , [ 52 ] [ 53 ] and University of Houston [ 54 ] ).

The Academy for Science and Design in New Hampshire honored Albert by naming one of its four houses Magnus House.

As a tribute to the scholar's contributions to the law, the University of Houston Law Center displays a statue of Albert. It is located on the campus of the University of Houston .

The Albertus-Magnus-Gymnasium is found in Rottweil, Germany.

In Managua , Nicaragua, the Albertus Magnus International Institute, a business and economic development research center, was founded in 2004.

University of Santo Tomas in the Philippines In the Philippines, the Albertus Magnus Building at the University of Santo Tomas that houses the Conservatory of Music, College of Tourism and Hospitality Management, College of Education, and UST Education High School is named in his honor.

The Saint Albert the Great Science Academy in San Carlos City , Pangasinan , which offers preschool, elementary and high school education, takes pride in having St. Albert as their patron saint. Its main building was named Albertus Magnus Hall in 2008. San Alberto Magno Academy in Tubao , La Union is also dedicated in his honor. This century-old Catholic high school continues to live on its vision-mission up to this day, offering Senior High school courses.

Due to his contributions to natural philosophy, the bacterium Agrobacterium albertimagni , [ 55 ] the plant species Alberta magna , the crustacean Bodigiella albertimagni , [ 56 ] the fossil brachiopod Albasphe albertimagni , [ 57 ] and the asteroid 20006 Albertus Magnus were named after him.

Numerous Catholic elementary and secondary schools are named for him, including schools in Toronto; Calgary; Cologne; and Dayton, Ohio.

The Albertus typeface is named after him.

[ 58 ] At the University of Notre Dame du Lac in Notre Dame, Indiana , the Zahm Hall Chapel is dedicated to St. Albert the Great.

Fr. John Zahm, C.S.C.

, after whom the men's residence hall is named, looked to St. Albert's example of using religion to illumine scientific discovery. Fr. Zahm's work with the Bible and evolution is sometimes seen as a continuation of St. Albert's legacy.

The second largest student's fraternity of the Netherlands, located in the city of Groningen , is named Albertus Magnus, in honor of the saint.

The Colegio Cientifico y Artistico de San Alberto, Hopelawn, New Jersey, USA with a sister school in Nueva Ecija, Philippines was founded in 1986 in honor of him who thought and taught that religion, the sciences and the arts may be advocated as subjects which should not contradict each other but should support one another to achieve wisdom and reason.

The Vosloorus Catholic parish (located in Vosloorus Extension One, Ekurhuleni, Gauteng, South Africa) is named after the saint.

The Catholic parish in Leopoldshafen, near Karlsruhe in Germany is also named after him, too, since Albert is the patron saint of scientists and the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology has a large research center nearby.

Since the death of King Albert I , the King's Feast is celebrated in Belgium on Albert's feast day.

Edinburgh's Catholic Chaplaincy which serves the city's universities, is named after St Albert.

Sant'Alberto Magno is a titular church in Rome .

Bibliography [ edit ] Translations [ edit ] The Paradise of the Soul: Forty-Two Virtues to Reach Heaven , translated by Fr. Robert Nixon, OSB (Gastonia, NC: TAN Books: 2023) [translation of Paradisus Animae ] On Fate , translated by D.P. Curtin (Philadelphia, PA: Dalcassian Publishing Company: 2023) [translation of De fato ] On Resurrection , translated by Irven M. Resnick and Franklin T. Harkins (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press: 2020) [translation of De resurrectione ] On the Body of the Lord, translated by Sr. Albert Marie Surmanski, OP (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press: 2017) [translation of De corpore Domini ] On the Causes of the Properties of the Elements , translated by Irven M. Resnick (Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 2010) [translation of Liber de causis proprietatum elementorum ] Questions concerning Aristotle's on Animals , translated by Irven M. Resnick and Kenneth F. Kitchell Jr. (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 2008) [translation of Quaestiones super De animalibus ] The Cardinal Virtues: Aquinas, Albert, and Philip the Chancellor , translated by R. E. Houser (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediæval Studies, 2004) [contains the translations of Parisian Summa, part six: On the good and Commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard , book 3, dist. 33 & 36] The Commentary of Albertus Magnus on Book 1 of Euclid's Elements of Geometry , edited by Anthony Lo Bello (Boston: Brill Academic Publishers, 2003) [translation of Priumus Euclidis cum commento Alberti ] On Animals: A Medieval Summa Zoologica , translated by Kenneth F. Kitchell Jr. and Irven Michael Resnick (Baltimore; London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999) [translation of De animalibus ] Paola Zambelli, The Speculum Astronomiae and Its Enigma: Astrology, Theology, and Science in Albertus Magnus and His Contemporaries (Dordrecht; Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1992) [includes Latin text and English translation of Speculum astronomiae ] Albert & Thomas: Selected Writings , translated by Simon Tugwell [ Wikidata ] , Classics of Western Spirituality (New York: Paulist Press, 1988) [contains translation of Super Dionysii Mysticam theologiam ] On Union with God , translated by a Benedictine of Princethorpe Priory (London: Burns Oates & Washbourne, 1911) [reprinted as (Felinfach: Llanerch Enterprises, 1991) and (London: Continuum, 2000)] [translation of De adherendo Deo ] See also [ edit ] Christian mysticism List of Catholic saints List of Catholic clergy scientists Saint Albert the Great, patron saint archive Science in the Middle Ages Notes [ edit ] ^ Latin : Albertus Teutonicus, Albertus Coloniensis References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "St. Albertus Magnus" . Britannica . Retrieved July 19, 2020 .

^ Hilde de Ridder-Symoens (ed.).

A History of the University in Europe: Volume 1, Universities in the Middle Ages , Cambridge University Press, 1991, p. 439.

^ Albertus Magnus, De IV coaequaevis , tract. 2, qu. 3.

^ Duchet-Suchaux, Gaston; Pastoureau, Michel (1994).

The Bible and the Saints . Flammarion iconographic guides, ISSN 1258-2220. Flammarion. p. 325.

ISBN 9782080135643 . Retrieved November 5, 2023 .

Albert of Swabia, known as Albert the Great (Albertus Magnus) [...] ^ "Alberti Magni e-corpus" .

^ Weisheipl, James A. (1980), "The Life and Works of St. Albert the Great", in Weisheipl, James A. (ed.), Albertus Magnus and the Sciences: Commemorative Essays , Studies and texts, vol. 49, Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, p. 46, ISBN 978-0-88844-049-5 ^ Joachim R. Söder, "Albert der Grosse – ein staunen- erregendes Wunder," Wort und Antwort 41 (2000): 145; J.A. Weisheipl, "Albertus Magnus," Joseph Strayer ed., Dictionary of the Middle Ages 1 (New York: Scribner, 1982) 129.

^ a b c Tugwell, Simon (1988).

Albert and Thomas . New York: Paulist Press. pp. 3, 96, 97.

ISBN 978-08091-3022-1 .

^ Tugwell 1988 , pp. 4–5.

^ a b Kovach, Francs, and Rober Shahan. Albert the Great: Commemorative Essays. Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press, 1980, p. x.

^ a b c Kennedy, Daniel. "St. Albertus Magnus." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 10 Sept. 2014 ^ Grange, Antoine Rivet de la; Clément, François; (Dom), Charles Clémencet; Daunou, Pierre Claude François; Clerc, Joseph Victor Le; Hauréau, Barthélemy; Meyer, Paul (1838).

Histoire littéraire de la France: XIIIe siècle . Vol. 19. p. 103 . Retrieved October 27, 2012 .

^ Probably Florentius de Hidinio, a.k.a. Florentius Gallicus, Histoire littéraire de la France: XIIIe siècle , Volume 19, p. 104, Accessed October 27, 2012 ^ Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics , Volume 10, p. 701. Accessed 9 June 2011 ^ Weisheipl O.P., J. A., "The Place of Study In the Ideal of St. Dominic" Archived 2010-12-29 at the Wayback Machine , 1960.  Accessed 19 March 2013 ^ a b c Führer, Markus, "Albert the Great", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2014 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.) , ^ "Zeittafel" . Gemeinden.erzbistum-koeln.de. Archived from the original on May 21, 2013 . Retrieved August 9, 2013 .

^ Carroll Cruz, Joan (1977).

The Incorruptibles: A Study of the Incorruption of the Bodies of Various Catholic Saints and Beati .

Charlotte, NC : TAN Books.

ISBN 978-0-89555-066-8 .

^ Füllenbach, Elias H.: The Canonization of Albert the Great in 1931, in: Fra trionfi e sconfitte. "Politica della santità" dell'Ordine dei predicatori, ed. by Viliam S. Doci and Gianni Festa, Rome 2021 (Dissertationes Historicae, vol. 39), p. 131-147.

Article ^ Enrico di Herford, August Potthast (editor), Liber de rebus memorabilioribus sive chronicon Henrici de Hervordia . Göttingen 1859 ^ Luigi di Valladolid, Tabula Alberti Magni , in «Catalogus codicum hagiographicorum Bibl. Regia Bruxellensis», 1.2, Bruxelles, 1889. As quoted in Giordana Carucci; Prof.ssa Luisa Valente; Dott. Massimiliano Lenzi (2018).

La ricezione della metafisica del flusso avicenniana nel Super Dionysium De divinis nominibus di Alberto Magno (PDF) (in Italian).

Sapienza University of Rome - Department of Letters and Philosophy. p. 9.

( Academia.edu ) ^ Luis de Valladolid, Historia de vita et doctrina Alberti Magni , in Subsidia hagiographica 1(1889): 96–105 ( Google Scholar ). As quoted in David J. Collins (Spring 2010). "Albertus, Magnus or Magus? Magic, Natural Philosophy, and Religious Reform in the Late Middle Ages".

Renaissance Quarterly .

63 (1). Cambridge University Press: 1– 44.

doi : 10.1086/652532 .

PMID 20527358 .

^ James A. Weisheipl, Thomas d'Aquino and Albert His Teacher , Étienne Gilson series (n°. 2), Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies , Toronto 1980.

OCLC 878247846 ^ Wolpert, Lewis (September 1, 2004).

"Much more from the chicken's egg than breakfast – a wonderful model system" .

Mechanisms of Development .

121 (9): 1015– 1017.

doi : 10.1016/j.mod.2004.04.021 .

ISSN 0925-4773 .

PMID 15296967 .

S2CID 7065525 .

^ a b Wyckoff, Dorothy (1967).

Book of Minerals . Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp. Preface.

^ Katz, David A., "An Illustrated History of Alchemy and Early Chemistry", 1978 ^ Georg Wieland, "Albert der Grosse.  Der Entwurf einer eigenständigen Philosophie," Philosophen des Mittelalters (Darmstadt: Primus, 2000) 124-39.

^ Walsh, John, The Thirteenth, Greatest of Centuries.

1907:46 ( available online ).

^ Emsley, John (2001).

Nature's Building Blocks: An A-Z Guide to the Elements . Oxford: Oxford University Press . pp. 43, 513, 529.

ISBN 978-0-19-850341-5 .

^ Davidson, Michael W.; National High Magnetic Field Laboratory at The Florida State University (August 1, 2003).

"Molecular Expressions: Science, Optics and You — Timeline — Albertus Magnus" . The Florida State University. Archived from the original on March 30, 2010 . Retrieved November 28, 2009 .

^ Szabadváry, Ferenc (1992).

History of analytical chemistry . Taylor & Francis. p. 17.

ISBN 978-2-88124-569-5 .

^ Julian Franklyn and Frederick E. Budd.

A Survey of the Occult.

Electric Book Company. 2001. p. 28-30.

ISBN 1-84327-087-0 .

^ Paola Zambelli, "The Speculum Astronomiae and its Enigma" Dordrecht.

^ a b Scott E. Hendrix, How Albert the Great's Speculum Astronomiae Was Interpreted and Used by Four Centuries of Readers (Lewiston: 2010), 44-46.

^ Curtin, D. P. (February 1, 2023).

On Fate (De Fato) . Dalcassian Publishing Company.

ISBN 9781960069030 .

^ Hendrix, 195.

^ Zambelli, Paola (1992).

The Speculum Astronomiae and its enigma. Astrology, Theology and Science in Albertus Magnus and his Contemporaries . Springer. pp.

51– 59.

ISBN 9789048140985 .

^ Deparis, Vincent; Legros, Hilaire; Souchay, Jean (2013), Souchay, Jean; Mathis, Stéphane; Tokieda, Tadashi (eds.), "Investigations of Tides from the Antiquity to Laplace" , Tides in Astronomy and Astrophysics , vol. 861, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.

31– 82, Bibcode : 2013LNP...861...31D , doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-32961-6_2 , ISBN 978-3-642-32960-9 , retrieved October 3, 2024 ^ Cunningham, Stanley. Reclaiming Moral Agency: The Moral Philosophy of Albert the Great. Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University Of America Press, 2008 p. 93 ^ Cunningham, Stanley. Reclaiming Moral Agency: The Moral Philosophy of Albert the Great. Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University Of America Press, 2008 p.207 ^ Cunningham, Stanley. Reclaiming Moral Agency: The Moral Philosophy of Albert the Great. Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University Of America Press, 2008 p.242 ^ Cunningham, Stanley. Reclaiming Moral Agency: The Moral Philosophy of Albert the Great. Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University Of America Press, 2008 p.243 ^ Cunningham, Stanley. Reclaiming Moral Agency: The Moral Philosophy of Albert the Great. Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University Of America Press, 2008 p.244 ^ France: A Phaidon Cultural Guide , Phaidon Press, 1985, ISBN 0-7148-2353-8 , p. 705 ^ The Concept of Anxiety , Princeton University Press , 1980, ISBN 0-691-02011-6 , pp. 150–151 ^ "A Cultural History of Mary Shelley's Frankenstein" .

mtholyoke.edu . Archived from the original on July 30, 2021 . Retrieved November 6, 2021 .

^ Erdmann - History of Philosophy vol 1 trans Hough - London 1910. p. 422 ^ "Open All Hours Season 2" . Archived from the original on April 16, 2021 . Retrieved April 16, 2021 .

^ "Albertus Magnus High School" . Albertusmagnus.net . Retrieved August 9, 2013 .

^ "Albertus Magnus College" . Albertus.edu . Retrieved August 9, 2013 .

^ "Frommann Garden - A gem and wonderful resting place" . visit-jena.de . Retrieved February 27, 2024 .

^ "San Alberto Magno" . Universidad de los Andes - Repositorio BADAC . Retrieved February 27, 2024 .

^ Admin (November 25, 2016).

"Nuestros símbolos" .

Universidad de los Andes - Colombia - Sitio oficial . Universidad de los Andes . Retrieved February 27, 2024 .

^ "Albertus Magnus, Original casting 1955, 3 of 3 casting 1970" . University of Houston. March 8, 2019 . Retrieved February 27, 2024 .

^ Salmassi, Tina M.; Venkateswaren, Kasthuri; Satomi, Masataka; Newman, Dianne K.; Hering, Janet G. (2002).

"Oxidation of Arsenite by Agrobacterium albertimagni, AOL15, sp. nov., isolated from Hot Creek, California" .

Geomicrobiology Journal .

19 (1): 53– 66.

Bibcode : 2002GmbJ...19...53S .

doi : 10.1080/014904502317246165 .

S2CID 85216609 .

^ Hertzog, L. (1933). "Bogidiella albertimagni sp.nov., ein neuer Grundwasseramphipode aus der Rheinebene bei Strassburg".

Zoologischer Anzeiger .

102 (9/10): 225– 227.

^ Halamski, Adam T.; Bitner, Maria Aleksandra; Kaim, Andrzej; Kolar-Jurkovšek, Tea; Jurkovšek, Bogdan (2015). "Unusual brachiopod fauna from the Middle Triassic algal meadows of Mt. Svilaja (Outer Dinarides, Croatia)".

Journal of Paleontology .

89 (4): 553– 575.

Bibcode : 2015JPal...89..553H .

doi : 10.1017/jpa.2015.34 .

S2CID 131380210 .

^ Ambrose, Gavin; Harris, Paul (October 4, 2010).

The Visual Dictionary of Typography . AVA.

ISBN 9782940411184 .

Sources [ edit ] Sighart, Joachim (1876), Albert the Great : his life and scholastic labours: from original documents .

Tugwell, Simon (1988).

Albert and Thomas . New York: Paulist Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Collins, David J.

"Albertus, Magnus or Magus? Magic, Natural Philosophy, and Religious Reform in the Late Middle Ages." Renaissance Quarterly 63 (2010): 1–44.

Collins, David J.

Disenchanting Albert the Great: The Life and Afterlife of a Medieval Magician . University Park, Pa: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2024.

Honnefelder, Ludger (ed.) Albertus Magnus and the Beginnings of the Medieval Reception of Aristotle in the Latin West. From Richardus Rufus to Franciscus de Mayronis , (collection of essays in German and English), Münster Aschendorff, 2005.

Jong, Jonathan.

"Albert the Great: Patron Saint of Scientists" , in: St Mary Magdalen School of Theology , Thinking Faithfully.

Kovach, Francis J. & Shahan, Robert W.

Albert the Great. Commemorative Essays , Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1980.

Lemay, Helen Rodnite.

Women's Secrets: A Translation of Pseudo-Albertus Magnus's De secretis mulierum with Commentaries.

SUNY Series in Medieval Studies. Albany: SUNY Press, 1992.

Miteva, Evelina.

"The Soul between Body and Immortality: The 13th Century Debate on the Definition of the Human Rational Soul as Form and Substance" [ usurped ] , in: Philosophia: E-Journal of Philosophy and Culture , 1/2012.

ISSN 1314-5606 .

Resnick, Irven (ed.), A Companion to Albert the Great: Theology, Philosophy, and the Sciences , Leiden, Brill, 2013.

Resnick, Irven e Kitchell Jr, Kenneth (eds.), Albert the Great: A Selective Annotated Bibliography , (1900–2000), Tempe, Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 2004.

Wallace, William A. (1970).

"Albertus Magnus, Saint" (PDF) . In Gillispie, Charles (ed.).

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 1. New York: Scribner & American Council of Learned Societies. pp.

99– 103.

ISBN 978-0-684-10114-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Albertus Magnus .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Albert the Great Wikiquote has quotations related to Albertus Magnus .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Albertus Magnus ".

Works by Albertus Magnus at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Albertus Magnus at the Internet Archive Works by or about Albert the Great at the Internet Archive Works by Albertus Magnus at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Führer, Markus.

"Albert the Great" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Kennedy, D.J. (1913).

"St. Albertus Magnus" .

Catholic Encyclopedia .

Alberti Magni Works in Latin Online Albertus Magnus on Astrology & Magic "Albertus Magnus & Prognostication by the Stars" Albertus Magnus: "Secrets of the Virtues of Herbs, Stones and Certain Beasts" [ usurped ] , London, 1604, full online version.

Albertus Magnus – De Adhaerendo Deo – On Cleaving to God Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries Archived May 6, 2021, at the Wayback Machine – High resolution images of works by Albertus Magnus in .jpg and .tiff format.

Albertus Magnus works at SOMNI in the collection of the Duke of Calabria .

Alberti Magni De laudibus beate Mariae Virginis , Italian digitized codex of 1476 with a completed transcription of his work "Liber de laudibus gloriosissime Dei genitricis Marie" Albertus Magnus De mirabili scientia Dei , Italian digitized codex of 1484 with a transcription of the first part of his Summa Theologicae .

v t e Order of Preachers A list of all the congregations, notable members, priories, churches, and convents of the Order of Preachers (Dominicans) Members of the Dominican Order Beatified Dominicans Agnes of Jesus Diana degli Andalò Andrea Franchi Fra Angelico Simone Ballachi Pope Benedict XI Pauline Jaricot Benvenuta Bojani Lucy Brocadelli Jose Gabriel del Rosario Brochero Matthew Carrieri Catherine of Racconigi Chiara Gambacorti Antonio della Chiesa Columba of Rieti Hyacinthe-Marie Cormier Domenico Spadafora John Dominici Margareta Ebner Emilia Bicchieri Augustine Fangi Francisco Martín Fernández de Posadas Pier Giorgio Frassati Peter González Buzád Hahót Humbert of Romans John of Vercelli Jordan of Saxony Ana of the Angels Monteagudo Manés de Guzmán Margaret of Castello Maria Bagnesi Ascensión Nicol y Goñi Osanna of Mantua Nicola Paglia Maddalena Panattieri Luke Spicola of Pontecorvo Marie Poussepin Stephana de Quinzanis Bernardo Scammacca Sebastian Maggi Henry Suso Raymond of Capua Reginald of Orleans Villana de' Botti Congregations of Nuns Congregation of the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament Dominican Nuns of the Holy Cross Convent, Regensburg Dominican Nuns of the Perpetual Rosary Dominicans of the Monastery of the Angels, Karachi Dominicans of the Monastery of the Heart of Jesus, Lockport Congregations of Sisters Adrian Dominican Sisters Dominican Sisters of Ilanz Dominican Sisters of Blauvelt Dominican Sisters of Hawthorne Dominican Sisters of Peace Dominican Sisters of St. Catherine of Siena Dominican Sisters of St. Cecilia Dominican Sisters of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Dominican Sisters of the Immaculate Conception Dominican Sisters of Grand Rapids Dominican Sisters of San Rafael Dominican Sisters of Mary, Mother of the Eucharist Dominican Sisters of Sparkill Racine Dominican Sisters Sinsinawa Dominican Sisters Dominican Bishops Diego de Aguilar (bishop) Johannes Alberti (bishop) Jose Advincula Nicolò Albertini Albertus Magnus Bernardo de Albuquerque Domingo de Alzola Andrea Franchi Rodolfo Fontiveros Beltran Teodoro Bacani Jr.

Rufino Sescon Napoleon Sipalay José S. Palma Socrates Villegas Antoninus of Florence Giacomo Balardi Arrigoni Carlos Azpiroz Costa Daniele Barboli Frank Leo Giovanni Battista Natali Archangelo de' Bianchi Franciscus Buratti James Burke Martín Cabeza de Vaca Francisco de la Cámara y Raya Thomas Cammerota Ambrosius Capello Tomás de Cárdenas Andrew of Carniola Bartolomé de las Casas Alfonso de la Cerda Jerónimo Clavijo Jean-Paul Vesco Antonio Cogorno R. Luke Concanen John Connolly Gregorio Cruz Edward Celestin Daly Vincent Darius Agustín Dávila Padilla Michael James Dempsey Joseph Augustine Di Noia Giulio Doffi John Dominici Jean-Paul Vesco Vincenzo de Doncelli Alberto Drago Vincenzo Ercolano Georg Fabri Edward Fenwick Felipe Fernandez de Pardo Anthony Fisher Eustache Fontana Serafino Fortibraccia Ambrosio Fracassini Felipe Galindo Chávez y Pineda Johannes de Galonifontibus John III of Soltaniyeh Ludovico Giamagna Andrés González Pietro de Gozzo Thomas Grace Alfonso Guerra Antonio de Hervias Jean Heysterbach John Howden Guy of Ibelin Henrik Kalteisen Thomas C. Kelly Edward Thaddeus Lawton Giorgio Lazzari Bartolomé de Ledesma Reginaldo de Lizárraga Jerónimo de Loayza Eustachio Locatelli Umberto Locati Bartolomeo Lopaci Juan Lópe Giovanni Marquet Martin of Opava Bartolomé Martinez Menacho y Mesa Pascase Maupair Stefan Antonin Mdzewski Godfried van Mierlo Paolo Isaresi della Mirandola Hermann Molitoris Antonio de Monroy Alonso de Montúfar Munio of Zamora Francisco Naranjo Girolamo Michele Nichesola Berthold von Oberg Michael Padrolo Dionysius Part Alberto Pascaleo Richard Payl Pedro de la Peña Vicente de Peraza Paolo Pico Sigfried Piscator Ponsa Antonio Ponticorona Agostino Quinzio Juan Ramírez de Arellano Miguel Ramírez de Salamanca Raphael Riva Cristóbal Rodríguez Juárez Giovanni Romano Reginaldo Romero Heinrich von Rübenach Abel de Saint-Brieuc Hugh of Saint-Cher Juan de Salamanca Thomas, bishop of Finland Thomas of Mancasola Tommaso da San Cipriano Peter Sanz Christoph Schönborn Tommaso Scotti Pedro Silva y Tenorio Juan Solano John Sproten Luigi Suppa Johannes Tideln Miguel de Torres Pablo de Torres Burchard Tuberflug Domingo de Ulloa Domingo Valderrama y Centeno Antonio de Valdivieso Vicente de Valverde Vincente de Valverde Vitas John of Wildeshausen Juan de Witte Hoos Pedro Xague Dominican Cardinals Nicolò Albertini Michael Browne Yves Congar John Dominici Andreas Frühwirth Hugh of Saint-Cher Christoph Schönborn Jose Advincula Juan de Torquemada Jean-Paul Vesco Frank Leo Timothy Radcliffe Dominican Martyrs Anna Abrikosova Luis Cancer Francis Ferdinand de Capillas Buzád Hahót John of Cologne Martyrs of Gorkum Paul and Ninety Companions Peter Sanz 17 Thomasian Martyrs Dominican Missionaries Jerónimo de Loayza Luise Radlmeier Peter Sanz Juan Solano Vincente de Valverde José Álvarez Fernández Leo Hofstee Dominican Mystics Agnes of Jesus Albertus Magnus Benvenuta Bojani Lucy Brocadelli Catherine of Racconigi Catherine of Siena Columba of Rieti Christina Ebner Margareta Ebner Mary of Jesus de León y Delgado Louis of Granada Osanna of Mantua Stephana de Quinzanis Catherine of Ricci Rose of Lima Elsbeth Stagel Henry Suso Thomas Aquinas Simone Weil Dominican Nuns Anna Abrikosova Agnes of Denmark Agnes of Jesus Agnes of Montepulciano Diana degli Andalò Concepción Argüello La Beata de Piedrahita Sister Bertranda Infanta Branca, Lady of Guadalajara Violante do Ceo Chiara Gambacorti Teresa Chikaba Anna Vittoria Dolara Augusta Theodosia Drane Christina Ebner Margareta Ebner Stephanie Gorodets Elizabeth of Töss Emilia Bicchieri Patricia Fresen Irmengard of Oettingen Marion Irvine Catherine Jarrige Joanna, Princess of Portugal Theresa Kugel Saint Margaret of Fontana Margaret of Hungary Juliana Morell Osanna of Cattaro Lea Ráskay Bartolomea Riccoboni Nora Rubashova Elsbeth Stagel Yolanda of Vianden Maria Petra Giordano Dominican Popes Pope Benedict XI Pope Benedict XIII Pope Innocent V Pope Pius V Dominican Saints Agnes of Montepulciano Albertus Magnus Antoninus of Florence Louis Bertrand Francis Ferdinand de Capillas Catherine of Siena Saint Dominic Vincent Ferrer Marie-Alphonsine Danil Ghattas Hyacinth of Poland John of Cologne John Macias Margaret of Hungary Martyrs of Gorkum Paul and Ninety Companions Pope Pius V Martin de Porres Raymond of Penyafort Rose of Lima Peter Sanz Thomas Aquinas Zdislava Berka Dominican Scholars Francisco Burgoa Jean Maurice Fiey Bede Jarrett Stjepan Krasić Raymond-Joseph Loenertz Martin of Opava Jean de Menasce Luise Radlmeier Lea Ráskay Antonin Sertillanges Rose Thering Dominican Sisters Anna Abrikosova Mother Mary Alphonsa Lucy Brocadelli Columba of Rieti Carol Gilbert Jackie Hudson Mary of Jesus de León y Delgado Margaret MacCurtain Ascensión Nicol y Goñi Ardeth Platte Stephana de Quinzanis Luise Radlmeier Catherine of Ricci Rose Thering Marjorie Tuite Rose Whitty Dominican Theologians Nicholas Bayard Catherine of Siena Yves Congar Joseph Augustine Di Noia Marcel-Jacques Dubois Luis Galiana y Cervera Henrik Kalteisen John Lutterell Aidan Nichols Paulus Hungarus Juan de Torquemada Benedict T. Viviano Dominican Tertiaries Francis Amherst Simone Ballachi Benvenuta Bojani Jose Gabriel del Rosario Brochero Catherine of Racconigi Catherine of Siena Pier Giorgio Frassati Pauline Jaricot Martin Grabmann Margaret of Castello Maria Bagnesi Osanna of Mantua Rose of Lima Villana de' Botti Lorenzo Ruíz of Manila Dominican Churches, Convents, and Monasteries Dominican Churches Basilica of San Sisto Vecchio Basilica of Santa Maria Novella Basilica of St Dominic, Valletta Blessed Sacrament Church, Seattle Church of St Catherine, Saint Petersburg Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, Košice Church of St. Vincent Ferrer, Manhattan Dominican Church, Lviv Dominican Church and Convent of St. James, Sandomierz Dominican Church and Convent of the Assumption of Mary, Tarnobrzeg Dominican Church, Vienna Église Saint-Cannat Monastery Church, Sighișoara Nuestra Señora del Rosario y Santo Domingo, Montevideo Our Lady of Pompei Church, Victoria, Gozo Predigerkirche Zürich San Domenico Maggiore San Domenico, Palermo San Giacomo Apostolo, Forlì Sant'Anastasia, Verona Santa Maria di Castello Santa Maria della Pietà, Palermo Santa Maria sopra Minerva Santa Sabina Santi Giovanni e Paolo, Venice Santissima Trinità a Via Condotti Santo Domingo, Mexico City St. Andrew's Church, Cologne St Cuthbert's Church, Durham St Dominic's Priory Church St. Paul's Church, Antwerp St. Hyacinth's Church, Warsaw Dominican Convents Convent of San Domenico, Fiesole Convento de Santo Tomás Dominican Church and Convent of St. James, Sandomierz Dominican Church and Convent of the Assumption of Mary, Tarnobrzeg Dominican Convent, Ilanz Dominican Convent, Zaragoza Predigerkloster St. Catherine's Priory, Roskilde Schlehdorf Abbey Skänninge Abbey St. John's Priory, Kalmar Wettenhausen Abbey Dominican Monasteries Ballindoon Friary Black Friars' Monastery of Stockholm Burrishoole Friary Corpus Christi Monastery Couvent des Jacobins de la rue Saint-Honoré Couvent des Jacobins de la rue Saint-Jacques Dominican Priory, Viborg Flavigny Abbey Holbæk Priory Kirchberg convent Liebenau monastery Matris Domini Monastery Monastère de Chalais North Abbey, Youghal Notre-Dame-de-Prouille Monastery Oetenbach nunnery Our Lady's Priory, Aarhus Priory of the Immaculate Conception Paulinerkirche, Leipzig Rue Saint-Dominique Sainte Marie de La Tourette Santa Catalina Monastery Sligo Abbey St. Agnes' Priory, Gavnø St Catherine's Monastery, Bremen St. Catherine's Monastery, Tallinn St. Catherine's Priory, Roskilde St. Catherine's Priory, Ribe St. Catherine Monastery, Olomouc Töss Monastery Weesen Abbey Dominican Education Colleges and Universities Albertus Magnus College Angelicum College Aquinas College, Michigan Aquinas College, Tennessee Aquinas Institute of Theology Aquinas University Barry University Caldwell University Colegio de San Juan de Letran Dominican College, New York Dominican School of Philosophy and Theology Dominican University, Illinois Dominican University of California Edgewood College Holy Trinity University Molloy College Mount Saint Mary College Providence College St. Catharine College St. Mary's Dominican College St. Thomas Aquinas College Siena Heights University Pontifical Universities Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas University of Santo Tomas Schools Albertus Magnus High School Angelicum School Iloilo Aquinas High School, New York Aquinas School Blackfriars Priory School Cabra Dominican College Dominican Academy Dominican Convent High School, Harare Dominican Convent High School, Bulawayo Dominican Convent Primary School, Bulawayo Dominican College Sion Hill Dominican College, Fortwilliam Dominican College, Portstewart Dominican High School, Whitefish Bay Dominican International School Dominican School Manila Edgewood High School of the Sacred Heart Fenwick High School (Oak Park, Illinois) Flintridge Sacred Heart Academy Frassati Catholic High School Immaculate Conception Academy (San Francisco, California) Marian Catholic High School (Illinois) Maryknoll School of Lupon Mount de Sales Academy (Catonsville, Maryland) Mount Saint Dominic Academy Newbridge College Queen of Peace High School, Illinois Regina Dominican High School Rosarian Academy Rosary High School, Aurora Rosaryhill School Sacred Heart High School (California) San Gabriel Mission High School Santa Catalina School Saint Agnes Academy, Texas Saint Dominic Academy Saint John Paul the Great Catholic High School (Virginia) Saint Michael Academy, Catarman Santa Sabina College Siena College, Camberwell Siena College of Quezon City Siena College of Taytay St Catherine's Academy St Catherine's School, Germiston St Dominic's Catholic School for Girls, Boksburg St Dominic's Chishawasha St Dominic's College, Henderson St Dominic's Grammar School St Dominic's Grammar School for Girls St Dominic's Priory School, Stone St Dominic's Priory College, Adelaide St Dominic's Sixth Form College St John's High School, Harare St Joseph's School, Oamaru St Mary's Dominican High School St Rose's Senior High School, Akwatia St Vincent Ferrer High School Superior Institute of Religious Sciences of St. Thomas Aquinas Trinity Catholic College, Dunedin, New Zealand Trinity High School (River Forest, Illinois) Catholicism portal v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal v t e Medieval philosophers Christian Early " Church Fathers " Augustine of Hippo Boethius Cassiodorus Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Isidore of Seville John Scotus Eriugena Alcuin 11–12th century " Scholasticism " Anselm of Canterbury Peter Abelard Anselm of Laon Hugh of Saint Victor Richard of Saint Victor Roscelin Peter Lombard Alexander of Hales Bernard of Chartres Dominicus Gundissalinus Gilbert de la Porrée Alain de Lille 13–14th century Robert Grosseteste Michael Scot Albertus Magnus Henry of Ghent Roger Bacon Bonaventure Thomas Aquinas Vitello John Peckham Ramon Llull Siger of Brabant Boetius of Dacia Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt Meister Eckhart Giles of Rome Godfrey of Fontaines Duns Scotus Durandus Petrus Aureolus William of Ockham Late Jean Buridan Marsilius of Inghen Nicole Oresme Albert of Saxony Francesc Eiximenis Nicholas of Cusa Vincent Ferrer Paul of Venice Lambertus de Monte John Hennon Jewish Medieval Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Saadia Gaon Solomon ibn Gabirol Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Maimonides Nachmanides Gersonides Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Islamic Early Jabir ibn Hayyan (Geber) al-Nazzam Al-Kindi (Alkindus) Abu Bakr al-Razi (Rhazes) Ikhwan al-Safa' (Brethren of Purity) Matta ibn Yunus Al-Farabi (Alpharabius) Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Ibn Masarra Abd al-Jabbar Al-Amiri Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani Miskawayh Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) al-Biruni al-Kirmani High Ibn Sina (Avicenna) Ibn Hazm Al-Ghazali (Algazel) Abu l-Barakat al-Baghdadi Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Rushd (Averroes) Late Ibn Sab'in Shahab al-Din Yahya ibn Habash Suhrawardi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Rashid al-Din Ibn Arabi al-Qazwini Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Athir al-Din al-Abhari Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Nafis Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Ibn Taymiyya Ibn Khaldun See also Renaissance philosophy v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Portals : Saints Biography Christianity Germany Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 FAST WorldCat 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain 2 Portugal 2 Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland 2 Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists ULAN People BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Albertus_Magnus&oldid=1306455305 " Categories : 1280 deaths 13th-century alchemists 13th-century astrologers 13th-century Christian mystics 13th-century Christian saints 13th-century German Catholic theologians 13th-century German philosophers 13th-century jurists 13th-century Roman Catholic bishops in Bavaria 13th-century writers in Latin Academic staff of the University of Paris Alsatian saints Aristotelian philosophers Canonizations by Pope Pius XI Catholic clergy scientists Catholic philosophers Characters in the Divine Comedy Discoverers of chemical elements Doctors of the Church Dominican bishops Dominican mystics Dominican saints German astrologers German Dominicans German entomologists German male non-fiction writers German Roman Catholic saints German Roman Catholic writers Incorrupt saints Latin commentators on Aristotle Natural law ethicists Natural philosophers People from Lauingen Provincial superiors Roman Catholic bishops of Regensburg Scholastic philosophers University of Padua alumni Writers about religion and science Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2019 Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Commons link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 21:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Albertus Magnus 74 languages Add topic

