Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 National celebrations Toggle National celebrations subsection 2.1 National civil-military parade 2.1.1 Rehearsals 2.1.2 Arrival honors 2.1.3 Ceremonial segment 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Day of the Foundation of the Republic 9 languages Ελληνικά Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Annual observance in North Korea Day of the Foundation of the Republic Also called Independence Day Observed by North Korea Observances Visits to statues of Kim Il Sung and his mausoleum , fireworks, performances, sports competitions, folk dances Date 9 September Next time 9 September 2025 ( 2025-09-09 ) Frequency annual Related to Day of the Shining Star (16 February), Day of the Sun (15 April), Party Foundation Day (10 October), Constitution Day (27 December) Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Day of the Foundation of the Republic ( Korean : 인민정권 창건일 ; Hanja : 人民政權 創建日 ) is the Republic Day and National day [ 1 ] of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea , held on 9 September.

[ 2 ] The Day of the Foundation of the Republic is one of the most important holidays of the country, along with the Day of the Sun (birthday of Kim Il Sung ), Day of the Shining Star (birthday of Kim Jong Il ) and Party Foundation Day .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Following the Liberation of Korea in 1945 by the Soviet and American forces, a communist Soviet military regime was set up in the northern part of Korea. A new Supreme People's Assembly was elected in August 1948, and on 3 September a new constitution was promulgated. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea was proclaimed on 9 September, with Kim Il Sung as Premier .

[ 4 ] Because the date is 9 September, it is also called 9 · 9 Holiday (구구절).

[ 5 ] National celebrations [ edit ] The holiday is celebrated throughout the country.

[ 6 ] On this day, events such as art performances, exhibitions, athletic events, and reports are held. On jubilee years (ex: 25th anniversary, 40th anniversary, 50th anniversary, 60th anniversary, 70th anniversary), military parades on Kim Il-sung Square take place with the participation of the leader of North Korea . It is also common for new children to be admitted to the Korean Children's Union on the day.

[ 1 ] In contrast to many other holidays that are very politicized, the Foundation Day concerns the whole country. It also has an international and diplomatic outlook with foreigners being likelier to attend it than some other holidays.

[ 7 ] The day was first celebrated in 1949. The intensity of celebrations has varied considerably. Celebrations in 1950 were low key due to the Korean War . In contrast, 1956 saw sizeable celebrations following Kim Il Sung's triumph in a domestic political crisis just days earlier called the August Faction Incident . In 1997 the Juche calendar was adopted on September 9, which became September 9, Juche 86.

[ 7 ] In 1978, the country celebrated the 30th anniversary of the republic. In honor of the anniversary, Chinese paramount leader Deng Xiaoping attended in his official capacities as the First Vice Premier of the State Council and the Chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference .

[ 8 ] In 2018: North Korea marked the 70th anniversary of its foundation, during which Russian Federation Council Chairman Valentina Matviyenko and Mauritanian President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz , as well as delegations from Cuba , Syria , Lebanon , Palestine , the Dominican Republic , Uganda , and South Africa were in attendance during the celebrations.

[ 9 ] Chinese Communist Party general secretary Xi Jinping was expected to attend the parade during his state visit to North Korea on 9 September, however cancelled his attendance, instead sending Congress chairman Li Zhanshu to Pyongyang .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] For the first time in five years, the Arirang Mass Games also took place.

[ 13 ] In 2021, a banquet was held at the yard in front of the Central Committee building at the Government Complex No. 1 in central Pyongyang.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In the 2022 celebrations, a concert and an outdoor banquet was held in the yard of the Mansudae Assembly Hall .

[ 16 ] National civil-military parade [ edit ] Further information: Military parades in North Korea This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Worker-Peasant Red Guards in Pyongyang during the 2013 Day of the Foundation of the Republic.

The semiannual parade, which was a feature of the day since the first parade of 1948, and is also televised on Korean Central Television via tape delay (since 2018), is a key highlight of the national celebrations in Pyongyang. Since 1958, parades have been held on the city's Kim Il Sung Square in honor of the holiday every 5 years, following Chinese practice. The first parade was a purely civil one (and so did others like the parades of 1960, 1968 and 1988) and it was in 1993 that the parade became a civil-military event.

The parade is attended by the Supreme Leader of the DPRK in his capacity as the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces of North Korea , and the current format dates from the parade of 2013. Its commander is a general-ranked officer of the KPA with the rank of either Colonel General or General of the Army (rarely a vice marshal ) with the billet of Commanding Officer, Pyongyang Defense Command , with the parade inspector also is a general-ranked officer of the KPA with the rank of either Colonel General or General of the Army (rarely a vice marshal or even a Marshal of the Republic) with higher billets, usually the Chief of the General Staff or Minister of Defense .

Rehearsals [ edit ] The Korean People's Army prepares for these parades at Mirim Parade Training Ground in the summer and is expected to be one of the largest according to a satellite analysis of the capital.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The training ground includes a replica of Kim Il-Sung Square and the central grandstand that is used during rehearsals.

[ 19 ] Arrival honors [ edit ] Before 10 a.m., the parade is formed up as a trumpeter sounds the attention call. To the tune of the massed bands of the Korean People's Army and the Korean People's Social Security Forces, the parade's formations march into Kim Il Sung Square by battalions, each echelon halting and then taking their places in the square. Since 2013 the guard of honor battalion of the Supreme Guard Command, a joint service formation, takes its places in the formation as well together with the massed bands. (A third honor guard company is stationed in front of the Grand People's Study House to receive the arrival of the Supreme Leader and other party and state leaders.) At the stands at the square are distinguished citizens, residents of Pyongyang, veterans of the People's Army and members of the diplomatic corps.

At 10 a.m. the Supreme Leader arrives at the grandstand and is received by a field officer of the Army who serves as the commander of the honor guard company, informing him of the readiness of the guard for inspection.

[ 20 ] He is accompanied by the following: High ranking members of the Central Committee of the WPK, including Politburo Chairman of the Standing Committee of the Supreme People's Assembly Chairman of the Supreme People's Assembly Director of the General Political Bureau of the Korean People's Army Minister of State Security Minister of Social Security Premier of the Cabinet President and Chief Justice of Supreme Court Director General of the Supreme Public Prosecutor's Office Other dignitaries During jubilee years, the occasional foreign leader or high ranking official on state visit to the DPRK As a secondary band plays inspection music, he inspects the guard company, and following this, he then enters the parade grandstand. At the signal of the conductor of the Massed Bands who then play "Song of Happiness for the Great Leader", a signature tune adopted in the late 1960s, the Supreme Commander arrives at the central viewing platform of the grandstand with the other invited dignitaries. Upon his arrival, the parade renders a salute and the colours of all participating units are dipped, as all 20,000 service personnel on formation shout Manse!

loud while a 21-gun salute is fired.

Ceremonial segment [ edit ] Female soldiers rehearsing for the parade in 2011.

As the music ends, the massed bands on formation sound an opening fanfare and then begin a military tattoo-style segment with the guards of honor as they prepare to reform to ceremonial order, in a tradition that began in 2013.

[ 21 ] Following this the parade commander takes his place on his vehicle, now set to begin the ceremonial segments of the parade. Following the command to present arms, the parade renders honors to the national flag and the banner of the Workers' Party, which arrive at the square on vehicles. As the colour guards depart, they march on to the two flagpoles at the south end of the square facing the state grandstand, whereby as the massed bands play " Aegukka " and '"Long Live the Workers' Party of Korea", the flags are raised.

Following this, the parade presents arms again for the inspection phrase. To the tune of the massed bands, the parade commander's vehicle meets with the vehicle of the parade inspector, and as the music stops the parade commander informs the parade inspector for the readiness of the parade to be reviewed for inspection.

[ 21 ] The report done, the parade inspection begins as each of the battalions forming up the parade are inspected while the bands play, and as they halt the inspector greets the formations assembled. Following this, after all have been inspected, the two then depart to inspect the mobile column, and after the inspector greets the personnel of the column formed into battalions, they both return, as the bands play "Victorious Military Parade", to the square. As the music pauses, the parade inspector then informs the Supreme Leader that the parade, now formed up and having been inspected, is now ready for the marchpast, the report received the inspector leaves for the grandstand while the parade commander returns to his position.

As the inspector arrives and the parade asked to order arms and stand at ease, the fanfare trumpeters sound a fanfare, and as another 21-gun salute is fired the massed bands play both the "Song of General Kim il-Sung" and the "Song of General Kim Jong-il", followed by the keynote national address by a high-ranking member of the Party Political Bureau or in some cases, the Supreme Leader himself. Following this, the parade renders a general salute to the memory of both Kim il-Sung and Kim Jong Il as limousines carrying their portraits are driven past, with red flag bearers (formerly colour bearers of KPA formations) escorting them while the massed bands play, the echelons are led by veteran officers of the KPA. (This segment was first introduced in the golden jubilee parade of 1998.) After this segment, the parade commander gives the following commands: Parade... attention! Ceremonial march past!

Form battalions! Distance by a single lineman! First battalion will remain in the right, remainder... left.. turn!

Slope.. arms!

(Eyes to the right..) Forward, quick march!

As the command is given to start the linemen take their places and the senior director of music of the massed bands gets his conducting baton ready to conduct the bands. After the final command, as the bands strike up the mostly locally composed marches the parade's ground column marches out by battalions past the grandstand and into the streets of the capital. As of 2021 the Cavalry Honors Group of the Supreme Guards Command leads the parading contingents first, followed by a historical column in jubilee years wearing uniforms of the Second World War Korean resistance and the Korean War period. As each battalion marches past the grandstand, in a recent tradition that began in the 65th anniversary parade in 2013, the color ensign dips the unit colour and upon finishing its march past away from the dais the bearer returns the colour to the slope position. Units that carry battle rifles or RPGs would present them at the trail at the eyes right position - a practice inherited from long time use of the Mosin Nagant and SKS by KPA formations. The parade's order of precedence for contingents on the march past is the KPA first followed by the Ministry of Social Security, the State Security Department, KPA Reserve Military Training Units, the Worker Peasant Red Guards, Red Youth Guards and the Korean Children's Union. On special years the KPA contingent is preceded by a historical formation wearing uniforms showing the evolution of the KPA and the country at large.

See also [ edit ] North Korea portal Holidays portal Day of the Shining Star Day of the Sun Government of North Korea History of North Korea National symbols of North Korea Public holidays in North Korea References [ edit ] ^ a b Hunter, Helen-Louise (2008).

"The Society and Its Environment" . In Worden, Robert L. (ed.).

North Korea: A Country Study (Fifth ed.). Washington: Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress. p.

85 .

ISBN 978-0-8444-1188-0 .

^ "Pyongyang theatre guide, North Korea" .

Korea Konsult AB - adventures to another world!

. Retrieved 12 November 2024 .

^ Yonhap News Agency, Seoul (27 December 2002).

North Korea Handbook . M.E. Sharpe. pp.

451– 452.

ISBN 978-0-7656-3523-5 .

^ Buzo, Adrian (2002).

The Making of Modern Korea . London: Routledge. p.

60 –61.

ISBN 0-415-23749-1 .

^ "9ㆍ9 '공화국 창건일'은 허구다" . Retrieved 30 April 2025 .

^ "Democratic People's Republic of Korea Founding Day" .

Holidays, Festivals, and Celebrations of the World Dictionary (Fourth ed.). Omnigraphics. 2010 . Retrieved 13 January 2017 – via TheFreeDictionary.com.

^ a b Tertitskiy, Fyodor (8 September 2018).

"Is North Korea's 9/9 Foundation Day its most important holiday?" .

NK News . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .

^ "Appearances and Activities of Leading Chinese Officials" . 1979.

^ "Russian upper house speaker Matviyenko to pay official visit to N. Korea" .

TASS . 7 September 2018 . Retrieved 9 September 2018 .

^ Lieu, Amy (19 August 2018).

"China's Xi to make first official visit to Pyongyang for North Korea's 70th anniversary" .

Fox News . Retrieved 8 September 2018 .

^ "Chinese President Xi to visit North Korea next month: Straits Times" .

Reuters . 18 August 2018 . Retrieved 8 September 2018 .

^ "Don't ask why Xi isn't going to North Korea. Ask: Why would he?" . 8 September 2018.

^ Smith, Josh (1 September 2018).

"North Korea preparing toned-down military parade: analysts" .

Reuters . Retrieved 8 September 2018 .

^ "Kim Jong Un Meets and Congratulates Labour Innovators and Merited Persons Who Participated in Celebrations of 73rd Anniversary of DPRK" . Explore DPRK. 9 September 2021 . Retrieved 4 September 2023 .

^ "NK diplomats engaging in illicit financing activities: British gov't report" .

The Korea Herald . 25 September 2021 . Retrieved 4 September 2023 .

^ Zwirko, Colin (9 September 2022).

"Mysterious new aide to Kim Jong Un reappears at massive concert, banquet" .

NK News . Retrieved 13 February 2023 .

^ "North Korea preparing for major military parade" .

United Press International . 22 August 2018 . Retrieved 8 September 2018 .

^ "North Korea's Foundation Day Parade: Likely to be Larger than the February Army Day Parade" .

38 North . 21 August 2018 . Retrieved 8 September 2018 .

^ "Timeline of North Korean Military Parade Preparations | 38 North: Informed Analysis of North Korea" . 24 January 2018.

^ http://www.pyongyangtimes.com.kp/LMTXM/?bbs=21006 [ dead link ] ^ a b "Parade and Demonstration Held to Mark DPRK's Birthday" . North Korea Leadership Watch . Retrieved 3 November 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Day of the Foundation of the Republic (North Korea) .

Day of the Foundation of the Republic Archived 14 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine at Naenara Tertitskiy, Fyodor (9 September 2017).

"The meaning of North Korea's 'Foundation Day' " .

NK News .

v t e Public holidays in North Korea New Year's Day Korean New Year Chosongul Day Day of the Shining Star Day of the Sun Military Foundation Day Daeboreum Buddha's Birthday International Workers' Day Day of Victory in the Great Fatherland Liberation War Fatherland Liberation Day Day of Songun Day of the Foundation of the Republic Party Foundation Day Mother's Day Constitution Day v t e National symbols of North Korea Constitutional Flag Emblem Anthem Pyongyang (capital) Other Magnolia sieboldii (flower) Oriental magpie (bird) Pine (tree) Pungsan (dog) Kimchi (dish) Choson-ot (dress) Ssirum (sport) Juche Tower and Mangyongdae (monuments) Juche calendar Foundation Day Cho Ki-chon (poet) Chollima Korean language Munhwaŏ North Korean won (currency) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Day_of_the_Foundation_of_the_Republic&oldid=1294090501 " Categories : Annual events in North Korea Events in Pyongyang Public holidays in North Korea Republic days September observances Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2018 Infobox holiday with missing field Infobox holiday fixed day (2) Articles containing Korean-language text Articles needing additional references from September 2020 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 14:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Day of the Foundation of the Republic 9 languages Add topic

