Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 ICSPCA definition of the crime of apartheid Toggle ICSPCA definition of the crime of apartheid subsection 2.1 UN definition of racial discrimination 3 ICC definition of the crime of apartheid 4 Court Cases 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Crime of apartheid 17 languages العربية Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית Lietuvių Nederlands پښتو Polski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Crime of racial oppression in international law This article is about the crime of Apartheid as defined in international law. For the system of racial segregation that formerly existed in South Africa, see Apartheid . For other uses, see Apartheid (disambiguation) .

International humanitarian law Courts and Tribunals Nuremberg trials International Military Tribunal for the Far East International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda International Court of Justice International Criminal Court Violations War crimes Treaties Hague Conventions Geneva Conventions Third Geneva Convention Fourth Geneva Convention Protocol I Protocol II Protocol III Rome Statute Related areas of law Law of war ( jus ad bellum ) International human rights law International criminal law v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e The crime of apartheid is defined by the 2002 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court as inhumane acts of a character similar to other crimes against humanity "committed in the context of an institutionalized regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group over any other racial group or groups and committed with the intention of maintaining that regime".

[ 1 ] On 30 November 1973, the United Nations General Assembly opened for signature and ratification The International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid .

[ 2 ] It defined the crime of apartheid as "inhuman acts committed for the purpose of establishing and maintaining domination by one racial group of persons over any other racial group of persons and systematically oppressing them".

[ 3 ] According to Human Rights Watch and legal scholar Miles Jackson, apartheid is also prohibited in customary international law although there is still debate as to whether it is criminalized as well.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In 2021, two former members of apartheid South Africa's security police became the first persons ever to be indicted for the crime of apartheid under customary international law.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] International opposition to apartheid in South Africa Anti-apartheid protest in Amsterdam , 1988 Campaigns Academic boycott Sporting boycott Disinvestment Constructive engagement Free South Africa Movement International anti-apartheid music International sanctions Milton King boycotts Instruments and legislation 1962 UN Resolution 1761 1973 Crime of Apartheid Convention 1977 Gleneagles Agreement 1977 Sullivan principles 1986 Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act Organisations Anti-Apartheid Movement Artists United Against Apartheid Commonwealth of Nations Halt All Racist Tours Organisation of African Unity TransAfrica UN Special Committee against Apartheid Conferences 1964 Conference for Economic Sanctions 1978 World Conference against Racism UN Security Council Resolutions Resolution 134 (Sharpeville massacre) Resolution 181 (voluntary arms embargo) Resolution 191 (sanctions feasibility) Resolution 282 (arms embargo strengthening) Resolution 418 (mandatory arms embargo) Resolution 435 (South-West Africa ceasefire) Resolution 591 (arms embargo strengthening) Other aspects Elimination of Racism Day "Biko" (song) Activists Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute Equity television programming ban Rugby union and apartheid v t e Further information: Allegations of apartheid by country The term apartheid , from Afrikaans for 'apartness', was the official name of the South African system of racial segregation which existed after 1948. Complaints about the system were brought to the United Nations as early as 12 July 1948 when Padmanabha Pillai, the representative of India to the United Nations, circulated a letter to the secretary-general expressing his concerns over treatment of ethnic Indians within the Union of South Africa .

[ 7 ] As it became more widely known, South African apartheid was condemned internationally as unjust and racist and many decided that a formal legal framework was needed in order to apply international pressure on the South African government.

In 1971, the Soviet Union and Guinea together submitted early drafts of a convention to deal with the suppression and punishment of apartheid.

[ 8 ] In 1973, the General Assembly of the United Nations agreed on the text of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid (ICSPCA).

[ 2 ] The convention has 31 signatories and 107 parties.
The convention came into force in 1976 after 20 countries had ratified it. They were: Benin, Bulgaria, Chad, Czechoslovakia , Ecuador, the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), Guinea, Hungary, Iraq, Mongolia, Poland, Qatar, Somalia, Syria, the USSR , the United Arab Emirates, Tanzania, and Yugoslavia .

[ 9 ] "As such, apartheid was declared to be a crime against humanity , with a scope that went far beyond South Africa. While the crime of apartheid is most often associated with the racist policies of South Africa after 1948, the term more generally refers to racially based policies in any state." [ 10 ] Seventy-six other countries subsequently signed on, but a number of nations, including Western democracies, have neither signed nor ratified the ICSPCA, including Canada, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand and the United States.

[ 11 ] In explanation of the US vote against the convention, Ambassador Clarence Clyde Ferguson Jr.

said: "[W]e cannot... accept that apartheid can in this manner be made a crime against humanity. Crimes against humanity are so grave in nature that they must be meticulously elaborated and strictly construed under existing international law..." [ 12 ] In 1977, Addition Protocol 1 to the Geneva Conventions designated apartheid as a grave breach of the protocol and a war crime. There are 169 parties to the protocol.

[ 13 ] The International Criminal Court provides for individual criminal responsibility for crimes against humanity, including the crime of apartheid.

[ 14 ] The ICC came into being on 1 July 2002, and can only prosecute crimes committed on or after that date.  The court can generally only exercise jurisdiction in cases where the accused is a national of a state party, the alleged crime took place on the territory of a state party, or a situation is referred to the court by the United Nations Security Council . The ICC exercises complimentary jurisdiction. Many of the member states have provided their own national courts with universal jurisdiction over the same offenses and do not recognize any statute of limitations for crimes against humanity.

[ 15 ] As of July 2008, 106 countries are states parties (with Suriname and Cook Islands set to join in October 2008), and a further 40 countries have signed but not yet ratified the treaty.

[ 16 ] However, many of the world's most populous nations, including China, India, the United States, Indonesia, and Pakistan are not parties to the court and therefore are not subject to its jurisdiction, except by security council referral.

ICSPCA definition of the crime of apartheid [ edit ] Main article: International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid Article II of the ICSPCA defines the crime of apartheid as: For the purpose of the present Convention, the term 'the crime of apartheid', which shall include similar policies and practices of racial segregation and discrimination as practiced in southern Africa, shall apply to the following inhumane acts committed for the purpose of establishing and maintaining domination by one racial group of persons over any other racial group of persons and systematically oppressing them: Denial to a member or members of a racial group or groups of the right to life and liberty of person By murder of members of a racial group or groups; By the infliction upon the members of a racial group or groups of serious bodily or mental harm, by the infringement of their freedom or dignity, or by subjecting them to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; By arbitrary arrest and illegal imprisonment of the members of a racial group or groups; Deliberate imposition on a racial group or groups of living conditions calculated to cause its or their physical destruction in whole or in part; Any legislative measures and other measures calculated to prevent a racial group or groups from participation in the political, social, economic and cultural life of the country and the deliberate creation of conditions preventing the full development of such a group or groups, in particular by denying to members of a racial group or groups basic human rights and freedoms, including the right to work, the right to form recognised trade unions, the right to education, the right to leave and to return to their country, the right to a nationality, the right to freedom of movement and residence, the right to freedom of opinion and expression, and the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association; Any measures including legislative measures, designed to divide the population along racial lines by the creation of separate reserves and ghettos for the members of a racial group or groups, the prohibition of mixed marriages among members of various racial groups, the expropriation of landed property belonging to a racial group or groups or to members thereof; Exploitation of the labour of the members of a racial group or groups, in particular by submitting them to forced labour; Persecution of organizations and persons, by depriving them of fundamental rights and freedoms, because they oppose apartheid.

— International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, Article II [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Signatories to the 1973 International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid: parties in dark green, signed but not ratified in light green, non-members in grey UN definition of racial discrimination [ edit ] Main article: International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination According to the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), the term "racial discrimination" shall mean any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life.

[ 17 ] This definition does not make any difference between discrimination based on ethnicity and race , in part because the distinction between the two remains debatable among anthropologists .

[ 18 ] Similarly, in British law the phrase racial group means "any group of people who are defined by reference to their race, colour, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origin".

[ 19 ] ICC definition of the crime of apartheid [ edit ] Main articles: Rome Statute and International Criminal Court Article 7 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court defines the crime of apartheid  as: [ 20 ] The 'crime of apartheid' means inhumane acts of a character similar to those referred to in paragraph 1, committed in the context of an institutionalised regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group over any other racial group or groups and committed with the intention of maintaining that regime.

Court Cases [ edit ] See also: Israeli apartheid The International Court of Justice in its 2024 case on Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territories , gave an advisory opinion [ 21 ] [ 22 ] which found that Israel was in breach of Article 3 of International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination , including "racial segregation and apartheid". HRW declared that "World Court Finds Israel Responsible for Apartheid".

[ 23 ] In 2024 South Africa opened prosecutions against the alleged perpetrators of the 1982 kidnapping and murder of the Cosas Four anti-apartheid activists. In 2025, a South African court ruled that apartheid had been a crime against customary international law at the time of the crime.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Internal resistance to apartheid Jim Crow laws References [ edit ] ^ "Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, 1998" .

legal.un.org .

^ a b c "Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid" .

United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law .

Archived from the original on 2013-12-09 . Retrieved 10 October 2011 .

^ a b "International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid " (PDF) .

United Nations .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-10-17 . Retrieved 2017-12-26 .

^ Jackson, Miles (2022). "The Definition of Apartheid in Customary International Law and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination".

International & Comparative Law Quarterly .

71 (4): 831– 855.

doi : 10.1017/S0020589322000379 .

ISSN 0020-5893 .

^ Baldwin, Clive (9 July 2021).

"Human Rights Watch Responds: Reflections on Apartheid and Persecution in International Law" .

Human Rights Watch . Retrieved 23 November 2022 .

^ Gerhard Kemp & Windell Nortje https://academic.oup.com/jicj/article/21/2/405/7231934 ^ Pillai, Padmanabha (12 July 1948).

"Letter from the representative of India to the Secretary-General concerning the treatment of Indians in South Africa" . Archived from the original on 3 June 2012 . Retrieved 10 October 2011 .

^ Olav Stokke and Carl Widstrand, ed. (1973).

Southern Africa Vol. 1: United Nations-Organization of African Unity Conference Oslo 9–14 April 1973 . Scandinavian Institute of African Studies.

Archived from the original on 13 June 2022 . Retrieved 22 April 2022 .

^ "Treaties and international agreements registered or filed and recorded with the Secretariat of the United Nations" (PDF) . VOLUME 1015. 1976. p.244.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 October 2019 . Retrieved 13 June 2019 .

^ Morton, Jeffrey S. (2000).

The International Law Commission of the United Nations . University of South Carolina Press. p. 27.

ISBN 1-57003-170-3 .

^ "United Nations Treaty Collection" .

treaties.un.org . Archived from the original on July 18, 2012.

^ Statement by Ambassador Clarence Clyde Ferguson Jr. before General Assembly in explanation of vote on Apartheid Convention, 30 November 1973. Review of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights: Hearings before the Subcommittee on International Organizations and Movements of the House Foreign Affairs Committee (1974) p.58 ^ See Article 85(4) and 85(5) of Additional Protocol 1, dated 8 June 1977 [1] Archived 2008-12-10 at the Wayback Machine ^ Article 7 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court specifically lists the "crime of apartheid" as one of eleven recognized crimes against humanity.

^ "Database of National Implementing Legislation" . Archived from the original on 6 July 2008 . Retrieved 4 July 2009 .

^ United Nations.

Multilateral treaties deposited with the Secretary-General: Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court Archived 2008-05-09 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed 16 July 2007.

^ UN International Convention on the Elimination of All of Racial Discrimination Archived 2021-04-23 at the Wayback Machine , New York 7 March 1966 ^ Metraux, A. (1950). "United nations Economic and Security Council Statement by Experts on Problems of Race".

American Anthropologist .

53 (1): 142– 145.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1951.53.1.02a00370 .

^ "Racist and Religious Crime – CPS Prosecution Policy" . The CPS. Archived from the original on 19 January 2010 . Retrieved 23 May 2010 .

^ United Nations (2002).

"Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Part 2, Article 7" . Archived from the original on 12 July 2007 . Retrieved 21 July 2007 .

^ LEGAL CONSEQUENCES ARISING FROM THE POLICIES AND PRACTICES OF ISRAEL IN THE OCCUPIED PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, INCLUDING EAST JERUSALEM, 19 JULY 2024, ADVISORY OPINION [2] ^ "World Court Finds Israel Responsible for Apartheid" .

Human Rights Watch . 2024-07-19 . Retrieved 2024-08-07 .

^ "World Court Finds Israel Responsible for Apartheid" .

Human Rights Watch . 19 July 2024.

Archived from the original on August 21, 2024 . Retrieved 2024-08-26 .

^ "Criminal Court in South Africa Confirms Charges in Historic First Prosecution of the Crime Against Humanity of Apartheid" .

Opinio Juris . 29 April 2025 . Retrieved 30 April 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Eden, P. (2014). "The Role of the Rome Statute in the Criminalization of Apartheid".

Journal of International Criminal Justice .

12 (2): 171– 191.

doi : 10.1093/jicj/mqu024 .

Eden, Paul (2013).

"Chapter 5: The Practices of Apartheid as a War Crime: A Critical Analysis" .

Yearbook of International Humanitarian Law .

16 : 89– 117.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-6265-038-1_5 .

ISSN 1389-1359 .

Kemp, Gerhard (2022). "The Crime of Apartheid".

International Conflict and Security Law: A Research Handbook . T.M.C. Asser Press. pp.

1073– 1091.

ISBN 978-94-6265-515-7 .

Lingaas, Carola (2017).

"The Crime against Humanity of Apartheid in a Post-Apartheid World" .

Oslo Law Review .

2 (2): 86– 115.

doi : 10.5617/oslaw2566 .

hdl : 10852/48121 .

Sitze, Adam (2019). "The crime of apartheid: genealogy of a successful failure".

London Review of International Law .

7 (2): 181– 214.

doi : 10.1093/lril/lrz005 .

External links [ edit ] Look up apartheid in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Human Sciences Research Council: Occupation, Colonialism, Apartheid? A re-assessment of Israel's practices in the occupied Palestinian territories under international law. Cape Town 2009 Richard Falk:Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, Report to the UN General Assembly, 30.August 2010, sec. 5 Human Rights Watch Report: Separate and Unequal. Israel's Discriminatory Treatment of Palestinians in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, December 19, 2010 v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e International human rights instruments Declarations, manifestos, and resolutions Brazilian Resolution Declaration of the Basic Duties of ASEAN Peoples and Governments Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam Declaration of Montreal Declaration of the Rights of the Child Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (DEDAW) Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women (DEVAW) Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) Declaration on sexual orientation and gender identity American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man Paris Principles Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (VDPA) Yogyakarta Principles Declaration on the Rights of Peasants (UNDROP) International law United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV) Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Convention against Torture Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination Convention on the Political Rights of Women Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Convention on the Rights of the Child Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Regional law African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (Maputo Protocol) European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) Convention for the Prevention of Torture Convention on Nationality Convention for the Protection of National Minorities Social Charter Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence (Istanbul Convention) American Convention on Human Rights Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Persons with Disabilities on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women (Belém do Pará Convention) International humanitarian law Genocide Convention Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness Geneva Conventions Hague Conventions Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court v t e International criminal law Sources Customary international law Geneva Conventions Hague Conventions International legal theories Nuremberg Charter Nuremberg principles Peremptory norm United Nations Charter Genocide Convention Convention against Corruption Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime Convention Against Torture Rome Statute Crimes against international law Crimes against humanity Crime of aggression Crime of apartheid Genocide Genocidal intent Incitement to genocide Piracy Slave trading Starvation War crime International courts (in order of foundation) International Military Tribunal (Nuremberg Trials) International Military Tribunal for the Far East International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda Special Court for Sierra Leone International Criminal Court Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia Special Panels of the Dili District Court Special Tribunal for Lebanon International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals International anti-crime bodies Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime International Association of Anti-Corruption Authorities UN Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice UN Office on Drugs and Crime Related concepts Command responsibility Superior orders Joint criminal enterprise International humanitarian law International speech crimes Universal jurisdiction v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Crime_of_apartheid&oldid=1302744676 " Categories : Racial segregation Crimes against humanity by type International opposition to apartheid in South Africa Apartheid Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 07:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Crime of apartheid 17 languages Add topic

