Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Social service Toggle Social service subsection 2.1 Aditya Birla Centre for Community Initiatives and Rural Development 2.2 Health care 2.3 Other social activities 3 Positions 4 Awards and recognitions 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Rajashree Birla 8 languages অসমীয়া বাংলা ಕನ್ನಡ മലയാളം مصرى ਪੰਜਾਬੀ தமிழ் తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philanthropist Rajashree Birla Born ( 1948-01-01 ) 1 January 1948 (age 77) Madurai , Tamil Nadu , India Occupation Businessperson Spouse Aditya Vikram Birla Children Kumar Mangalam Birla (son), Vasavadatta Bajaj (daughter) Awards Padma Bhushan Women Achievers Award Corporate Citizen of the Year Seva Shiromani Award Citizen of Bombay Award 2003 The Pride of India Award Website Official web page Rajashree Birla is an Indian philanthropist. She is married to the late Aditya Birla (scion of the Birla family of business magnates). After her husband's death in 1995, Rajashree began working in CSR and charity sectors, developing a large philanthropic organization funded by her family. In 2011, the Government of India honoured her with the Padma Bhushan , the third highest civilian award, for her services to society.

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Rajashree was born in 1948 in Madurai , in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu , in a family which hailed originally from Rajasthan in north-western India. Her father, Radhakishen Fomra, [ 2 ] held a dealership agency for Burmah Shell .

[ 3 ] Her mother, Parvati Devi Fomra, was a home-maker. The family were Marwari Vaishyas and belonged to the Maheshwari sub-caste.

Rajashree and her sisters studied at St. Joseph's convent school in Madurai, [ 4 ] Following the usual Indian custom, Rajshree's marriage was arranged by her parents into a family belonging to their specific Maheshwari sub-caste. The nuptials were celebrated in three stages, as per the Marwari tradition. The first stage, being the engagement, was performed when Rajashree was around 10 years old. Her fiancé was Aditya Vikram Birla , scion of the Birla family and grandson of the legendary business magnate Ghanshyam Das Birla . The second stage comprised the initial ceremony of marriage (essentially an irrevocable engagement), which was performed when Rajashree was 14, and the final ceremonies ( gauna and vidaai ) was performed in 1965, when she was 17 years old. At this point, she departed her parents’ house in Madurai and moved into her in-law's house in Kolkata .

By this time, she had completed her matriculation and was studying at Fatima College in Madurai. With the encouragement from her husband and his parents, she enrolled at Loreto College, Kolkata and took a degree in Arts from the University of Calcutta .

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] In June 1967, Rajashree became a mother with the birth of a son, Kumar Mangalam Birla . This was followed in June 1976 by a daughter, Vasavadatta. With the full support of her family, Rajashree completed her education (albeit with a break for the birth of Kumar Mangalam) and took a degree in Arts from Kolkata university. For the next three decades, she devoted herself to caring for her family and raising her two children, viewing this as her primary responsibility. Only after they had grown up and settled down did she devote her energy to public or social welfare. Throughout her life, Rajashree has maintained an understated, unostentatious lifestyle and a middle-class sense of morality and family responsibility, bringing up her children also with the same values. She has in interviews attributed this quality to the influence of Mahatma Gandhi upon her family ( Ghanshyam Das Birla was a close associate of the Mahatma) and the teachings of the Bhagwat Gita .

She has stated that her favourite axiom at all time, good and bad alike, is the phrase "This too will pass," a quotation from the Bhagwat Gita .

Rajashree Birla sits on the boards of her family businesses in India and abroad and heads the Aditya Birla Centre for Community Initiatives and Rural Development, the charity arm of the Aditya Birla Group , which looks after the corporate social responsibilities of the conglomerate .

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] She lives in South Mumbai with her son, Kumar Mangalam Birla and his family.

[ 6 ] Social service [ edit ] Aditya Birla Centre for Community Initiatives and Rural Development [ edit ] As the Chairperson of the Aditya Birla Centre for Community Initiatives and Rural Development (ABCCIR), Rajashree oversees the charity efforts, development activities and community initiatives of the Aditya Birla Group , with the help of ₹ 1,600 crores, the Aditya Birla Group, spends on CSR activities, of which ₹ 40 crores goes for educational activities.

[ 3 ] The main focusses are on education, employment, drinking water and women empowerment initiatives. She is also involved in activities related to assistance to rural poor and physically disabled people, widow remarriage and activism against dowry . ABCCIR assists in the running of 42 schools and 18 hospitals and pays for the education of around 18,000 students.

[ 3 ] These activities are reported to have assisted around 7 million people in about 3000 villages around the globe and has presence in countries like Thailand and Egypt .

[ 7 ] Health care [ edit ] Rajashree Birla, as a tribute to her late husband, set up a 325-bed hospital, Aditya Birla Memorial Hospital, at a cost of US$ 30 million, in Pune, 2006. The hospital complex, spread over a land measuring 18 acres, is managed by the Aditya Birla Center for Community Initiatives and Rural Development and is funded by the Aditya Birla Foundation.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Rajashree also oversees the running of a healthcare initiative which conducts around 3500 medical camps a year, attending to reportedly 3 million patients. The initiative also conducts around 20,000 polio vaccines to children.

[ 6 ] Rajashree has also donated US$1 million to Rotary International for the eradication of polio.

[ 8 ] Other social activities [ edit ] Rajashree Birla is in active association with Population First a non-governmental organisation dedicated to the cause of female foeticide. She maintains a close association with Habitat for Humanity , sits on the Boards of its Asia Pacific and Global committees and attended Habitat conference in Manila , the Philippines, in 2012. The same year, she rallied a group of celebrity cricketers such as M. S. Dhoni and collected a sum of US$ 2 million for the efforts of the organization. She has personally arranged a contribution of ₹ 100 million to the Habitat for Humanity .

[ 3 ] On the issue of widow remarriage, which is still a taboo among many village people in India, Rajashree and her volunteers have worked with the village chieftains for their support. She is reported to be largely successful and her foundation has distributed monies in the form of loans to the prospective husbands for starting small businesses. She admits that this initiative is the one closest to her heart [ 6 ] In Rajasthan , she has helped build a charity kitchen which supplies 30,000 meals every day, in association with the State Government's free lunch program for poor children studying in Government schools. She is in the process of setting up two more kitchens in Odisha , at a cost of US$ one million, to cater to 60,000 children. She is also planning to open vocational institutes in Kerala .

[ 6 ] Rajashree Birla has built a memorial to her late husband in Pilani, Rajasthan and is looking to build a temple in Pune.

[ 6 ] Positions [ edit ] Apart from being the Director board member of most of the Aditya Birla Group companies, Rajashree Birla also holds or has held various other posts of importance.

Chairperson of the Advisory Board – University of Kanchipuram [ 5 ] Chairperson - Advisory Committee - Habitat for Humanity India Trust Member of the Advisory Board – The Research Society for the Care, Treatment and Training of Children in Need of Special Care, Mumbai [ 5 ] Trustee – Population First, India [ 5 ] Trustee – BAIF Development Research Foundation , Pune [ 5 ] Member – Tirumala Tirupathi Devasthanam Development Advisory Council [ 5 ] Member of the Executive Committee – Gandhi Smriti – 2003–06 [ 5 ] Member of the Executive Committee – Darshan Smriti – 2003–06 [ 5 ] President – Sangeet Kala Kendra [ 5 ] Trustee – Anand Ashram Trust, Mumbai [ 5 ] Trustee – Jayashree Charity (1962) Trust, Kolkata [ 5 ] Trustee – Breach Candy Hospital and Research Centre , Mumbai [ 5 ] Consul General- Honorary Consulate General of the Philippines in Mumbai She is also the trustee of many foundations related to her family such as G. D. Birla Medical Research and Education Foundation, Vasavadatta Foundation, Neerja Foundation, Rajashree Foundation, Aditya Birla Foundation and Aditya Vikram Birla Memorial Trust.

[ 5 ] Awards and recognitions [ edit ] Padma Bhushan – 2011 [ 1 ] Women Achievers' Award – Archana Trust, Mumbai – 2001–02 [ 5 ] Corporate Citizen of the Year – The Economic Times – 2001–02 [ 5 ] Seva Shiromani Award – Rotarians in Action – 2003 [ 5 ] Citizen of Bombay Award – Rotary Club of Bombay – 2003 [ 5 ] The Pride of India Award – Rotary Club of Mulund – 2004 [ 5 ] Women of the Decade Award – ASSOCHAM 's Ladies League – 2004 [ 9 ] [ 10 ] 25th Lal Bahadur Shastri National Award For Excellence 2024 See also [ edit ] Kumar Mangalam Birla References [ edit ] ^ a b "Padma announcement" . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

^ "Early life" . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 January 2015 .

^ a b c d e f Bhagat, Rasheeda.

"I don't dream, I just do it" .

Business Line . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

^ "Early years" . Archived from the original on 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 January 2015 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s "Profile" . Archived from the original on 7 August 2021 . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

^ a b c d e f g "Forbes philanthropy" .

Forbes . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

^ a b "Forbes bio" .

Forbes . Archived from the original on 24 June 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

^ "Polio" .

Forbes . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

^ "ALL Ladies League" . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

^ "ALL Ladies League" . Archived from the original on 7 January 2014 . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

External links [ edit ] "FT" .

Financial Times . 11 January 2013 . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

"Family history" . Money Control . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

"Baif" (PDF) .

BAIF Development Research Foundation . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

India Inc with Rajashree Birla on YouTube ADDRESS BY SMT.RAJASHREE BIRLA, DIRECTOR, ADITYA BIRLA GROUP on YouTube "Rotary – video" .

Rotary Convention . 15 May 2012 . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

v t e Padma Bhushan award recipients (2010–2019) 2010 Satya Paul Agarwal Mohammad Amin Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhyay M. S. Banga Anil Bordia Bipan Chandra B. K. Chaturvedi Sant Singh Chatwal G. P. Chopra Tan Chung Madhusudan Dhaky P. R. Dubhashi Puttaraj Gawai Belle Monappa Hegde Ilaiyaraaja Jagdish Chandra Kapur Shrinivas Khale Aamir Khan Sultan Khan Ram Kumar Kumudini Lakhia Kuzhur Narayana Marar Chhannulal Mishra Eledath Thaikkattu Narayanan Mooss C. P. Krishnan Nair S. P. Oswal Akbar Padamsee Ramakanta Panda Balasaheb Vikhe Patil Arogyaswami Paulraj A. R. Rahman Moosa Raza Mallika Sarabhai Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana Abhijit Sen Satya Vrat Shastri Noshir M. Shroff Kushal Pal Singh Bikash Sinha Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Narayanan Vaghul P. K. Warrier Fareed Zakaria 2011 S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Rajashree Birla M. N. Buch C. V. Chandrasekhar Ajai Chowdhry Yogesh Chander Deveshwar Satyadev Dubey T. J. S. George Shankha Ghosh Kris Gopalakrishnan Keki Byramjee Grant Shashi Kapoor Krishen Khanna Khayyam Chanda Kochhar Dwijen Mukhopadhyay Madavoor Vasudevan Nair Ramdas Pai Dashrath Patel Rajendra Singh Pawar Suryanarayanan Ramachandran Shobhana Ranade Gunupati Venkata Krishna Reddy Kallam Anji Reddy Waheeda Rehman Shyam Saran Analjit Singh Arpita Singh Surendra Singh R. K. Srikantan Raghavan Thirumulpad 2012 Suresh H. Advani Shabana Azmi Homi K. Bhabha Shashikumar Chitre Khaled Choudhury Jatin Das Vidya Dehejia Dharmendra S. N. Goenka M. S. Gopalakrishnan T. V. Gopalakrishnan Buddhadev Das Gupta Sunil Janah Anish Kapoor S. B. Mujumdar B. Muthuraman Mira Nair Arvind Panagariya José Pereira Mata Prasad M. S. Raghunathan P. Chandrasekhara Rao Ronen Sen Devi Shetty M. V. Subbiah N. Vittal N. H. Wadia George Yeo 2013 Satya N. Atluri Maharaj Kishan Bhan Jaspal Bhatti Rahul Dravid Adi Godrej Abdul Rashid Khan Rajesh Khanna Mary Kom Nandkishore Shamrao Laud Mangesh Padgaonkar Hemendra Singh Panwar Jogesh Pati Shivajirao Girdhar Patil A. Sivathanu Pillai D. Ramanaidu Kanak Rele V. K. Saraswat Ashoke Sen Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak B. N. Suresh Sharmila Tagore Ramamurthy Thyagarajan Saroja Vaidyanathan 2014 Anisuzzaman Mrityunjay Athreya Padmanabhan Balaram Dalveer Bhandari Ruskin Bond Anita Desai Pullela Gopichand Kamal Haasan Jyeshtharaj Joshi V. N. Kaul Neelam Kler M. Mahadevappa Leander Paes Koppillil Radhakrishnan Anumolu Ramakrishna Thirumalachari Ramasami Lloyd Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Vinod Prakash Sharma Gulam Mohammed Sheikh Parween Sultana Dhirubhai Thaker Vairamuthu J. S. Verma T. H. Vinayakram 2015 Jahnu Barua Manjul Bhargava Vijay P. Bhatkar Swapan Dasgupta David Frawley Bill Gates Melinda French Gates Swami Satyamitranand N. Gopalaswami Subhash C. Kashyap Gokulotsavji Maharaj Saichiro Misumi Ambrish Mithal Sudha Ragunathan Harish Salve Ashok Seth Rajat Sharma Satpal Singh Shivakumara Swami Khadg Singh Valdiya 2016 Ravindra Chandra Bhargava Robert D. Blackwill Hafeez Contractor Indu Jain Heisnam Kanhailal Anupam Kher Sania Mirza Pallonji Mistry Udit Narayan Saina Nehwal Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad Vinod Rai N. S. Ramanuja Tatacharya A. V. Rama Rao D. Nageshwara Reddy Dayananda Saraswati Barjinder Singh Hamdard Ram V. Sutar Tejomayananda 2017 Vishwa Mohan Bhatt Deviprasad Dwivedi Ratnasundarsuri Niranjanananda Saraswati Cho Ramaswamy Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Tehemton Erach Udwadia 2018 Pankaj Advani Philipose Mar Chrysostom Mahendra Singh Dhoni Alexander Kadakin Ramachandran Nagaswamy Laxman Pai Arvind Parikh Sharda Sinha 2019 John T. Chambers Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa Pravin Gordhan Dharampal Gulati Darshan Lal Jain Ashok Laxmanrao Kukade Kariya Munda Budhaditya Mukherjee Mohanlal Nambi Narayanan Kuldip Nayar Bachendri Pal V. K. Shunglu Hukmdev Narayan Yadav # Posthumous conferral 1954–1959 1960–1969 1970–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–2029 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rajashree_Birla&oldid=1296627447 " Categories : 1948 births Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in social work Indian philanthropists Living people Businesspeople from Madurai Loreto College, Kolkata alumni University of Calcutta alumni 20th-century Indian businesspeople 20th-century Indian educators Women educators from Tamil Nadu Social workers from Tamil Nadu Indian women philanthropists Educators from Tamil Nadu 20th-century Indian women educators Birla family Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from September 2014 Use dmy dates from September 2014 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 05:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rajashree Birla 8 languages Add topic

