Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Description 3 Interpretation 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Astronomer Copernicus, or Conversations with God 15 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Ελληνικά Español Français Հայերեն Lietuvių Magyar Polski Русский Slovenščina Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1873 painting by Jan Matejko Astronomer Copernicus, or Conversations with God Polish: Astronom Kopernik, czyli rozmowa z Bogiem Artist Jan Matejko Year 1873 ( 1873 ) Medium oil on canvas Dimensions 225 cm × 315 cm (89 in × 124 in) Location Collegium Novum , Jagiellonian University Astronomer Copernicus, or Conversations with God ( Polish : Astronom Kopernik, czyli rozmowa z Bogiem ) is a painting by the Polish artist Jan Matejko completed in 1873, in the collection of the Jagiellonian University , Kraków . It depicts Nicolaus Copernicus observing the heavens from a balcony in a tower with the cathedral in Frombork in the background. The canvas was purchased from a private owner by public subscription in Poland and hangs in the aula (Great Hall) of the Collegium Novum of the university. Matejko produced the painting as part of a series of paintings intended to capture and represent key moments in the history of Poland to inspire the public.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The painting of Copernicus , 1872, Matejko's self-caricatured drawing of his working conditions Entrance, right, to the Collegium Novum , Kraków Matejko began work on this painting in 1871 in preparation for the 400th anniversary of Copernicus's birth. He used research materials available in the Jagiellonian University, and made several preparatory pencil drawings and two oil sketches, prior to executing the painting. He began work on the canvas in the summer of 1872 in the cramped conditions of his old apartment in Kraków. This he recorded in an parodic self-portrait . The definitive work was completed in a new studio in early 1873.

[ 2 ] In the event the organizers of Copernicus' quadricentennial anniversary in Kraków were indifferent to Matejko's endeavours, and did not plan to exhibit his painting during the official festivities. Meanwhile, the town council of Toruń , Copernicus' home town then under German rule, approached Matejko with a view to purchasing it. He however refused their offer, possibly out of national pride, and opted instead to organize his own exhibition in Kraków. He was able to exhibit the picture in February 1873, in the Wielopolski Palace , then the Kraków City Council building. Profits from the event were donated to charity. The painting had a mixed reception. Later that year it was shown in Vienna . In March the inhabitants of Kraków decided to buy the painting and raised the necessary 12,000 zlotys , and donated it to the Jagiellonian University. It has been on public display in the university's Collegium Novum ever since.

[ 2 ] As of May 2021 the painting has been loaned by the Jagiellonian University authorities for a period of four months to London's National Gallery for a temporary exhibition and is the first work by any Polish artist to be exhibited there.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Description [ edit ] Frombork Cathedral and neighbouring buildings, with Vistula lagoon in the background Original manuscript of Copernicus' heliocentric map Frombork , Copernicus' Tower and part of the city wall The painting depicts the exalted cleric and scientist Nicolaus Copernicus - he was a canon of Frombork Cathedral - kneeling as he observes the heavens during the transition from night to dawn. He is high up on a balcony, supposedly in his observatory, near to cathedral in Frombork, surrounded by various astronomical instruments. By his side is his own heliocentric model drawn on a large flat board, based on an actual illustration from his De revolutionibus . The scene likely portrays the moment of revelation when Copernicus becomes convinced of his discovery .

[ 2 ] The main features of the composition include 16th-century costume and use of objects as part of a symbolic narrative. There is also the symmetrical focal point with atmospheric perspective around the subject, a radial balance of light arranged around a central element, and dramatic contrasts with dark colours on the periphery. Copernicus's epiphany or ecstasy is captured through the use of quasi stage lighting . Two individuals are known to have served as models for Copernicus . One was Dr.

Henryk Levittoux [ pl ] , a medical practitioner and the younger brother of Polish independence activist Karol Levittoux , who tragically died in 1841.

[ 5 ] The other was Antoni Serafińsk, Matejko's nephew.

[ 2 ] Interpretation [ edit ] The location depicted by Matejko is fictional. Modern scholars are still looking for the exact location of the Copernicus observatory, and agree that Matejko's portrayal was more of a "romantic vision". Whereas Matejko shows Copernicus on top of a tower, in reality his small observatory was probably  at ground level, possibly in the garden of his house.

[ 6 ] Most of Matejko's notable paintings consist of large group scenes. A scene with a single individual such as this, another being Stańczyk , tends to be exceptional in his oeuvre .

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] History painting Mannerism Northern Renaissance Polish positivism The Ambassadors (Holbein) References [ edit ] ^ Wanda Małaszewska. "Matejko, Jan." Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online. Oxford University Press, accessed 28 May 2014, http://www.oxfordartonline.com/subscriber/article/grove/art/T055919 ^ a b c d e Janina Mazurkiewicz (27 May 2010).

"Astronom Kopernik czyli Rozmowa z Bogiem" .

Biblioteka Uniwersytecka W Toruniu . Muzeum Okręgowe: 3 . Retrieved 26 May 2012 .

^ "Huge portrait of Copernicus to be seen in UK for first time" .

The Guardian . 23 November 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2020 .

^ Riopelle, Christopher; Gingerich, Owen; Szczerski, Andrzej (2021).

Conversations with God: Matejko's Copernicus . London: The National Gallery/Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-1-85709-6699 .

^ "Karol Levittoux - śmierć w płomieniach - Historia" .

www.polskieradio.pl (in Polish).

^ Natasza Jatczyńska (21 January 2009).

"Skąd Kopernik patrzył w niebo?" . DziennikBaltycki.pl . Retrieved 25 May 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Conversations with God, Jan Matejko's Copernicus - an Exhibition. National Gallery, London, 21 May - 22 August 2021.

www.Jan-Matejko.org A website dedicated to Matejko v t e Jan Matejko Paintings Stańczyk (1862) Poland - The Year 1863 (1864) The Sermon of Piotr Skarga (1864) Blind Veit Stoss with his granddaughter (1865) Rejtan (1866) The Interior of the Tomb of King Casimir the Great (1869) Union of Lublin (1869) Stephen Báthory at Pskov (1872) Astronomer Copernicus, or Conversations with God (1873) Zawieszenie dzwonu Zygmunta (1874) Battle of Grunwald (1878) Prussian Homage (1879–1882) The Babin Republic (1881) Twardowski conjuring up the spirit of Barbara before Sigismund Augustus (1884) The Baptism of Lithuania (1888) Kościuszko at Racławice (1888) The Constitution of 3 May 1791 (1891) Students Leaving Krakow in 1549 (1892) Painting series History of Civilization in Poland (1888–1889) Museums Jan Matejko Manor House Jan Matejko House Related Teodora Matejko (wife and model) Helena Unierzyska (daughter) Franciszek Ksawery Matejko (father) Edmund Matejko (brother) v t e Nicolaus Copernicus Scientific career Copernican heliocentrism Copernican Revolution Works Commentariolus De revolutionibus orbium coelestium Locationes mansorum desertorum " Monetae cudendae ratio " Translations of Theophylact Simocatta Family Lucas Watzenrode the Elder (grandfather) Lucas Watzenrode (uncle) Related Scientific Revolution Nicolaus Copernicus Gesamtausgabe Copernicus law Copernican principle Frombork Cathedral Astronomer Copernicus, or Conversations with God Monuments Chicago Los Angeles Montreal Toruń Kraków Warsaw Copernicium Copernicus (lunar crater) Copernicus (Martian crater) Films Copernicus Copernicus' Star Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astronomer_Copernicus,_or_Conversations_with_God&oldid=1253690438 " Categories : 1873 paintings Books in art Churches in art Cultural depictions of Nicolaus Copernicus Paintings by Jan Matejko Paintings in Kraków Maps in art Symbolist paintings Hidden categories: CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2021 Pages using infobox artwork with the material parameter Articles containing Polish-language text This page was last edited on 27 October 2024, at 10:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astronomer Copernicus, or Conversations with God 15 languages Add topic

