Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Distinction between chemical physics and physical chemistry 2 History 3 What chemical physicists do 4 Journals 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Chemical physics 27 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Български Чӑвашла Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 עברית ქართული Қазақша Македонски 日本語 Polski Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Tagalog Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subdiscipline of chemistry and physics For the journal, see Chemical Physics (journal) .

Not to be confused with Physical chemistry .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chemical physics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Chemical physics is a branch of physics that studies chemical processes from a physical point of view. It focuses on understanding the physical properties and behavior of chemical systems, using principles from both physics and chemistry. This field investigates physicochemical phenomena using techniques from atomic and molecular physics and condensed matter physics .

The United States Department of Education defines chemical physics as "A program that focuses on the scientific study of structural phenomena combining the disciplines of physical chemistry and atomic/molecular physics. Includes instruction in heterogeneous structures, alignment and surface phenomena, quantum theory , mathematical physics , statistical and classical mechanics, chemical kinetics , and laser physics ." [ 1 ] Distinction between chemical physics and physical chemistry [ edit ] While at the interface of physics and chemistry, chemical physics is distinct from physical chemistry as it focuses more on using physical theories to understand and explain chemical phenomena at the microscopic level, such as quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics, and molecular dynamics. Meanwhile, physical chemistry uses a broader range of methods, such as thermodynamics and kinetics, to study the physical nature of chemical processes. On the other hand, physical chemistry deals with the physical properties and behavior of matter in chemical reactions, covering a broader range of topics such as thermodynamics , kinetics , and spectroscopy , and often links the macroscopic and microscopic chemical behavior. The distinction between the two fields still needs to be clarified as both fields share common grounds. Scientists often practice in both fields during their research, as there is significant overlap in the topics and techniques used.

[ 2 ] Journals like PCCP ( Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics ) cover research in both areas, highlighting their overlap.

History [ edit ] The term "chemical physics" in its modern sense was first used by the German scientist A. Eucken, who published "A Course in Chemical Physics" in 1930. Prior to this, in 1927, the publication "Electronic Chemistry" by V. N. Kondrat'ev, N. N. Semenov, and Iu. B. Khariton hinted at the meaning of "chemical physics" through its title. The Institute of Chemical Physics of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR was established in 1931. In the United States, " The Journal of Chemical Physics " has been published since 1933.

[ 3 ] In 1964, the General Electric Foundation established the Irving Langmuir Award in Chemical Physics to honor outstanding achievements in the field of chemical physics. Named after the Nobel Laureate Irving Langmuir , the award recognizes significant contributions to understanding chemical phenomena through physics principles, impacting areas such as surface chemistry and quantum mechanics.

[ 4 ] What chemical physicists do [ edit ] Chemical physicists investigate the structure and dynamics of ions , free radicals , polymers , clusters , and molecules . Their research includes studying the quantum mechanical aspects of chemical reactions, solvation processes, and the energy flow within and between molecules, and nanomaterials such as quantum dots. Experiments in chemical physics typically involve using spectroscopic methods to understand hydrogen bonding , electron transfer , the formation and dissolution of chemical bonds , chemical reactions, and the formation of nanoparticles .

The research objectives in the theoretical aspect of chemical physics are to understand how chemical structures and reactions work at the quantum mechanical level. This field also aims to clarify how ions and radicals behave and react in the gas phase and to develop precise approximations that simplify the computation of the physics of chemical phenomena.

Chemical physicists are looking for answers to such questions as: Can we experimentally test quantum mechanical predictions of the vibrations and rotations of simple molecules? Or even those of complex molecules (such as proteins )?

Can we develop more accurate methods for calculating the electronic structure and properties of molecules?

Can we understand chemical reactions from first principles?

Why do quantum dots start blinking (in a pattern suggesting fractal kinetics [ 5 ] ) after absorbing photons ?

How do chemical reactions really take place?

What is the step-by-step process that occurs when an isolated molecule becomes solvated? Or when a whole ensemble of molecules becomes solvated?

Can we use the properties of negative ions to determine molecular structures, understand the dynamics of chemical reactions, or explain photodissociation ?

Why does a stream of soft x-rays knock enough electrons out of the atoms in a xenon cluster to cause the cluster to explode?

Journals [ edit ] Main category: Chemical physics journals The Journal of Chemical Physics Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters Journal of Physical Chemistry A Journal of Physical Chemistry B Journal of Physical Chemistry C Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics Chemical Physics Letters Chemical Physics ChemPhysChem Molecular Physics (journal) See also [ edit ] Physics portal Intermolecular force Molecular dynamics Quantum chemistry Solid-state physics or Condensed matter physics Surface science Van der Waals molecule References [ edit ] ^ Detail for CIP Code 40.0508 ^ "Introduction to chemical physics. By J. C. Slater. Pp. xiv + 521. London: McGraw‐Hill Publishing Co., Ltd., 1939. 33s" .

Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry .

59 (11): 187– 187. 1940-03-16.

doi : 10.1002/jctb.5000591106 .

ISSN 0368-4075 .

^ "Chemical Physics" .

TheFreeDictionary.com . Retrieved 2024-03-31 .

^ "Irving Langmuir Award in Chemical Physics" .

American Chemical Society . Retrieved 2024-04-16 .

^ Routzahn, Aaron L.; Jain, Prashant K. (2015-04-08).

"Luminescence Blinking of a Reacting Quantum Dot" .

Nano Letters .

15 (4): 2504– 2509.

doi : 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b00068 .

ISSN 1530-6984 .

v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Major branches of physics Divisions Pure Applied Engineering Approaches Experimental Theoretical Computational Classical Classical mechanics Newtonian Analytical Celestial Continuum Acoustics Classical electromagnetism Classical optics Ray Wave Thermodynamics Statistical Non-equilibrium Modern Relativistic mechanics Special General Nuclear physics Particle physics Quantum mechanics Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Atomic Molecular Modern optics Condensed matter physics Solid-state physics Crystallography Interdisciplinary Astrophysics Atmospheric physics Biophysics Chemical physics Geophysics Materials science Mathematical physics Medical physics Ocean physics Quantum information science Related History of physics Nobel Prize in Physics Philosophy of physics Physics education research Timeline of physics discoveries Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐cxk68
Cached time: 20250815040234
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.313 seconds
Real time usage: 0.417 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 938/1000000
Revision size: 7533/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 56651/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 828/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 40660/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.203/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6299874/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  343.177      1 -total
 26.71%   91.665      1 Template:Reflist
 20.57%   70.579      2 Template:Navbox
 20.52%   70.415      2 Template:Cite_journal
 20.41%   70.028      1 Template:BranchesofChemistry
 15.30%   52.503      1 Template:Short_description
 14.25%   48.918      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 13.23%   45.389      1 Template:Ambox
  9.20%   31.585      1 Template:Authority_control
  9.11%   31.252      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:733929:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815040234 and revision id 1300211338. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chemical_physics&oldid=1300211338 " Categories : Chemical physics Applied and interdisciplinary physics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2014 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 23:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chemical physics 27 languages Add topic

