Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Cold War 1.2 Post Cold War 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Three-world model 10 languages العربية Български 한국어 Latviešu 日本語 Português Српски / srpski తెలుగు Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political concept of the Cold War This article is about the Western political concept. For the Maoist political concept, see Three Worlds Theory .

The " Three Worlds " of the Cold War (between 30 April and 24 June 1975) First World : Countries aligned with the Western Bloc (i.e., NATO and allies), led by the United States Second World : Countries aligned with the Eastern Bloc (i.e., Warsaw Pact , China , and allies), led by the Soviet Union Third World : The Non-Aligned Movement , led by Egypt and Yugoslavia , and other neutral countries The terms First World , Second World , and Third World were originally used to divide the world's nations into three categories. The complete overthrow of the pre–World War II status quo left two superpowers (the United States and the Soviet Union ) vying for ultimate global supremacy, a struggle known as the Cold War . They created two camps, known as blocs. These blocs formed the basis of the concepts of the First and Second Worlds.

[ 1 ] The Third World consisted of those countries that were not closely aligned with either bloc.

History [ edit ] Cold War [ edit ] Early in the Cold War era, NATO and the Warsaw Pact were created by the United States and the Soviet Union, respectively. They were also referred to as the Western Bloc and the Eastern Bloc . The circumstances of these two blocs were so different that they were essentially two worlds, however, they were not numbered first and second.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The onset of the Cold War is marked by Winston Churchill 's famous "Iron Curtain" speech.

[ 5 ] In this speech, Churchill describes the division of the West and East to be so solid that it could be called an iron curtain.

[ 5 ] In 1952, the French demographer Alfred Sauvy coined the term Third World in reference to the three estates in pre-revolutionary France.

[ 6 ] The first two estates being the nobility and clergy and everybody else comprising the third estate.

[ 6 ] He compared the capitalist world (i.e., First World) to the nobility and the communist world (i.e., Second World) to the clergy. The First World countries were characterized by economic prosperity, technological advancement, and political stability, whereas the Second World countries were characterized by state-controlled economies and centralized political structures. Just as the third estate comprised everybody else, Sauvy called the Third World all the countries that were not in this Cold War division, i.e., the unaligned and uninvolved states in the "East–West Conflict." [ 6 ] [ 4 ] The Third World countries are often described as developing nations with diverse economic, social, and political conditions. With the coining of the term Third World directly, the first two groups came to be known as the "First World" and "Second World," respectively. Here the three-world system emerged.

[ 4 ] However, Shuswap Chief George Manuel presented a critique of the three-worlds model, considering it to be outdated. In his 1974 book The Fourth World: An Indian Reality , he describes the emergence of the Fourth World while coining the term. The fourth world refers to "nations," e.g., cultural entities and ethnic groups, of indigenous people who do not compose states in the traditional sense.

[ 7 ] Rather, they live within or across state boundaries (see First Nations ). One example is the Native Americans of North America, Central America, and the Caribbean.

[ 7 ] Post Cold War [ edit ] With the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 , the Eastern Bloc ceased to exist; with it, so did all applicability of the Three-world model.

[ 8 ] However, Third World is still used as a ( pejorative ) term for the traditionally less-developed world (e.g. Africa) See also [ edit ] history portal modern history portal politics portal geography portal First World Second World Third World Fourth World Western world Colonialism Developed country Developing country Digital divide Global North and Global South Globalization Great Divergence List of countries by wealth per adult Multinational corporation National wealth References [ edit ] ^ Gaddis, John (1998).

We Now Know: Rethinking Cold War History . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

1– 2.

ISBN 0-19-878071-0 .

^ Melkote, Srinivas R.; Steeves, H. Leslie (2001).

Communication for development in the Third World: theory and practice for empowerment . Sage Publications. p. 21.

ISBN 0-7619-9476-9 .

Archived from the original on 16 December 2023 . Retrieved 5 December 2020 .

^ Provizer, Norman W. (1978).

Analyzing the Third World: essays from Comparative politics . Transaction Publishers. p. 3.

ISBN 0-87073-943-3 .

Archived from the original on 16 December 2023 . Retrieved 5 December 2020 .

^ a b c Leonard, Thomas M. (2006).

"Third World" .

Encyclopedia of the Developing World . Vol. 3. Taylor & Francis. pp.

1542– 3.

ISBN 0-87073-943-3 .

Archived from the original on 16 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 November 2009 .

^ a b "Winston Churchill "Iron Curtain" " . The History Place.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2015 . Retrieved 11 January 2018 .

^ a b c "Three Worlds Model" . University of Wisconsin Eau Claire. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015 . Retrieved 11 January 2018 .

^ a b "First, Second and Third World" . One World – Nations Online. July 2009.

Archived from the original on 3 February 2017 . Retrieved 11 January 2018 .

^ "Fall of the Soviet Union" . The Cold War Museum. 2008. Archived from the original on 24 July 2017 . Retrieved 1 November 2009 .

v t e Economic classification of countries Developed country Developing country Heavily indebted poor countries Least developed countries Newly industrialized country World Bank high-income economy Three/Four-World Model First World Second World Third World Fourth World Gross domestic product (GDP) Nominal By country past and projected per capita per capita Purchasing power parity (PPP) By country future estimates per capita per capita per person employed Gross national income and Income Disposable income GNI (nominal) per capita GNI (PPP) per capita Per capita growth Income inequality Median income Real income Wages and salary Average wage Europe Employee compensation (per hour) Labour productivity Minimum wage Canada Europe United States Wealth Wealth inequality Wealth per adult Europe Financial assets per capita Other national accounts Gross National Happiness Net material product Research and development spending Stock market capitalization Patents, trademarks, and industrial design filing activity Human development Human Development Index by country inequality-adjusted planetary pressures–adjusted HDI Human Poverty Index Percentage living in poverty Human Capital Index Household income Social Progress Index Digital divide ICT Development Index Number of broadband Internet subscriptions Number of Internet users Smartphone penetration Net international investment position (NIIP) Per capita (creditors) Per capita (debtors) Economics portal World portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Three-world_model&oldid=1291365119 " Categories : Country classifications Politics by region World systems theory Cold War terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2017 This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 19:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Three-world model 10 languages Add topic

