Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Research 4 Accomplishments, awards and honours 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Alexander Halliday 2 languages Français Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Alex N. Halliday ) British geochemist and academic (born 1952) Sir Alexander Halliday FRS Born Penzance , Cornwall , England Education Newcastle University Occupations Founding Dean Emeritus, Columbia Climate School Director, The Earth Institute at Columbia University Sir Alexander Norman Halliday FRS (born 11 August 1952) is a British geochemist and academic who is the Founding Dean Emeritus of the Columbia Climate School , [ 1 ] and Director of the Earth Institute at Columbia University .

[ 2 ] He joined the Earth Institute in April 2018, after spending more than a decade at the Department of Earth Sciences at the University of Oxford, during which time he was dean of science and engineering. He is also a professor of Earth and Environmental Sciences [ 3 ] at Columbia University.

Early life [ edit ] Halliday was born in Penzance , Cornwall, in the UK.

[ 4 ] He went to school at the Humphry Davy Grammar School where he studied geology. He received his undergraduate degree and PhD degree in geology from Newcastle University in 1977.

Career [ edit ] Halliday was Professor of Geochemistry at the University of Oxford from 2004 to 2018. Before coming to Oxford, he spent twelve years as a professor at the University of Michigan and then six years in Switzerland, where he was Head of the Department of Earth Sciences at ETH Zurich . His research involves the use of isotopic methods to study Earth and planetary processes.

[ citation needed ] Halliday is a former president of the Geochemical Society ; [ 5 ] the European Association of Geochemistry ; and the Volcanology, Geochemistry and Petrology Section of the American Geophysical Union . He has experience with a range of top science boards and advisory panels including those of the Natural Environment Research Council , HEFCE , the Natural History Museum , the Max Planck Society , the Royal Society and the American Geophysical Union. At Oxford he was Head of the Division of Mathematical, Physical and Life Sciences (science and engineering) from 2007 to 2015. In 2014, he was elected vice-president and Physical Secretary of the UK's Royal Society.

[ 6 ] He is currently a Fellow of the Royal Society [ 7 ] and Foreign Associate of the US National Academy of Sciences .

[ citation needed ] Research [ edit ] Alex Halliday is an isotope geochemist known for novel mass spectrometry techniques and their applications to the Earth and planetary sciences. An enthusiast for technological innovation, most of Halliday's recent research is in developing and using new mass spectrometry techniques to shed light on the origin and early development of the Solar System [ 8 ] and recent Earth processes, such as continental erosion and climate. However, he has also been engaged in other studies, such as the mechanisms of volcanic eruptions, and the formation of mineral and hydrocarbon deposits. He has collaborated with many others, for example, Bernard Wood .

[ 9 ] Halliday has over 400 published research papers.

[ 10 ] Accomplishments, awards and honours [ edit ] Halliday's scientific accomplishments have been recognised with awards including the Murchison Medal of the Geological Society , [ 11 ] the Bowen Award and Hess Medal [ 12 ] of the American Geophysical Union, [ 13 ] the Urey Medal of the European Association of Geochemistry [ 14 ] and the Oxburgh Medal of the Institute of Measurement and Control .

[ 15 ] He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2000 and a Foreign Associate of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences in 2015.

[ 16 ] He was appointed a Knight Bachelor in the 2019 New Year Honours for services to Science and Innovation. He also is the recipient of an Honorary Degree from the University of St Andrews .

[ 17 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Founding Dean Emeritus of the Columbia Climate School" .

^ "Alex Halliday - The Earth Institute, Columbia University" . Earth.columbia.edu. 10 May 2018.

^ "Alexander Halliday | Earth and Environmental Sciences" .

eesc.columbia.edu . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

^ CV at University of Oxford web site Retrieved 1 January 2019.

^ "Elements magazine" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 October 2012 . Retrieved 9 March 2014 .

^ "Professor Alex Halliday is elected as Physical Secretary and Vice-President of the Royal Society | Royal Society" .

^ "Alexander Halliday | Royal Society" .

royalsociety.org . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

^ "Origin of the moon | Royal Society" .

^ Blundy, Jon (2015).

"Presentation of the 2014 Roebling Medal of the Mineralogical Society of America to Bernard J. Wood" (PDF) .

American Mineralogist .

100 ( 5– 6): 1312.

Bibcode : 2015AmMin.100.1312B .

doi : 10.2138/am-2015-AP1005-610 .

S2CID 131066686 – via Mineralogical Society of America.

^ "Department of Earth Sciences » Alex Halliday" . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

^ "The Geological Society of London" .

^ "2016 AGU Union Medal, Award, and Prize Recipients Announced" . 21 July 2016.

^ "Welcome to AGU | Advancing Earth and space science" . Archived from the original on 8 March 2019 . Retrieved 28 November 2016 .

^ "Prof Alex Halliday receives the Urey Award 2012 - University of Oxford Department of Earth Sciences" . Archived from the original on 12 August 2014 . Retrieved 22 July 2014 .

^ "Professor Alex Halliday awarded the Oxburgh Medal — Mathematical, Physical and Life Sciences Division" .

^ "April 28, 2015: NAS Members and Foreign Associates Elected" . Archived from the original on 20 November 2015 . Retrieved 10 May 2015 .

^ "Honorary degree" .

www.st-andrews.ac.uk/graduation/2023/alex-halliday . Retrieved 7 December 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Google Scholar v t e The Earth Institute of Columbia University Director Alexander Halliday Research Units LDEO CWC Center for Rivers and Estuaries CCSR CERC EEC LCSE CGHED CNHDE CGSD CSSR The Center on Capitalism and Society CSUD CIESIN IRI CHRR Urban Design Lab Partnership Institutions The Black Rock Forest Consortium CRED CICAR GISS Projects Millennium Villages Project Millennium Cities Initiative v t e Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 2000 Fellows Michael Akam James Binney Brice Bosnich Cyrus Chothia Peter Cresswell Alan Davison John Douglas Denton Warren Ewens Michael Fasham Michael Anthony John Ferguson Chris Frith Michel Goedert Don Grierson Peter Gavin Hall Alexander Halliday Andrew Bruce Holmes Roy Jackson Bruce Arthur Joyce Simon Barry Laughlin Peter Francis Leadlay Anthony Charles Legon Robert Glanville Lloyd Robert Sinclair MacKay Thomas John Martin Kiyoshi Nagai Stuart Parkin Ole Holger Petersen M. S. Raghunathan T. V. Ramakrishnan Michael Alfred Robb Janet Rossant Patricia Simpson Harry Smith Peter Somogyi Martin Sweeting Brian Douglas Sykes James Till Paul Townsend Alan Andrew Watson Ian Wilson John Henry Woodhouse Adrian Wyatt Foreign Grigory Barenblatt Ronald Breslow Harry B. Gray Erwin Hahn Martin Karplus Mitsuhiro Yanagida Honorary John Maddox Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States Academics Scopus Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alexander_Halliday&oldid=1282929120 " Categories : 1952 births Living people Alumni of Newcastle University British geochemists Academics of the University of Oxford Fellows of the Royal Society Knights Bachelor Academics of Newcastle University People associated with the Natural History Museum, London University of Michigan faculty Foreign associates of the National Academy of Sciences People educated at Humphry Davy Grammar School for Boys Academic staff of ETH Zurich Columbia University faculty Presidents of the Geochemical Society Murchison Medal winners Lamont–Doherty Earth Observatory people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2020 Use British English from September 2016 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 12:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alexander Halliday 2 languages Add topic

