Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Prevalence of multiculturalism over time 1.2 Multiculturalism in modern government policy 2 Impact according to research 3 Opinions Toggle Opinions subsection 3.1 Support 3.2 Criticism 4 Americas Toggle Americas subsection 4.1 Argentina 4.2 Bolivia 4.3 Brazil 4.4 Canada 4.5 Mexico 4.6 Peru 4.7 United States 4.7.1 Effect of diversity on civic engagement 4.8 Venezuela 4.9 Colombia 5 Europe Toggle Europe subsection 5.1 Bulgaria 5.2 France 5.3 Germany 5.4 Luxembourg 5.5 Netherlands 5.6 Romania 5.7 Scandinavia 5.7.1 Denmark 5.7.2 Norway 5.7.3 Sweden 5.8 Serbia 5.9 United Kingdom 5.10 Russian Federation 6 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 6.1 India 6.1.1 Cultural minorities in India 6.1.2 Scheduled Castes (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Other Backward Castes (OBC) 6.2 Indonesia 6.3 Kazakhstan 6.4 Malaysia 6.5 Singapore 6.6 South Korea 6.7 Turkey 7 Africa Toggle Africa subsection 7.1 Cameroon 7.1.1 Demographics and official languages 7.1.2 Indigenous languages 7.1.3 Indigenous peoples' rights 7.2 Mauritius 7.3 South Africa 8 Oceania Toggle Oceania subsection 8.1 Australia 8.2 New Zealand 8.3 Papua New Guinea 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Multiculturalism 64 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Multicultural ) Existence of multiple cultural traditions within a single country Not to be confused with Polyculturalism .

Countries ranked by ethnic and cultural diversity level, blue is lower and orange is higher.

[ 1 ] Multiculturalism is the coexistence of multiple cultures. The word is used in sociology , in political philosophy , and colloquially. In sociology and everyday usage, it is usually a synonym for ethnic or cultural pluralism [ 2 ] in which various ethnic and cultural groups exist in a single society. It can describe a mixed ethnic community area where multiple cultural traditions exist or a single country. Groups associated with an indigenous , aboriginal or autochthonous ethnic group and settler-descended ethnic groups are often the focus.

[ 3 ] In reference to sociology, multiculturalism is the end-state of either a natural or artificial process (for example: legally controlled immigration) and occurs on either a large national scale or on a smaller scale within a nation's communities. On a smaller scale, this can occur artificially when a jurisdiction is established or expanded by amalgamating areas with two or more different cultures (e.g.

French Canada and English Canada ). On a large scale, it can occur as a result of either legal or illegal migration to and from different jurisdictions around the world.

In reference to political science, multiculturalism can be defined as a state's capacity to effectively and efficiently deal with cultural plurality within its sovereign borders. Multiculturalism as a political philosophy involves ideologies and policies which vary widely.

[ 4 ] It has been described as a " salad bowl " and as a " cultural mosaic ", [ 5 ] in contrast to a " melting pot ".

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Prevalence of multiculturalism over time [ edit ] According to migration researcher Hein de Haas , it is a myth that our current societies are more diverse than ever. The idea that we live in an exceptionally diverse society is based on a distorted image of past societies, in which historical diversity is often overlooked. Historical waves of migration have led to levels of diversity that are comparable to or even greater than those of today. European countries such as Great Britain, France, Germany, and the Netherlands have long-standing diverse societies due to colonial migration, labor migration , and flows of refugees .

[ 7 ] States that embody multicultural ideals have arguably existed since ancient times. The Achaemenid Empire founded by Cyrus the Great followed a policy of incorporating and tolerating various cultures.

[ 8 ] The Holy Roman Empire during the High Middle Ages . Before the rise of the nation state in the 16th century, local and regional identities in Europe were strong, with each region and town having its own dialect, customs, and traditions.

Ethnographic map of Austria-Hungarian Empire (1910) Europe has historically known great diversity in terms of ethnic, linguistic, and religious groups, far outnumbering the number of nation-states. Local and regional identities were strong, with each region and town having its own dialect , customs, and traditions. From the 16th century larger nation states were formed. This process gained momentum after the French Revolution and consolidated in the 19th century.

[ 7 ] The Habsburg monarchy , which existed from 1282 to 1918, stood in contrast to the emerging trend of nation-state formation in Europe. It encompassed a mosaic of languages, religions, and regional identities, resisting the centralizing and homogenizing tendencies that characterized nation-state development elsewhere. Today's topical issues such as social and cultural differentiation, multilingualism, competing identity offers or multiple cultural identities have already shaped the scientific theories of many thinkers of this multi-ethnic empire.

[ 9 ] Especially since the 19th century societies in Europe and North America have become culturally more homogeneous due to the consolidation of the nation-state . Governments promoted national identities through education , conscription , and the standardization of languages . In France, for instance, the promotion of French led to the decline of regional languages such as Breton and Occitan . Likewise, in Western Europe, the use of many local dialects decreased. In addition, the rigid religious divides in Western countries softened due to the declining influence of organized religion and the advance of secularization . This pattern repeated itself elsewhere in Europe and North America, where national unification was accompanied by cultural homogenization.

[ 7 ] In the 19th century, millions of people from diverse ethnic and religious backgrounds migrated to the United States and Europe, in search of better economic opportunities or to escape persecution. The U.S. was a melting pot of groups such as Irish, Italian, Chinese, German, and Jewish immigrants, who were often initially perceived as threats to the national identity . At the beginning of the 20th century, 14.7% of the U.S. population were immigrants, a percentage that corresponds to current levels.

[ 7 ] Nationalism further accelerated cultural homogenization in the 20th century. For example after World War I, much of the former ethnic diversity in the area of the former Habsburg monarchy disappeared. Under the influence of nationalist ideologies, ethnic minorities were disadvantaged, forced to emigrate or even murdered in most regions in the area of the former Habsburg monarchy due to the prevailing nationalism at the time. In many areas, these ethnic mosaics no longer exist today. The ethnic mix of that time can only be experienced in a few areas, such as in the former Habsburg port city of Trieste .

[ 10 ] Globalization has further reduced cultural differences. The emergence of an increasingly global youth culture in the 1920s, which accelerated significantly from the 1950s onward, made it easier for young people around the world to find shared reference points in food, music, film, literature, and other forms of artistic expression.

International travel and the rise of television and the internet promoted the development of both national and international culture. The spread of English as a global language, Hollywood films, and the universal availability of fast-food chains such as McDonald's are all signs of a world becoming increasingly culturally homogeneous. Although urban areas tend to show greater ethnic diversity, the variation between regions and countries has declined, which is often seen as a loss of cultural diversity .

[ 7 ] Homogenization is taking place worldwide, with the decline of minority languages being a major indicator of this trend. It is estimated that every two weeks a language disappears along with its last speaker. Since language is a crucial carrier of culture, identity, and shared understanding, the significance of this development is substantial.

[ 7 ] Multiculturalism in modern government policy [ edit ] The term multiculturalism is most often used in reference to Western nation-states, which had seemingly achieved a de facto single national identity during the 18th and/or 19th centuries.

[ 11 ] Multiculturalism has been official policy in several Western nations since the 1970s, for reasons that varied from country to country, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] including the fact that many of the great cities of the Western world are increasingly made of a mosaic of cultures.

[ 15 ] The Canadian government has often been described as the instigator of multicultural ideology because of its public emphasis on the social importance of immigration.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The Canadian Royal Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism is often referred to as the origins of modern political awareness of multiculturalism.

[ 18 ] Canada has provided provisions to the French speaking majority of Quebec, whereby they function as an autonomous community with special rights to govern the members of their community, as well as establish French as one of the official languages. In the Western English-speaking countries, multiculturalism as an official national policy started in Canada in 1971, followed by Australia in 1973 where it is maintained today.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Recently, right-of-center governments in several European Union states – notably the Netherlands and Denmark – have reversed the national policy and returned to an official monoculturalism.

[ 23 ] A similar reversal is the subject of debate in the United Kingdom, among others, due to evidence of incipient segregation and anxieties over "home-grown" terrorism .

[ 24 ] Several heads-of-state or heads-of-government have expressed doubts about the success of multicultural policies: The United Kingdom's ex-Prime Minister David Cameron , German Chancellor Angela Merkel , Australia's ex-prime minister John Howard , Spanish ex-prime minister José María Aznar and French ex-president Nicolas Sarkozy have voiced concerns about the effectiveness of their multicultural policies for integrating immigrants.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Many nation-states in Africa, Asia, and the Americas are culturally diverse and are 'multicultural' in a descriptive sense. In some, ethnic communalism is a major political issue. The policies adopted by these states often have parallels with multiculturalist policies in the Western world, but the historical background is different, and the goal may be a mono-cultural or mono-ethnic nation-building – for instance in the Malaysian government's attempt to create a 'Malaysian race' by 2020.

[ 27 ] Impact according to research [ edit ] People of Indian origin have been able to achieve a high demographic profile in India Square , Jersey City , New Jersey , US, known as Little Bombay , [ 28 ] home to the highest concentration of Asian Indians in the Western Hemisphere [ 29 ] and one of at least 24 enclaves characterized as a Little India which have emerged within the New York City Metropolitan Area, with the largest metropolitan Indian population outside Asia, as large-scale immigration from India continues into New York City, [ 30 ] [ 31 ] through the support of the surrounding community.

According to migration researcher Hein de Haas , research anno 2023 shows that there is no systematic relationship between levels of immigration or ethnic diversity and social cohesion or trust . Studies show that factors such as economic inequality and trust in government are much more important for social cohesion than diversity. In countries and regions where income inequality is low and where people trust their government, social cohesion remains strong even with high levels of diversity. Canada and Australia, for example, are countries with high levels of immigration and diversity, but also with stable and well-functioning societies. On the other hand, hate speech toward minority groups by politicians can reduce social cohesion. So diversity as such does not undermine social cohesion, hate speech by politicians does.

[ 32 ] In a study concluded in 2007, Harvard professor of political science Robert D. Putnam conducted a nearly decade-long study on how multiculturalism affects social trust.

[ 33 ] He surveyed 26,200 people in 40 American communities, finding that when the data were adjusted for class, income and other factors, the more racially diverse a community is, the greater the loss of trust. People in diverse communities "don't trust the local mayor, they don't trust the local paper, they don't trust other people and they don't trust institutions," writes Putnam.

[ 34 ] In the presence of such ethnic diversity, Putnam maintains that, "[W]e hunker down. We act like turtles. The effect of diversity is worse than had been imagined. And it's not just that we don't trust people who are not like us. In diverse communities, we don't trust people who do not look like us".

[ 33 ] Putnam has also stated, however, that "this allergy to diversity tends to diminish and to go away... I think in the long run we'll all be better." [ 35 ] Putnam denied allegations he was arguing against diversity in society and contended that his paper had been "twisted" to make a case against race-conscious admissions to universities. He asserted that his "extensive research and experience confirm the substantial benefits of diversity, including racial and ethnic diversity, to our society." [ 36 ] In a 2003 book On Genetic Interests , Ethnologist Frank Salter writes: Relatively homogeneous societies invest more in public goods, indicating a higher level of public altruism. For example, the degree of ethnic homogeneity correlates with the government's share of gross domestic product as well as the average wealth of citizens. Case studies of the United States, Africa and South-East Asia find that multi-ethnic societies are less charitable and less able to cooperate to develop public infrastructure. Moscow beggars receive more gifts from fellow ethnics than from other ethnies  [ sic ]. A recent multi-city study of municipal spending on public goods in the United States found that ethnically or racially diverse cities spend a smaller portion of their budgets and less per capita on public services than do the more homogeneous cities.

[ 37 ] Research psychologist Kenan Malik has criticized the views of Frank Salter, arguing that the main issue with Salter’s argument is not so much the politically sensitive aspects, but rather the points he shares with broader debates on the evolution of ethnocentrism and identity politics. Malik argues that Salter pays insufficient attention to historical context. In Salter’s view group differences are portrayed as a constant and universal feature of human nature. Malik argues that this approach can lead to a distorted interpretation of empirical data. Malik also criticized the theory of ethnic nepotism, and argued that the field studies of favoritism shown to beggars of the benefactor's ethnic group are best explained by cultural factors.

[ 38 ] While there is research that suggests that ethnic diversity increases chances of war, lower public goods provision and decreases democratization, there is also research that shows that ethnic diversity in itself is not detrimental to peace, [ 39 ] [ 40 ] public goods provision [ 41 ] [ 42 ] or democracy.

[ 43 ] Rather, it was found that promoting diversity actually helps in advancing disadvantaged students.

[ 44 ] A 2018 study in the American Political Science Review cast doubts on findings that ethnoracial homogeneity led to greater public goods provision.

[ 45 ] A 2015 study in the American Journal of Sociology challenged past research showing that racial diversity adversely affected trust.

[ 46 ] Racial and ethnic labels can have a significant impact: non-minorities primed to think of themselves as White (versus European American ) were subsequently less in favor of multiculturalism and were more racially prejudiced.

[ 47 ] This was due to decreases in identification with ethnic minorities .

[ 47 ] The contact hypothesis in sociology is a well-documented phenomenon in which cooperative interactions with those from a different group than one's own reduce prejudice and inter-group hostility.

Opinions [ edit ] Support [ edit ] The Monument to Multiculturalism in Toronto , Canada. Four identical sculptures are located in East London (South Africa) , in Changchun (China), in Sarajevo ( Bosnia and Herzegovina ), and in Sydney (Australia).

Multiculturalism is seen by its supporters as a fairer system that allows people to truly express who they are within a society, that is more tolerant and that adapts better to social issues.

[ 48 ] They argue that culture is not one definable thing based on one race or religion, but rather the result of multiple factors that change as the world changes.

Historically, support for modern multiculturalism stems from the changes in Western societies after World War II, in what Susanne Wessendorf calls the "human rights revolution", in which the horrors of institutionalized racism and ethnic cleansing became almost impossible to ignore in the wake of the Holocaust ; with the collapse of the European colonial system , as colonized nations in Africa and Asia successfully fought for their independence and pointed out the discriminatory underpinnings of the colonial system; and, in the United States in particular, with the rise of the Civil Rights Movement , which criticized ideals of assimilation that often led to prejudices against those who did not act according to Anglo-American standards and which led to the development of academic ethnic studies programs as a way to counteract the neglect of contributions by racial minorities in classrooms.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] As this history shows, multiculturalism in Western countries was seen to combat racism, to protect minority communities of all types, and to undo policies that had prevented minorities from having full access to the opportunities for freedom and equality promised by the liberalism that has been the hallmark of Western societies since the Age of Enlightenment .

Will Kymlicka argues for "group differentiated rights", that help both religious and cultural minorities operate within the larger state as a whole, without impinging on the rights of the larger society. He bases this on his opinion that human rights fall short in protecting the rights of minorities, as the state has no stake in protecting the minorities.

[ 51 ] C. James Trotman argues that multiculturalism is valuable because it "uses several disciplines to highlight neglected aspects of our social history, particularly the histories of women and minorities [...and] promotes respect for the dignity of the lives and voices of the forgotten.

[ 52 ] By closing gaps, by raising consciousness about the past, multiculturalism tries to restore a sense of wholeness in a postmodern era that fragments human life and thought." [ 52 ] Tariq Modood argues that in the early years of the 21st century, multiculturalism "is most timely and necessary, and [...] we need more not less", since it is "the form of integration" that (1) best fits the ideal of egalitarianism , (2) has "the best chance of succeeding" in the "post- 9/11 , post 7/7 " world, and (3) has remained "moderate [and] pragmatic".

[ 53 ] Bhikhu Parekh counters what he sees as the tendencies to equate multiculturalism with racial minorities "demanding special rights" and to see these as promoting a "thinly veiled racis[m]". Instead, he argues that multiculturalism is in fact "not about minorities" but "is about the proper terms of the relationship between different cultural communities", which means that the standards by which the communities resolve their differences, e.g., "the principles of justice" must not come from only one of the cultures but must come "through an open and equal dialogue between them." [ 54 ] Balibar characterizes criticisms of multiculturalism as "differentialist racism", which he describes as a covert form of racism that does not purport ethnic superiority as much as it asserts stereotypes of perceived "incompatibility of life-styles and traditions".

[ 55 ] Criticism [ edit ] Main article: Criticism of multiculturalism Critics of multiculturalism often debate whether the multicultural ideal of benignly co-existing cultures that interrelate and influence one another, and yet remain distinct, is sustainable, paradoxical, or even desirable.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] It is argued that nation states , who would previously have been synonymous with a distinctive cultural identity of their own, lose out to enforced multiculturalism and that this ultimately erodes the host nations' distinct culture.

[ 59 ] Sarah Song views cultures as historically shaped entities by its members, and that they lack boundaries due to globalization, thereby making them stronger than others might assume.

[ 60 ] She goes on to argue against the notion of special rights as she feels cultures are mutually constructive, and are shaped by the dominant culture. Brian Barry advocates a difference-blind approach to culture in the political realm and he rejects group-based rights as antithetical to the universalist liberal project, which he views as based on the individual.

[ 61 ] Susan Moller Okin , a feminist professor of political philosophy , argued in 1999, in "Is multiculturalism bad for women?", that the principle that all cultures are equal means that the equal rights of women in particular are sometimes severely violated.

[ 62 ] Dick Lamm , former three-term Democratic governor of the US state of Colorado , argued that "diverse peoples worldwide are mostly engaged in hating each other—that is, when they are not killing each other. A diverse, peaceful, or stable society is against most historical precedent." [ 63 ] The American classicist Victor Davis Hanson used the perceived differences in "rationality" between Moctezuma and Cortés to argue that Western culture was superior to every culture in the entire world, which thus led him to reject multiculturalism as a false doctrine that placed all cultures on an equal footing.

[ 64 ] In New Zealand ( Aotearoa ), which is officially bi-cultural, multiculturalism has been seen as a threat to the Māori as an attempt by the New Zealand Government to undermine Māori demands for self-determination and encourage assimilation.

[ 65 ] Far-right sympathisers have been shown to increasingly take part in a multitude of online discursive efforts directed against global brands' multicultural advertisements.

[ 66 ] : 477 Americas [ edit ] Argentina [ edit ] Main articles: Demographics of Argentina and Immigration to Argentina Russian Orthodox Cathedral of the Most Holy Trinity in Buenos Aires Though not called Multiculturalism as such, the preamble of Argentina's constitution explicitly promotes immigration , and recognizes the individual's multiple citizenship from other countries. Though 97% of Argentina's population self-identify as of European descent and mestizo [ 67 ] to this day a high level of multiculturalism remains a feature of Argentina's culture , [ 68 ] [ 69 ] allowing foreign festivals and holidays (e.g.

Saint Patrick's Day ), supporting all kinds of art or cultural expressions from ethnic groups , as well as their diffusion through an important multicultural presence in the media .
In Argentina there are recognized regional languages Guaraní in Corrientes , [ 70 ] Quechua in Santiago del Estero , [ 71 ] Qom , Mocoví , and Wichí in Chaco .

[ 72 ] According to the National Institute for Indigenous Affairs published on its website, there are 1,779 registered indigenous communities in Argentina, belonging to 39 indigenous peoples.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Bolivia [ edit ] Bolivia is a diverse country made up of 36 different types of indigenous groups.

[ 75 ] Over 62% of Bolivia's population falls into these different indigenous groups, making it the most indigenous country in Latin America .

[ 76 ] Out of the indigenous groups the Aymara and the Quechua are the largest.

[ 75 ] The latter 30% of the population is a part of the mestizo , which are a people mixed with European and indigenous ancestry.

[ 76 ] Bolivia's political administrations have endorsed multicultural politics and in 2009 Bolivia's Constitution was inscribed with multicultural principles.

[ 77 ] The Constitution of Bolivia recognizes 36 official languages besides Spanish, each language has its own culture and indigenous group.

[ 78 ] Bolivian culture is celebrated across the country and has heavy influences from the Aymara, the Quechua, the Spanish, and other popular cultures from around Latin America.

Brazil [ edit ] House with elements of people from different countries, including Russians and Germans , in Carambeí , south of the country , a city of Dutch majority Brazil has been known to acclaim multiculturalism and has undergone many changes regarding this in the past few decades. Brazil is a controversial country when it comes to defining a multicultural country.

[ 79 ] There are two views: the Harvard Institute of Economic Research points to the fact that Brazil has a large mixed-race population, while researcher Erkan Gören of the University of Oldenburg notes that virtually all Brazilians speaks Portuguese .

[ 79 ] Cities such as São Paulo are home to migrants from Japan , Italy , Lebanon , Portugal , and Africa .

[ 80 ] There is a multicultural presence in this city, and this is prevalent throughout Brazil. Furthermore, Brazil is a country that has made great strides to embrace migrant cultures. There has been increased awareness of anti-blackness and active efforts to combat racism. However, there is still a lack of school engagement in these matters.

[ 81 ] Canada [ edit ] Main article: Multiculturalism in Canada Sikhs celebrating the Sikh new year in Toronto , Canada Canadian society is often depicted as being "very progressive , diverse, and multicultural," or a just society that formally acknowledges several different cultures and beliefs .

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Multiculturalism, however, is a misnomer often misidentified as a societal ideal with its associated natural moral sensitivity, whereas it functions as a political instrument for diversity management under official policy.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Multiculturalism was adopted as the official policy of the Canadian government during the premiership of Pierre Elliott Trudeau in the 1970s and 1980s, influenced by factors such as the militant politics of Québécois nationalism, rising Indigenous discontent over the assimilationist policies outlined in the 1969 White Paper, the threat of American cultural annexation, the need to secure ethnic votes in immigrant-rich urban centers, and the appeasement of other European ethnic groups.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Multiculturalism is reflected in the law through the Canadian Multiculturalism Act [ 88 ] and section 27 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .

[ 89 ] Canadian multiculturalism is often seen as cherishing immigrant ways of life from outside the country, and as such, it is looked upon with admiration resulting in dismissing of most critics of the concept.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] The Broadcasting Act of 1991 asserts the Canadian broadcasting system should reflect the diversity of cultures in the country.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] This conceptual transition of multiculturalism is also reflected in Canada's official discourse, where attitudes about "multiculturalism" have shifted to focus on "diversity," driven by increasing immigration rates. It now emphasizes Canada's growing multicultural makeup and the diversity of ethnic and racial groups within the country adhering to a politics of recognition, rather than a politics of interrogation that could have been instrumental in addressing dominant power dynamics and the privileges that affect marginalized groups.

[ 94 ] Multiculturalism in Canada is often globally recognized as one of the country's significant accomplishments in diversity management, and a key distinguishing element of Canadian national identity.

[ 85 ] [ 95 ] In a 2002 interview with The Globe and Mail , Karīm al-Hussainī , the 49th Aga Khan of the Ismaili Muslims , described Canada as "the most successful pluralist society on the face of our globe", citing it as "a model for the world".

[ 96 ] He explained that the experience of Canadian governance—its commitment to pluralism and its support for the rich multicultural diversity of its people—is something that must be shared and would be of benefit to all societies in other parts of the world.

[ 96 ] The Economist ran a cover story in 2016 praising Canada as the most successful multicultural society in the West .

[ 97 ] The Economist argued that Canada's multiculturalism was a source of strength that united the diverse population and by attracting immigrants from around the world was also an engine of economic growth as well.

[ 97 ] The influence of the transitioned ideology of multiculturalism in the public sphere has led many public and private groups in Canada to work toward supporting both multiculturalism and recent immigrants to Canada.

[ 98 ] In an effort to support recent Filipino immigrants to Alberta, for example, one school board partnered with a local university and an immigration agency to support these new families in their school and community.

[ 99 ] Mexico [ edit ] Teotihuacan Mexico has historically always been a multicultural country. After the betrayal of Hernán Cortés to the Aztecs , the Spanish conquered the Aztec Empire and colonized indigenous people. They influenced the indigenous religion, politics, culture and ethnicity.

[ citation needed ] The Spanish opened schools in which they taught Christianity, and the Spanish language eventually surpassed indigenous languages, making it the most spoken language in Mexico. Mestizo was also born from the conquest, which meant being half-Indigenous and half-Spanish.

[ 100 ] Mexico City has recently been integrating rapidly, doing much better than many cities in a sample conducted by the Intercultural Cities Index (being the only non-European city, alongside Montreal , on the index).

[ 101 ] Mexico is an ethnically diverse country with a population composed of approximately 123 million in 2017. There is a wide variety of ethnic groups, the major group being Mestizos followed by White Mexicans and Indigenous Mexicans .

[ 102 ] There are many other ethnic groups such as Arab Mexicans , Afro-Mexicans and Asian Mexicans .

From the year 2000 to 2010, the number of people in Mexico that were born in another country doubled, reaching a total of 961,121 people, mostly coming from Guatemala and the United States.

[ 103 ] Mexico is quickly becoming a melting pot , with many immigrants coming into the country. It is considered to be a cradle of civilization , which influences their multiculturalism and diversity, by having different civilizations influence them. A distinguishable trait of Mexico's culture is the mestizaje of its people, which caused the combination of Spanish influence, their indigenous roots while also adapting the culture traditions from their immigrants.

Peru [ edit ] Peru is an exemplary country of multiculturalism, in 2016 the INEI reported a total population of 31 million people. They share their borders with Ecuador, Colombia, Brazil, Chile and Bolivia, and have welcomed many immigrants into their country creating a diverse community.

Tambomachay, Cuzco, Peru Peru is the home to Amerindians but after the Spanish Conquest , the Spanish brought African, and Asian peoples as slaves to Peru creating a mix of ethnic groups. After slavery was no longer permitted in Peru, African-Peruvians and Asian-Peruvians have contributed to Peruvian culture in many ways. Today, Amerindians make up 25.8% of the population, Mestizos 60.2%, White 5.9% and 4.8% is composed by Black , Chinese, Japanese and others.

[ 104 ] In 1821, Peru's president José de San Martín gave foreigners the freedom to start industries in Peru's ground, 2 years after, foreigners that lived in Peru for more than 5 years were considered naturalized citizens, which then decreased to 3 years.

United States [ edit ] See also: Multicultural education and Race and ethnicity in the United States Little Italy (top, c.

1900 ) in New York City abuts Manhattan's Chinatown .

People waiting to cross Fifth Avenue Poster from 1907: The many ways in which New Yorkers say " Merry Christmas " or its equivalent ; in Arabic , Armenian , Chinese , Croatian , Czech , Dutch , Esperanto , Finnish , Flemish , French , Gaelic , German , Greek , Yiddish (labeled as " Christian Hebrew "), Hungarian , Italian , Japanese , Lithuanian , Norwegian , Polish , Portuguese , Romanian , Russian , Slovene , Spanish , Swedish , Turkish and Ukrainian .

" Gotham 's citizens have been called "The Sons of Elsewhere", and their language that spoken at the Tower of Babel ..." Although official multiculturalism policy is not established at the federal level, ethnic and cultural diversity is common in rural , suburban and urban areas.

[ 105 ] Continuous mass immigration was a feature of the United States economy and society since the first half of the 19th century.

[ 106 ] The absorption of the stream of immigrants became, in itself, a prominent feature of America's national myth . The idea of the melting pot is a metaphor that implies that all the immigrant cultures are mixed and amalgamated without state intervention.

[ 107 ] The melting pot theory implied that each individual immigrant, and each group of immigrants, assimilated into American society at their own pace. This is different from multiculturalism as it is defined above, which does not include complete assimilation and integration.

[ 108 ] The melting pot tradition co-exists with a belief in national unity, dating from the American founding fathers : Providence has been pleased to give this one connected country to one united people – a people descended from the same ancestors, speaking the same language, professing the same religion, attached to the same principles of government, very similar in their manners and customs... This country and this people seem to have been made for each other, and it appears as if it was the design of Providence, that an inheritance so proper and convenient for a band of brethren, united to each other by the strongest ties, should never be split into a number of unsocial, jealous, and alien sovereignties.

[ 109 ] Staff of President Clinton's One America Initiative . The President's Initiative on Race was a critical element in President Clinton's effort to prepare the country to embrace diversity.

As a philosophy, multiculturalism began as part of the pragmatism movement at the end of the 19th century in Europe and the United States, then as political and cultural pluralism at the turn of the 20th century.

[ 110 ] It was partly in response to a new wave of European imperialism in sub-Saharan Africa and the massive immigration of Southern and Eastern Europeans to the United States and Latin America. Philosophers, psychologists and historians and early sociologists such as Charles Sanders Peirce , William James , George Santayana , Horace Kallen , John Dewey , W. E. B. Du Bois and Alain Locke developed concepts of cultural pluralism, from which emerged what we understand today as multiculturalism. In Pluralistic Universe (1909), William James espoused the idea of a " plural society ". James saw pluralism as "crucial to the formation of philosophical and social humanism to help build a better, more egalitarian society.

[ 111 ] The educational approach to multiculturalism has since spread to the grade school system, as school systems try to rework their curricula to introduce students to diversity earlier – often on the grounds that it is important for minority students to see themselves represented in the classroom.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Studies estimated 46 million Americans ages 14 to 24 to be the most diverse generation in American society.

[ 114 ] In 2009 and 2010, controversy erupted in Texas as the state's curriculum committee made several changes to the state's requirements, often at the expense of minorities. They chose to juxtapose Abraham Lincoln's inaugural address with that of Confederate president Jefferson Davis ; [ 115 ] they debated removing Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall and labor-leader Cesar Chavez [ 116 ] and rejected calls to include more Hispanic figures, in spite of the high Hispanic population in the state.

[ 117 ] According to a 2000 analysis of domestic terrorism in the United States , "A distinctive feature of American terrorism is the ideological diversity of perpetrators. White racists are responsible for over a third of the deaths, and black militants have claimed almost as many. Almost all of the remaining deaths are attributable to Puerto Rican nationalists, Islamic extremists, revolutionary leftists and emigre groups." [ 118 ] Twenty years later, far-right and white racists were observed as the leading perpetrators of domestic terrorism in the U.S.

[ 119 ] According to a 2020 study by the Strategic & International Studies, right-wing extremists are responsible for the murder of 329 people since 1994 [ 120 ] (over half due to the terrorist bombing of the 1995 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah building in Oklahoma City, which killed 168 people).

[ 121 ] Effect of diversity on civic engagement [ edit ] A 2007 study by Robert Putnam encompassing 30,000 people across the US found that diversity had a negative effect on civic engagement. The greater the diversity, the fewer people voted and the less they volunteered for community projects; also, trust among neighbours was only half that of homogenous communities.

[ 122 ] Putnam says, however, that "in the long run immigration and diversity are likely to have important cultural, economic, fiscal, and developmental benefits", as long as society successfully overcomes the short-term problems.

[ 33 ] Putnam adds that his "extensive research and experience confirm the substantial benefits of diversity, including racial and ethnic diversity, to our society." [ 123 ] Bartizan in Venezuela Venezuela [ edit ] Venezuela is home to a variety of ethnic groups, with an estimated population of 32 million, as of 2018 [update] .

[ 124 ] Their population is composed of approximately 68% mestizo, which means of mixed race.

[ 125 ] Venezuelan culture is mainly composed of a mixture of their indigenous culture, Spanish, and African.

[ 126 ] There was a heavy influence of Spanish culture due to the Spanish Conquest, which influenced their religion, language and traditions. African influence can be seen in their music.

[ 126 ] While Spanish is Venezuela's main language, there are more than 40 indigenous languages spoken to this day.

[ 127 ] Colombia [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Colombia , with an estimated population of 51 million inhabitants, is populated by a great variety of ethnic groups . Approximately 49% of its population is Mestizo , 37% White , 10% African descent , 3.4% Indigenous and 0.6 Romani .

It is estimated that 18.8 million Colombians are direct descendants of Europeans, either by one of their parents or grandparents. Mainly from Spain, Italy, Germany, Poland and England, they represent 37% of its population. The Arab descent also predominates in the country. The Syrians , Lebanese and Palestinians are the largest post-independence immigrants to the country, so much so that Colombia has the second largest Arab diaspora in Latin America , with a little more than 3.2 million descendants, which represents 6.4% of its population.

Europe [ edit ] Ethno-linguistic map of Austria-Hungary , 1910 Ethno-linguistic map of the Second Polish Republic , 1937 Historically, Europe has always been a mixture of Latin, Slavic, Germanic, Uralic, Celtic, Hellenic, Illyrian, Thracian and other cultures influenced by the importation of Jewish, Christian, Muslim and other belief systems; although the continent was supposedly unified by the super-position of Imperial Roman Christianity , it is accepted that geographic and cultural differences continued from antiquity into the modern age.

[ 128 ] In the nineteenth century, the ideology of nationalism transformed the way Europeans thought about the state .

[ 128 ] Existing states were broken up and new ones created; the new nation-states were founded on the principle that each nation is entitled to its own sovereignty and to engender, protect, and preserve its own unique culture and history. Unity, under this ideology, is seen as an essential feature of the nation and the nation-state; unity of descent, unity of culture, unity of language, and often unity of religion. The nation-state constitutes a culturally homogeneous society, although some national movements recognised regional differences.

[ 129 ] Where cultural unity was insufficient, it was encouraged and enforced by the state.

[ 130 ] The nineteenth century nation-states developed an array of policies – the most important was compulsory primary education in the national language .

[ 130 ] The language itself was often standardised by a linguistic academy, and regional languages were ignored or suppressed. Some nation-states pursued violent policies of cultural assimilation and even ethnic cleansing .

[ 130 ] Some countries in the European Union have introduced policies for "social cohesion", "integration", and (sometimes) "assimilation". The policies include: Compulsory courses and/or tests on national history , on the constitution and the legal system (e.g., the computer-based test for individuals seeking naturalisation in the UK named Life in the United Kingdom test ) Introduction of an official national history, such as the national canon defined for the Netherlands by the van Oostrom Commission, [ 131 ] and promotion of that history (e.g., by exhibitions about national heroes ) Tests designed to elicit "unacceptable" values. In Baden-Württemberg , immigrants are asked what they would do if their son says he is a homosexual (the desired answer is that they would accept it).

[ 132 ] Other countries have instituted policies which encourage cultural separation.

[ 133 ] The concept of " Cultural exception " proposed by France in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations in 1993 was an example of a measure aimed at protecting local cultures.

[ 134 ] Bulgaria [ edit ] Sofia Synagogue Banya Bashi Mosque in Sofia Since its establishment in the seventh century, Bulgaria has hosted many religions, ethnic groups and nations. The capital city Sofia is the only European city that has peacefully functioning, within walking distance of 300 metres, [ 135 ] [ 136 ] four Places of worship of the major religions: Eastern Orthodox ( St Nedelya Church ), Islam ( Banya Bashi Mosque ), Roman Catholicism ( St. Joseph Cathedral ), and Orthodox Judaism ( Sofia Synagogue , the third-largest synagogue in Europe).

This unique arrangement has been called by historians a "multicultural cliche".

[ 137 ] It has also become known as "The Square of Religious Tolerance" [ 138 ] [ 139 ] and has initiated the construction of a 100-square-metre scale model of the site that is to become a symbol of the capital.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] Furthermore, unlike some other Nazi Germany allies or German-occupied countries excluding Denmark , Bulgaria managed to save its entire 48,000-strong Jewish population during World War II from deportation to Nazi concentration camps .

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] According to Dr Marinova-Christidi, the main reason for the efforts of Bulgarian people to save their Jewish population during WWII is that within the region, they "co-existed for centuries with other religions" – giving it a unique multicultural and multiethnic history.

[ 145 ] Consequently, within the Balkan region, Bulgaria has become an example for multiculturalism in terms of variety of religions, artistic creativity [ 146 ] and ethnicity.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Its largest ethnic minority groups, Turks and Roma, enjoy wide political representation. In 1984, following a campaign by the Communist regime for a forcible change of the Islamic names of the Turkish minority, [ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] [ 152 ] an underground organisation called «National Liberation Movement of the Turks in Bulgaria» was formed which headed the Turkish community's opposition movement. On 4 January 1990, the activists of the movement registered an organisation with the legal name Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF) (in Bulgarian: Движение за права и свободи: in Turkish: Hak ve Özgürlükler Hareketi) in the Bulgarian city of Varna. At the moment of registration, it had 33 members, at present, according to the organisation's website, 68,000 members plus 24,000 in the organisation's youth wing [1] . In 2012, Bulgarian Turks were represented at every level of government: local, with MRF having mayors in 35 municipalities, at parliamentary level with MRF having 38 deputies (14% of the votes in Parliamentary elections for 2009–13) [ 153 ] and at executive level, where there is one Turkish minister, Vezhdi Rashidov . 21 Roma political organisations were founded between 1997–2003 in Bulgaria.

[ 154 ] France [ edit ] Further information: Immigration to France After the end of World War II in  1945, immigration significantly increased. During the period of reconstruction, France lacked the labour to do so, and as a result; the French Government was eager to recruit immigrants coming from all over Europe, the Americas, Africa and Asia.

Although there was a presence of, Vietnamese in France since the late-nineteenth century (mostly students and workers), a wave of Vietnamese migrated after 1954. These migrants consisted of those who were loyal to the colonial government and those married to French colonists. Following the partition of Vietnam , students and professionals from South Vietnam continued to arrive in France. Although many initially returned to the country after a few years, as the Vietnam War situation worsened, a majority decided to remain in France and brought their families over as well.

[ 155 ] This period also saw a significant wave of immigrants from Algeria . As the Algerian War started in 1954, there were already 200,000 Algerian immigrants in France .

[ 156 ] However, because of the tension between the Algerians and the French, these immigrants were no longer welcome. This conflict between the two sides led to the Paris Massacre of 17 October 1961, when the police used force against an Algerian demonstration on the streets of Paris. After the war, after Algeria gained its independence, the free circulation between France and Algeria was once again allowed, and the number of Algerian immigrants started to increase drastically. From 1962–75, the Algerian immigrant population increased from 350,000 to 700,000.

[ 157 ] Many of these immigrants were known as the " harkis ", and the others were known as the " pieds-noirs ". The "harkis" were Algerians who supported the French during the Algerian War; once the war was over, they were deeply resented by other Algerians, and thus had to flee to France. The "pieds-noirs" were European settlers who moved to Algeria, but migrated back to France since 1962 when Algeria declared independence.

According to Erik Bleich, multiculturalism in France faced stiff resistance in the educational sector, especially regarding recent Muslim arrivals from Algeria. Gatekeepers often warned that multiculturalism was a threat to the historic basis of French culture.

[ 158 ] Jeremy Jennings finds three positions among elites regarding the question of reconciling traditional French Republican principles with multiculturalism. The traditionalists refuse to make any concessions and instead insist on clinging to the historic republican principles of "laïcité" and the secular state in which religion and ethnicity are always ignored. In the middle are modernising republicans who uphold republicanism but also accept some elements of cultural pluralism. Finally there are multiculturalist republicans who envision a pluralist conception of French identity and seek an appreciation of the positive values brought to France by the minority cultures.

[ 159 ] A major attack on multiculturalism came in Stasi Report of 2003 which denounces "Islamism" as deeply opposed to the mainstream interpretations of French culture. It is portrayed as a dangerous political agenda that will create a major obstacle for Muslims to comply with French secularism or "laïcité " .

[ 160 ] Murat Akan, however, argues that the Stasi Report and the new regulations against the hijab and religious symbols in the schools must be set against gestures toward multiculturalism, such as the creation of Muslim schools under contract with the government.

[ 161 ] Germany [ edit ] Main article: Immigration to Germany In October 2010, Angela Merkel told a meeting of younger members of her Christian Democratic Union (CDU) party at Potsdam , near Berlin , that attempts to build a multicultural society in Germany had "utterly failed", [ 162 ] stating: "The concept that we are now living side by side and are happy about it does not work".

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] She continued to say that immigrants should integrate and adopt Germany's culture and values. This has added to a growing debate within Germany [ 164 ] on the levels of immigration, its effect on Germany and the degree to which middle eastern immigrants have integrated into German society.

[ 165 ] In 2015, Merkel again criticized multiculturalism on the grounds that it leads to parallel societies .

[ 166 ] The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community of Germany is the first Muslim group to have been granted "corporation under public law status", putting the community on par with the major Christian churches and Jewish communities of Germany.

[ 167 ] Luxembourg [ edit ] Luxembourg has one of the highest foreign-born populations in Europe, foreigners account for nearly half of the country's total population.

[ 168 ] The majority of foreigners are from: Belgium , France, Italy, Germany, and Portugal .

[ 169 ] In total, 170 different nationalities make up the population of Luxembourg, out of this; 86% are of European descent.

[ 170 ] The official languages of Luxembourg are German, French, and Luxembourgish all of which are supported in the Luxembourg government and education system.

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] In 2005, Luxembourg officially promoted and implemented the objectives of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. This Convention affirms multicultural policies in Luxembourg and creates political awareness of cultural diversity.

[ 172 ] Netherlands [ edit ] Main article: Multiculturalism in the Netherlands Süleymanìye Mosque in Tilburg , built in 2001 Multiculturalism in the Netherlands began with major increases in immigration to the Netherlands during the mid-1950s and 1960s.

[ 173 ] As a consequence, an official national policy of multiculturalism was adopted in the early-1980s.

[ 173 ] Different groups could themselves determine religious and cultural matters, while state authorities would handle matters of housing and work policy.

[ 174 ] In the 1990s, the public debate were generally optimistic on immigration and the prevailing view was that a multicultural policy would reduce the social economic disparities over time.

[ 174 ] This policy subsequently gave way to more assimilationist policies in the 1990s and post-electoral surveys uniformly showed from 1994 onwards that a majority preferred that immigrants assimilated rather than retained the culture of their country of origin.

[ 173 ] [ 175 ] Following the September 11 attacks in the United States and the murders of Pim Fortuyn (in 2002) and Theo van Gogh (in 2004), there was increased political debate on the role of multiculturalism in the Netherlands.

[ 174 ] [ 176 ] Lord Sacks , Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth, made a distinction between tolerance and multiculturalism, citing the Netherlands as a tolerant, rather than multicultural, society.

[ 177 ] In June 2011, the First Rutte cabinet said the Netherlands would turn away from multiculturalism: "Dutch culture, norms and values must be dominant" Minister Donner said.

[ 178 ] Romania [ edit ] Main article: Immigration to Romania Since Antiquity , Romania has hosted many religious and ethnic groups, besides Romanians , including Roma people, Hungarians , Germans , Turks , Greeks , Tatars , Slovaks , Serbs , Jews and others . During WW2 and Communism , most of these ethnic groups chose to emigrate to other countries. However, since the 1990s, Romania has received a growing number of immigrants and refugees, most of them from the Arab world , Asia or Africa . Immigration is expected to increase in the future, as large numbers of Romanian workers leave the country and are being replaced by foreigners.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] Scandinavia [ edit ] The Vuosaari district in Helsinki , Finland , is highly multicultural.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] Multiculturalism in Scandinavia has centered on discussions about marriage, dress, religious schools, Muslim funeral rites and gender equality.

Forced marriages have been widely debated in Denmark, Sweden and Norway but the countries differ in policy and responses by authorities.

[ 183 ] Sweden has the most permissive policies while Denmark the most restrictive ones.

Denmark [ edit ] Main article: Immigration to Denmark This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section contains weasel words : vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information .

Such statements should be clarified or removed .

( January 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In 2001, Denmark, a liberal-conservative coalition government with the support of the Danish People's Party which instituted less pluralistic policy, geared more towards assimilation .

[ 183 ] A 2018 study found that increases in local ethnic diversity in Denmark caused "rightward shifts in election outcomes by shifting electoral support away from traditional "big government" left‐wing parties and towards anti‐immigrant nationalist parties." [ 184 ] For decades, Danish immigration policy was built upon the belief that, with support, immigrants and their descendants would eventually reach the same levels of education as Danes. In a 2019 report, the Danish Immigration Service and the Ministry of Education found this to be false. The report found that, while the second-generation immigrants without a Western background do better than their parents, the same is not true for third-generation immigrants. One of the reasons given was that second-generation immigrants may marry someone from their country of origin, which may cause Danish not to be spoken at home, which would put the children at a disadvantage in school. Thereby, the process of integrating has to start from the beginning for each generation.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] Norway [ edit ] Main article: Immigration to Norway Educational attainment of migrants in Norway in 2018 [ 187 ] Apart from citizens of Nordic countries , all foreigners must apply for permanent residency in order to live and work in Norway.

[ 188 ] In 2017, the Norwegian immigrant population was made up of: citizens of EU and EEA countries (41.2%); citizens of Asian countries, including Turkey (32.4%); citizens of African countries (13.7%); and citizens of non-EU/EEA European, North American, South American and Oceanian countries (12.7%).

[ 189 ] In 2015, during the European migrant crisis , a total of 31,145 asylum seekers, most of whom came from Afghanistan and Syria, crossed the Norwegian border.

[ 190 ] In 2016, the number of asylum seekers dramatically reduced by almost 90%, with 3460 asylum seekers coming to Norway. This was partly due to the stricter border control across Europe, including an agreement between the EU and Turkey.

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] As of September 2019, 15 foreign residents who had travelled from Norway to Syria or Iraq to join the Islamic State have had their residence permits revoked.

[ 193 ] The Progress Party has named the reduction of high levels of immigration from non-European countries one of their goals: "Immigration from countries outside the EEA must be strictly enforced to ensure a successful integration. It can not be accepted that fundamental Western values and human rights are set aside by cultures and attitudes that certain groups of immigrants bring with them to Norway." [ 194 ] An extreme form of opposition to immigration in Norway were the 22/7 attacks carried out by the terrorist Anders Behring Breivik on 22 July 2011. He killed 8 people by bombing government buildings in Oslo and massacred 69 young people at a youth summer camp held by the Labour Party , who were in power at the time. He blamed the party for the high level of Muslim immigration and accused it of "promoting multiculturalism".

[ 195 ] Sweden [ edit ] Main article: Immigration to Sweden Source: Gävle University College [ 196 ] Sweden has from the early 1970s experienced a greater share of non-Western immigration than the other Scandinavian countries, which consequently have placed multiculturalism on the political agenda for a longer period of time.

[ 183 ] Sweden was the first country to adopt an official policy of multiculturalism in Europe. On 14 May 1975, a unanimous Swedish parliament passed an act on a new multiculturalist immigrant and ethnic minority policy put forward by the social democratic government, that explicitly rejected the ideal ethnic homogeneity and the policy of assimilation.

[ 197 ] The three main principles of the new policy were equality, partnership and freedom of choice. The explicit policy aim of the freedom of choice principle was to create the opportunity for minority groups in Sweden to retain their own languages and cultures. From the mid-1970s, the goal of enabling the preservation of minorities and creating a positive attitude towards the new officially endorsed multicultural society among the majority population became incorporated into the Swedish constitution as well as cultural, educational and media policies. Despite the anti-multiculturalist protestations of the Sweden Democrats , multiculturalism remains official policy in Sweden.

[ 198 ] A 2008 study which involved questionnaires sent to 5,000 people, showed that less than a quarter of the respondents (23%) wanted to live in areas characterised by cultural, ethnic and social diversity.

[ 199 ] A 2014 study published by Gävle University College showed that 38% of the population never interacted with anyone from Africa and 20% never interacted with any non-Europeans.

[ 200 ] The study concluded that while physical distance to the country of origin, also religion and other cultural expressions are significant for the perception of cultural familiarity. In general, peoples with Christianity as the dominant religion were perceived to be culturally closer than peoples from Muslim countries.

[ 196 ] A 2017 study by Lund University also found that social trust was lower among people in regions with high levels of past non-Nordic immigration than among people in regions with low levels of past immigration.

[ 201 ] The erosive effect on trust was more pronounced for immigration from culturally distant countries.

[ 202 ] Serbia [ edit ] Csárdás traditional Hungarian folk dance in Doroslovo In Serbia , there are 19 officially recognised ethnic groups with a status of national minorities.

[ 203 ] Vojvodina is an autonomous province of Serbia, located in the northern part of the country. It has a multiethnic and multicultural identity; [ 204 ] there are more than 26 ethnic groups in the province, [ 205 ] [ 206 ] which has six official languages.

[ 207 ] Largest ethnic groups in Vojvodina are Serbs (67%), Hungarians (13%), Slovaks , Croats , Romani , Romanians , Montenegrins , Bunjevci , Bosniaks , Rusyns . The Chinese [ 208 ] [ 209 ] and Arabs, are the only two significant immigrant minorities in Serbia.

Radio Television of Vojvodina broadcasts program in ten local languages. The project by the Government of AP Vojvodina titled "Promotion of Multiculturalism and Tolerance in Vojvodina", whose primary goal is to foster the cultural diversity and develop the atmosphere of interethnic tolerance among the citizens of Vojvodina, has been successfully implemented since 2005.

[ 210 ] Serbia is continually working on improving its relationship and inclusion of minorities in its effort to gain full accession to the European Union. Serbia has initiated talks through Stabilisation and Association Agreement on 7 November 2007.

United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Modern immigration to the United Kingdom Multicultural policies [ 211 ] were adopted by local administrations from the 1970s and 1980s onwards. In 1997, the newly elected Labour government committed to a multiculturalist approach at a national level, [ 212 ] but after 2001, there was something of a backlash , led by centre-left commentators such as David Goodhart and Trevor Phillips . The Government then embraced a policy of community cohesion instead. In 2011, Conservative Prime Minister David Cameron said in a speech that "state multiculturalism has failed".

[ 213 ] Critics argue that analyses which view society as 'too diverse' for social democracy and cohesion have "performative" effects regarding legitimate racism towards those classed as immigrants.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] Others, however, like author Ed West , criticize the notion that the United Kingdom is or should be a multicultural society in the first place and that the project of diversity is misguided.

[ 216 ] Russian Federation [ edit ] Main articles: Ethnic groups in Russia and Russian nationality law The idea of multiculturalism in Russia is closely linked to the territory and the Soviet concept of " nationality ". The Federation is divided into a series of republics where each ethnic group has preponderance in deciding the laws that affect that republic. A distinction is then made between Rossiyane (Russian citizens) and Russkie (ethnic Russians).

Each people within their territories has the right to practice their customs and traditions and even to impose their own laws, as is the case in Chechnya , as long as they do not violate federal and constitutional laws of the Russian Federation .

Asia [ edit ] India [ edit ] The Durga Puja celebrated in Kolkata Jama Masjid, Delhi , one of the largest mosques in India According to the 1961 Census of India , there are 1652 indigenous languages in the country.

[ 217 ] The culture of India has been shaped by its long history , unique geography and diverse demography .

India's languages , religions , dance , music, architecture and customs differ from place to place within the country, but nevertheless possess a commonality. The culture of India is an amalgamation of these diverse sub-cultures spread all over the Indian subcontinent and traditions that are several millennia old.

[ 218 ] The previously prevalent Indian caste system describes the social stratification and social restrictions in the Indian subcontinent, in which social classes are defined by thousands of endogamous hereditary groups, often termed jātis or castes .

[ 219 ] Religiously, Hindus form the majority, followed by Muslims. The statistics are: Hindu (79.8%), Muslim (14.2%), Christian (2.3%), Sikh (1.7%), Buddhist (0.7%), Jain (0.4%), Unaffiliated (0.23%), Baháʼís , Jews, Zoroastrians , and others (0.65%).

[ 220 ] Linguistically, the two main language families in India are Indo-Aryan (a branch of Indo-European ) and Dravidian . In India's northeast, people speaking Sino-Tibetan group of languages such as Meitei (Meitei-lon) and Bodo recognized by the Indian constitution and Austroasiatic languages are commonly found. India (officially) follows a three-language policy.

Hindi (spoken in the form of Hindustani ) is the official federal language, English has the federal status of associate/subsidiary official language and each state has its own state official language (in the Hindi sprachraum , this reduces to bilingualism). Further, India does not have any national language.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] The Republic of India 's state boundaries are largely drawn based on linguistic groups; this decision led to the preservation and continuation of local ethno-linguistic sub-cultures, except for the Hindi sprachraum which is itself divided into many states. Thus, most states differ from one another in language, culture, cuisine , clothing , literary style , architecture , music and festivities.

India has encountered religiously motivated violence , [ 223 ] such as the Moplah Riots , the Bombay riots , the 1984 Sikh genocide , the 1990 Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus , the 2002 Gujarat riots , the 2008 Mumbai attacks , the 2012 Assam violence , the 2013 Muzaffarnagar riots , and the 2020 Delhi riots . This has resulted from traditionally disadvantaged communities in public employment such as the policing of the same locality, apprehension of owners in giving properties for sale or rent [ 224 ] and of society in accepting inter-marriages.

[ 225 ] Cultural minorities in India [ edit ] The Indian constitution requires the various state-run institutions to provide quotas for minorities, which give these cultural minorities equal opportunities, as well as a forum through which they can actively participate in the institutions of the dominant culture.

[ 226 ] Indian polity after the 1990s has been marked by a shift from secular principles to a landscape that is dominated by pro-Hindu propaganda; the Bhartiya Janata Party has used this rhetoric by reconstructing Hinduism and bartering it under the guise of Indian nationalism.

[ 227 ] However, the rise of pro-Hindu ideology, commonly known as Hindutva , has impinged on the rights of cultural minorities.

[ 228 ] This can be seen in the large scale violence against cultural minorities, the votebank politics used by the Indian National Congress , and the promotion of issues faced by the larger religious communities over those faced by the backward groups in religious minorities.

[ 229 ] Scheduled Castes (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Other Backward Castes (OBC) [ edit ] Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are constitutionally recognized terms in India and constitute approximately 25% of the Indian population. Moreover more than 40 percent of India's population belongs to the Other Backward Castes as per the National Sample Survey Office or the NSSO which is a government organization for conducting surveys in India. So the total size of the lower castes in India is estimated to be around 70 percent of the country's population whereas the upper caste make up around 18 percent of the population. These groups have been provided with reservations that constitutionally guarantee them representation in governmental institutions, a mandate suggested by the Mandal Commission.

[ 230 ] The Indian constitution also provides SC's and ST's with protective measures that ensure equality, which is the main issue faced by members of both communities. However, while scheduled castes have turned into important political communities that the state concerns itself about, scheduled tribes continue to be politically marginalized.

[ 226 ] Indonesia [ edit ] Further information: Bhinneka Tunggal Ika , Demographics of Indonesia , Ethnic groups in Indonesia , and Culture of Indonesia Pluralism , diversity and multiculturalism is a daily fact of life in Indonesia . There are over 600 ethnic groups in Indonesia.

[ 231 ] [ 232 ] 95% of those are of Native Indonesian ancestry.

[ 233 ] The Javanese are the largest ethnic group in Indonesia who make up nearly 42% of the total population.

[ 234 ] The Sundanese , Malay , and Madurese are the next largest groups in the country.

[ 234 ] There are also more than 700 living languages spoken in Indonesia [ 235 ] and although predominantly Muslim the country also has large Christian and Hindu populations.

Indonesia's national motto, Bhinneka Tunggal Ika ("Unity in Diversity" lit. "many, yet one") enshrined in Pancasila the national ideology, articulates the diversity that shapes the country.

[ 236 ] The government nurtures and promotes the diversity of Indonesian local culture; adopting a pluralist approach.

Due to migration within Indonesia (as part of government transmigration programs or otherwise), there are significant populations of ethnic groups who reside outside of their traditional regions. The Javanese for example, moved from their traditional homeland in Java to the other parts of the archipelago. The expansion of the Javanese and their influence throughout Indonesia has raised the issue of Javanization , although Minangkabau , Malay , Madurese, Bugis and Makassar people, as a result of their merantau (migrating) culture are also quite widely distributed throughout the Indonesian archipelago, while Chinese Indonesians can be found in most urban areas. Because of urbanization, major Indonesian cities such as Greater Jakarta , Surabaya , Bandung , Palembang , Medan and Makassar have attracted large numbers of Indonesians from various ethnic, cultural and religious backgrounds. Jakarta in particular has almost all Indonesian ethnic groups represented.

However, this transmigration program and close interactions between people of different cultural backgrounds caused socio-cultural problems, as the inter-ethnics interactions have not always been conducted harmoniously. After the fall of Suharto in 1998 into the 2000s, numbers of inter-ethnic and inter-religious clashes erupted in Indonesia. Like the clashes between native Dayak tribes against Madurese transmigrants in Kalimantan during Sambas riots in 1999 [ 237 ] and the Sampit conflict in 2001.

[ 238 ] There were also clashes between Muslims and Christians, such as violence erupted in Poso between 1998 and into 2000, [ 239 ] and violences in Maluku between 1999 and into 2002.

[ 240 ] Nevertheless, Indonesia today still struggles and has managed to maintain unity and inter-cultural harmony, through a national adherence of pro-pluralism policy of Pancasila; promoted and enforced by the government and its people.

Chinese Indonesians are the largest foreign-origin minority that has resided in Indonesia for generations. Despite centuries of acculturation with native Indonesians, because of their disproportionate influence on Indonesian economy, and alleged question of national loyalty, Chinese Indonesians have suffered discrimination .

[ 241 ] The Suharto Orde Baru or New Order adopted a forced assimilation policy; which indicated that Chinese cultural elements were unacceptable.

[ 242 ] Chinese Indonesians were forced to adopt Indonesian-sounding names , and the use of Chinese culture and language was banned.

[ 241 ] The violence targeting Chinese Indonesians erupted during riots in 1998.

As the looting and destruction took place, a number of Chinese Indonesians, as well as looters, were killed. The Chinese Indonesians were treated as the scapegoat of 1997 Asian Financial Crisis , a result of ongoing discrimination and segregation policies enforced during Suharto's New Order regime. Soon after the fourth Indonesian President, Abdurrahman Wahid came into power in 1999, he quickly abolished some of the discriminatory laws in efforts to promote acceptance and to improve inter-racial relationships, such as abolishing the ban on Chinese culture; allowing Chinese traditions to be practised freely. Two years later President Megawati Sukarnoputri declared that the Chinese New Year ( Imlek ) would be marked as a national holiday from 2003.

[ 243 ] Tense incidents however have included attacks on Chinese temples [ 244 ] and Indonesian politician Basuki Tjahaja Purnama being given a two year prison sentence for blasphemy due to comments he made to his supporters in September 2016.

[ 245 ] [ 246 ] Kazakhstan [ edit ] See also: 1951 anti-Chechen pogrom in Eastern Kazakhstan There are sizeable populations of ethnic Kazakhs, Russians, Uzbeks, Ukrainians, Uighurs, Tatars, Germans and more in Kazakhstan.

[ 247 ] [ unreliable source?

] Kazakhstan was one of a few countries in post-Soviet territories that avoided interethnic clashes and conflicts in the period of USSR's final crisis and its eventual breakup.

[ 248 ] In 1995, Kazakhstan created the Assembly of People of Kazakhstan , an advisory body designed to represent the country's ethnic minorities.

[ 249 ] However, recent ethnic clashes and discrimination have been reported for groups such as Christians, [ 250 ] [ 251 ] ultraconservative Muslims, [ 252 ] ethnic Dungans , [ 253 ] [ 254 ] Chechens , Tajiks , [ 255 ] and LGBT people .

[ 256 ] [ 257 ] Malaysia [ edit ] Main articles: Ketuanan Melayu , Bumiputera (Malaysia) , and Demographics of Malaysia Malaysia is a multiethnic country, with Malays making up the majority, close to 58% of the population. About 25% of the population are Malaysians of Chinese descent .

Malaysians of Indian descent comprise about 7% of the population. The remaining 10% comprises: Native East Malaysians , namely Bajau , Bruneian , Bidayuh , Dusun , Iban , Kadazan , Kedayan , Melanau , Orang Ulu , Sarawakian Malays , etc.

Other native tribes of Peninsular Malaysia , such as the Orang Asli and Siamese people, and Non-native tribes of Peninsular Malaysia such as the Chettiars , the Peranakan and the Portuguese.

The Malaysian New Economic Policy or NEP serves as a form of "racial equalization" in the view of the Malay-controlled government.

[ 258 ] It promotes structural changes in various aspects of life from education to economic to social integration. Established after the 13 May racial riots of 1969, it sought to address the "significant imbalance" in the economic sphere where the minority especially the Chinese population had substantial control over commercial activity in the country. Critics of this policy has called it synonymous to racial discrimination and synonymous to Apartheid .

The Malay Peninsula has a long history of international trade contacts, influencing its ethnic and religious composition. Predominantly Malays before the 18th century, the ethnic composition changed dramatically when the British introduced new industries, and imported Chinese and Indian labor. Several regions in the then British Malaya such as Penang , Malacca and Singapore became Chinese dominated. Until the riots 1969, co-existence between the three ethnicities (and other minor groups) was largely peaceful, although the three main racial groups for the most part lived in separate communities – the Malays in the villages, the Chinese in the urban areas, and the Indians in the towns and plantation. More Malays however have moved into the cities since the 1970s, and the proportion of the non-Malays have been decreasing continually, especially the Chinese, due in large part to lower birth-rate and emigration as a result of institutionalized discrimination .

[ 259 ] [ 260 ] Preceding independence of the Federation of Malaya , a social contract was negotiated as the basis of a new society. The contract as reflected in the 1957 Malayan Constitution and the 1963 Malaysian Constitution states that the immigrant groups are granted citizenship, and Malays' special rights are guaranteed. This is often referred to the Bumiputra policy.

These pluralist policies have come under pressure from racialist Malay parties, who oppose perceived subversion of Malay rights. The issue is sometimes related to the controversial status of religious freedom in Malaysia .

Singapore [ edit ] High density public housing in Singapore, which are a common sight in the country, consists of different ethnic groups living together.

Main article: Immigration to Singapore Due to historical immigration trends, Singapore has a Chinese majority population with significant minority populations of Malays and Indians (predominantly Tamils ). Other prominent smaller groups include Peranakans , Arabs , Armenians , Eurasians , Europeans , Americans , and Canadians. Besides English, Singapore recognizes three other languages— Malay , Mandarin Chinese and Tamil . English was established as the medium of instruction in schools during the 1960s and 1970s and is the language of trade and government while the other three languages are taught as second languages ("mother tongues"). Besides being a multilingual country, Singapore also acknowledges festivals celebrated by the three main ethnic communities.

Under the Raffles Plan of Singapore , the city was divided into ethnic enclaves such as Geylang , Chinatown , and Little India . Housing in Singapore is governed by the Ethnic Integration Policy, which ensures an even ethnic distribution throughout Singapore.

[ 261 ] A similar policy exists in politics as all Group Representation Constituencies are required to field at least one candidate from an ethnic minority.

[ 262 ] Today, such ethnic enclaves has mostly been eliminated, due to the contemporary Singapore's government policy to encourage further ethnic integration between the different races of Singapore . A prominent example is its public housing system. Unlike other countries, public housing is not ostracised by a wide majority of the population and its government, and acts as a necessary and vital measure to provide immaculate and safe housing surrounded by public amenities at affordable prices, especially during its rapid development and industrialisation in the early years of independence.

[ 263 ] It is also meant to foster social cohesion between the social classes and races of Singapore, and prevent neglected areas or districts and ethnic enclaves from developing – known as the Ethnic Integration Policy (EIP).

[ 264 ] As such, it is considered a unique part of Singaporean culture, being commonly associated with the country.

[ 265 ] South Korea [ edit ] Main article: Immigration to South Korea South Korea remains a relatively homogenous country ethnically, linguistically, and culturally.

[ 266 ] Foreigners, expatriates, and immigrants are often rejected by the mainstream South Korean society and face discrimination.

[ 267 ] This can be seen as a result of World War II where the first noteworthy wave of multiculturalism between American servicemen and Korean women occurred. South Korea has been long regarded as an ethnic homogeneous country, therefore, the rise in mixed-race children was seen as a new phenomenon. Before the 1990s, the term honhyeol was commonly used to identify multiracial individuals in Korea – primarily in relation to the children of Korean women and American servicemen; [ 268 ] this common term strengthened the association of multiracial people with a sense of alienation, rather than promoting cultural diversity within Korea. Not only did this term effectively discriminate against mixed-race Koreans but it also made a clear distinction between native Koreans and mixed-race Koreans.

Han Geon-Soo 2007 notes the increased use of the word "multiculturalism" in South Korea: "As the increase of foreign migrants in [South] Korea transforms a single-ethnic homogeneous [South] Korean society into multiethnic and multicultural one, [the South] Korean government and the civil society pay close attention to multiculturalism as an alternative value to their policy and social movement." He argued, however, that "the current discourses and concerns on multiculturalism in [South] Korea" lacked "the constructive and analytical concepts for transforming a society".

[ 269 ] The same year, Stephen Castles of the International Migration Institute argued: "Korea no longer has to decide whether it wants to become a multicultural society. It made that decision years ago – perhaps unconsciously – when it decided to be a full participant in the emerging global economy. It confirmed that decision when it decided to actively recruit foreign migrants to meet the economic and demographic needs of a fast-growing society. Korea is faced by a different decision today: what type of multicultural society does it want to be?" [ 270 ] The Korea Times suggested in 2009 that South Korea was likely to become a multicultural society.

[ 271 ] In 2010, an opinion editorial written by Peter Underwood for the JoongAng Ilbo stated: "Media in [South] Korea is abuzz with the new era of multiculturalism. With more than one million foreigners in [South] Korea, 2 percent of the population comes from other cultures." He further opined: "If you stay too long, Koreans become uncomfortable with you. [...] Having a two percent foreign population unquestionably causes ripples, but having one million temporary foreign residents does not make Korea a multicultural society. [...] In many ways, this homogeneity is one of Korea's greatest strengths. Shared values create harmony. Sacrifice for the nation is a given. Difficult and painful political and economic initiatives are endured without discussion or debate. It is easy to anticipate the needs and behavior of others. It is the cornerstone that has helped Korea survive adversity. But there is a downside, too. [...] Koreans are immersed in their culture and are thus blind to its characteristics and quirks. Examples of group think are everywhere. Because Koreans share values and views, they support decisions even when they are obviously bad. Multiculturalism will introduce contrasting views and challenge existing assumptions. While it will undermine the homogeneity, it will enrich Koreans with a better understanding of themselves." [ 272 ] In 2010, results from the Korean Identity Survey suggested that government programs promoting multiculturalism had seen some success with over 60% of Koreans supporting the idea a multicultural society.

[ 273 ] However, the same poll in 2015 showed that support of a multicultural society had dropped to 49.7% suggesting a possible return to ethnic exclusivism.

[ 274 ] Turkey [ edit ] Main article: Immigration to Turkey Turkey is a country that straddles both Europe and Asia . It is home to several ethnic groups including Turkish , Arab , Armenian , Assyrian , Greek , Kurdish , and Jewish . There are cultural influences dating back to ancient Hellenic , Semitic and Iranian civilizations which diffused and mingled in myriad ways over a period of centuries.

[ 275 ] In recent years there has been an increase of diversity acceptance in Turkey, mainly because there was fear of losing values of the Ottoman past .

[ 276 ] Africa [ edit ] Cameroon [ edit ] Officially known as the Republic of Cameroon, Cameroon is found in central Africa consisting of a diverse geographical and cultural area that makes it one of the most diverse countries known today. Ranging from mountains, deserts, and rainforests, to coast-lands and savanna grasslands, its diverse geography makes a large diverse population possible. This diverse geography resembles Africa as a whole and due to this, many people commonly label Cameroon as "Africa in Miniature".

[ 277 ] [ 278 ] Demographics and official languages [ edit ] Before Cameroon's independence, it was under British and French colonial rule from 1916–1961.

[ 278 ] Upon gaining sovereignty , a major colonial influence was evident, having both English and French become the national language to roughly 25,000,000 Cameroonian residents.

[ 279 ] [ 280 ] Apart from these two major languages, a new language consisting of a mixture of French, English, and Pidgin known as Frananglais gained popularity among Cameroonian residents.

[ 281 ] Indigenous languages [ edit ] Although these three languages are the most common in Cameroon, there are still approximately 273 indigenous languages being spoken throughout the country, making it not only culturally diverse but linguistically as well.

[ 282 ] Among those who speak these indigenous languages are people from Bantu , Sudanic, Baka , Wodaabe (or Mbororo ) and even primitive hunter-gatherer groups known as Pygmies .

[ 283 ] [ 284 ] Indigenous peoples' rights [ edit ] Although native to Cameroonian land, they faced constant discrimination much like other indigenous groups around the world. The United Nations General Assembly ( UNGA ) adopted the United Nations' Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples ( UNDRIP ) in 2007. What this allowed was the protection of land and resource rights and prevented others from exploiting or violating them.

[ 285 ] : 2 In 2016, a group of indigenous Baka and Bagyeli groups united to form Gbabandi. Gbabandi allowed these indigenous groups to have a form of representation and a declared list of requirements that people of Cameroon had to abide by. Among these requirements were guaranteed land rights, peoples' consent to the usage of their sacred land, traditional chiefs and the ability to participate in "local, regional, and national levels" of political and economic matters. As a result, this established a sense of justice and acknowledgment among indigenous groups in Cameroon and posed for future battles for indigenous peoples' rights.

[ 286 ] Mauritius [ edit ] Multiculturalism has been a characteristic feature of the island of Mauritius .

[ 287 ] This is mainly because of colonization that has been present from, the English, the French, and the Dutch.

[ 288 ] However, the Mauritian society includes people from many different ethnic and religious groups: Hindu, Muslim and Indo-Mauritians , Mauritian Creoles (of African and Malagasy descent), Buddhist and Roman Catholic Sino-Mauritians and Franco-Mauritians (descendants of the original French colonists).

[ 289 ] Mauritius has embraced intertwining of cultures from the origin of the country, and has coined the term fruit-salad, which is a much more appealing term in comparison to melting-pot showing that they were not forced to these cultures.

[ 290 ] South Africa [ edit ] Main article: Immigration to South Africa South Africa is the fifth-most populous country and one of the most developed countries in Africa.

[ 291 ] South Africa also officially recognises 11 languages including English, making it third behind Bolivia and India in most official languages.

[ 292 ] The three most common languages are Zulu, Xhosa, and Afrikaans. Though South Africa's cultural traditions may decline as it becomes more and more Westernised due to its development, it is still known for its diverse culture.

Oceania [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Main article: Multiculturalism in Australia The next country to adopt an official policy of multiculturalism after Canada was Australia , a country with similar immigration situations and similar policies - for example, the formation of the Special Broadcasting Service .

[ 293 ] The Australian Government retains multiculturalism in policy and as a defining aspect of modern Australia.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 22 ] [ 21 ] Sydney's Chinatown The White Australia Policy was dismantled after World War II by various changes to immigration policy , although the official policy of multiculturalism was not formally introduced until 1972.

[ 294 ] The election of John Howard's Liberal-National Coalition government in 1996 was a major watershed for Australian multiculturalism.

Howard had long been a critic of multiculturalism, releasing his One Australia policy in the late 1980s.

[ 295 ] A Practical Reference to Religious Diversity for Operational Police and Emergency Services , first published in 1999, was a publication of the Australasian Police Multicultural Advisory Bureau designed to offer guidance to police and emergency services personnel on how religious affiliation can affect their contact with the public.

[ 296 ] [ 297 ] [ 298 ] The first edition covered Buddhist , Hindu , Islamic , Jewish and Sikh faiths, with participation of representatives of the various religions .

[ 299 ] The second edition, published in 2002, added Christian , Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander religions and the Baháʼí Faith to the list of religions.

[ 300 ] Contact between people of different cultures in Australia has been characterised by tolerance and engagement, but have also occasionally resulted in conflict and rifts.

[ 301 ] [ 302 ] Australia's diverse migrant communities have brought with them food, lifestyle and cultural practices, many of which have been absorbed into mainstream Australian culture.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Members of a multicultural community who are not of English-speaking Anglo-Australian , Anglo-Saxon or ‘ Anglo-Celtic ’ Australian background or not "assimilated" are often referred to in policy discourse as culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD), introduced in 1996 to replace non-English speaking background (NESB).

[ 303 ] [ 304 ] [ 305 ] New Zealand [ edit ] New Zealand is a sovereign Oceanic country that adopted its multicultural policies post World War II. The country used to have immigration policies similar to Australia's White Australia Policy and the United States Immigration Act of 1924 , [ 306 ] but it would later follow suit with Australia and Canada in the 1970s and adopt similar multicultural policies. The relaxation of migration led to an influx of new migration to New Zealand in the 1980s.

[ 307 ] [ 308 ] This led to an increase of Asian and Pacific islander peoples on the island, and ultimately a more diverse European population.

[ 309 ] In 1985, the Law Commission Act was passed which required the New Zealand Law Commission to review laws while taking into account both the indigenous Māori of New Zealand and New Zealand's multicultural character.

[ 310 ] In 1987, New Zealand officially recognized the indigenous Māori language as a national language.

[ 311 ] The revitalization in the Māori language led to its immersion in schools and television broadcast.

[ 312 ] In 2001, the New Zealand government opened an Office of Ethnic Affairs to advise its local governments on the advancement of ethnic diversity and affairs of its multicultural communities.

[ 310 ] Many landmarks on the island have both their Māori and English names officially recognized. Māori makes up 3.7% of the population's speaking language.

[ 313 ] A 2013 census of New Zealand's population showed that 74% of the population identifies ethnically as European, while the latter 15% majority identify as Māori. The remainder identify as Asian, Arab, African, Pacific Islander and Latin American.

Papua New Guinea [ edit ] Papua New Guinea has one of the most heterogeneous indigenous populations in the world: there are several thousand separate communities , most with only a few hundred people.

[ 314 ] : 205 This Oceanian country is home to over eight million people [ 315 ] that are divided into hundreds of different indigenous ethnic groups and cultures with over 820 different indigenous languages.

[ 316 ] A majority of the indigenous groups are Papuans who have ancestors that lived in New Guinea over ten thousand years ago. The latter majority are Austronesians whose ancestors arrived less than four thousand years ago. The island's population is also made up of many expatriate citizens from China , Australia , Indonesia , Europe and the Philippines . In 1975, the island population was found to be made up of 40,000 of these diverse expatriate citizens.

[ 317 ] Despite the large amount of culturally diverse locations on the island, the Kuk Early Agricultural Site is the only UNESCO World heritage location.

[ 318 ] See also [ edit ] Society portal Cosmopolitanism Cross-cultural Cross-cultural communication Cultural assimilation Cultural competence Cultural conflict Cultural homogenization Diversity (politics) Ethnic penalty Ethnocentrism Ethnocultural empathy Ethnopluralism Europeanism Global Centre for Pluralism (Canada) Hybridity Immigration and crime Interculturalism Intercultural competence Intercultural relations Leitkultur List of countries ranked by ethnic and cultural diversity level Miscegenation Multiculturalism without Culture (book) Sociology of race and ethnic relations Multicultural art Multicultural education Multikulti Multinational state National personal autonomy Parallel society Paradox of intolerance Pluriculturalism Plurinationalism Polyculturalism Polyethnicity Rainbow Nation Racial integration Syncretism The Society for the Study of the Multi-Ethnic Literature of the United States Transculturation Unrooted Childhoods (book) Unity in diversity Xenocentrism References [ edit ] ^ Fearon, James (2003). "Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country".

Journal of Economic Growth .

8 (2): 195– 222.

doi : 10.1023/A:1024419522867 .

S2CID 152680631 .

^ Reynolds, Cecil R.; Fletcher-Janzen, Elaine, eds. (2008). "Pluralism, Cultural".

Encyclopedia of Special Education . Wiley. pp.

1591– 1592.

doi : 10.1002/9780470373699.speced1627 .

ISBN 978-0-470-37369-9 .

^ Gasimova, Narmina (15 December 2022).

"Multiculturalism as the main philosophical concept in the social development of modern society" (PDF) .

Metafizika (in Azerbaijani).

5 (4): 77– 87.

eISSN 2617-751X .

ISSN 2616-6879 .

OCLC 1117709579 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 November 2022 . Retrieved 14 October 2022 .

^ Thomas L. Harper (13 January 2011).

Dialogues in urban and regional planning . Taylor & Francis. p. 50.

ISBN 978-0-415-59334-2 .

^ Burgess, Ann Carroll; Burgess, Tom (2005).

Guide to Western Canada (7th ed.). Globe Pequot Press. p. 31.

ISBN 978-0-7627-2987-6 . Retrieved 16 January 2011 .

^ Condra, Jill (9 April 2013).

Encyclopedia of National Dress: Traditional Clothing around the World [2 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. p. 111.

ISBN 9780313376375 .

^ a b c d e f de Haas, Hein (2023). "Myth 4: Our societies are more diverse than ever".

How Migration Really Works: A Factful Guide to the Most Divisive Issue in Politics . Random House.

^ Menek, İbrahim Halil (26 May 2020).

"A HISTORICAL EXAMPLE OF MULTICULTURALISM: ACHAEMENID EMPIRE MULTICULTURALISM" .

Gaziantep Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi .

2 (1): 118– 138.

ISSN 2651-267X .

^ Doris Griesser "Denkanstöße aus der Multikulti-Monarchie" in: Standard, 3 July 2012; Pieter M. Judson "The Habsburg Empire. A New History" (Harvard 2016); Christopher Clark "The Sleepwalkers" (New York 2012).

^ Patricia Engelhorn "Wie Wien mit Meersicht: Ein Tag in der Hafenstadt Triest" In: NZZ 15 February 2020.

^ Geneviève Zarate; Danielle Levy; Claire Kramsch (19 April 2011).

Handbook of Multilingualism and Multiculturalism . Archives contemporaines. p. 377.

ISBN 978-2-8130-0039-2 .

^ "Policy Paper no. 4 – Multiculturalism: New Policy Responses to Diversity" . Unesco.org . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ "Multiculturalism in Canada" . Pch.gc.ca. 9 April 2009. Archived from the original on 10 June 2011 . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ "Immigration and Multiculturalism" . .gu.edu.au. Archived from the original on 19 February 2011 . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ "Multiculturalism and the Dynamics of Modern Civilizations" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 June 2010 . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ Wayland, Shara (1997). "Immigration, Multiculturalism and National Identity in Canada".

International Journal of Group Rights .

5 (1): 33– 58.

doi : 10.1163/15718119720907408 .

^ "Ujjal Dosanjh: By silencing white men, Canada can't have an honest debate about equality, race and culture" .

National Post . 4 January 2016 . Retrieved 16 January 2017 .

^ Ronald L. Jackson, II (29 June 2010).

Encyclopedia of Identity . SAGE. p. 480.

ISBN 978-1-4129-5153-1 .

^ a b c "About Australia: Our Country" . australia.gov.au. Archived from the original on 27 February 2012 . Retrieved 25 October 2013 .

^ a b c "About Australia: People, culture and lifestyle" . Dfat.gov.au. Archived from the original on 12 May 2012 . Retrieved 25 October 2013 .

^ a b "The Hon. Tony Abbott MP Press Release - A Team to Build a Stronger Australia" .

Liberal Party of Australia . liberal.org.au. 16 September 2013. Archived from the original on 6 November 2013.

^ a b "The People of Australia – Australia's Multicultural Policy" (PDF) . Department of Immigration and Citizenship. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 February 2014 . Retrieved 14 November 2013 .

^ Bissoondath, Neil. 2002.

Selling Illusions: The Myth of Multiculturalism . Toronto: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-100676-5 .

^ Fact or fiction in the great UK immigration debate . workpermit.com. News. 26 April 2005. Retrieved: 21 October 2007.

^ Lawrence A. Peskin; Edmund F. Wehrle (17 November 2011).

America and the World: Culture, Commerce, Conflict . JHU Press. pp. 262–.

ISBN 978-1-4214-0296-3 . Retrieved 31 January 2012 .

^ Heneghan, Tom (11 February 2011).

"Sarkozy joins allies burying multiculturalism" .

Reuters . Retrieved 2 November 2019 .

^ The Economist : The changing of the guard , 3 April 2003.

^ Kiniry, Laura. "Moon Handbooks New Jersey", Avalon Travel Publishing, 2006. pg. 34 ISBN 1-56691-949-5 ^ Laryssa Wirstiuk (21 April 2014).

"Neighborhood Spotlight: Journal Square" .

Jersey City Independent . Archived from the original on 30 June 2018 . Retrieved 26 December 2014 .

^ "Supplemental Table 2. Persons Obtaining Lawful Permanent Resident Status by Leading Core Based Statistical Areas (CBSAs) of Residence and Region and Country of Birth: Fiscal Year 2014" . U.S. Department of Homeland Security . Retrieved 1 June 2016 .

^ "Yearbook of Immigration Statistics: 2013 Supplemental Table 2" . U.S. Department of Homeland Security . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ de Haas, Hein (2023). "Myth 4: Our societies are more diverse than ever".

How Migration Really Works: A Factful Guide to the Most Divisive Issue in Politics . Random House.

^ a b c Putnam, Robert D.

(June 2007). " E Pluribus Unum : Diversity and community in the twenty-first century".

Scandinavian Political Studies .

30 (2): 137– 74.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9477.2007.00176.x .

S2CID 14234366 .

^ Sailer, Steve (15 January 2007).

"Fragmented future" .

The American Conservative . Jon Basil Utley. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 19 November 2009 .

^ Martin, Michel, " Political Scientist: Does Diversity Really Work?

" Tell Me More, NPR. Written 15 August 2007, accessed 15 September 2017.

^ Berlett, Tom (15 August 2012).

"Harvard Sociologist Says His Research Was 'Twisted' " .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . Archived from the original on 1 January 2020 . Retrieved 28 January 2020 .

^ Salter, Frank, On Genetic Interests , 2003, p. 146.

^ Malik, Kenan (4 July 2008).

"Why both sides are wrong in the race debate" .

Spiked . Retrieved 29 June 2025 .

^ Fearon, James D.; Laitin, David D. (February 2003). "Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War".

American Political Science Review .

97 (1): 75– 90.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.453.3913 .

doi : 10.1017/S0003055403000534 .

S2CID 8303905 .

^ Wimmer, Andreas; Cederman, Lars-Erik; Min, Brian (April 2009). "Ethnic Politics and Armed Conflict: A Configurational Analysis of a New Global Data Set".

American Sociological Review .

74 (2): 316– 337.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.518.4825 .

doi : 10.1177/000312240907400208 .

S2CID 9751858 .

^ Baldwin, Kate; Huber, John D. (November 2010). "Economic versus Cultural Differences: Forms of Ethnic Diversity and Public Goods Provision".

American Political Science Review .

104 (4): 644– 662.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055410000419 .

S2CID 6811597 .

^ Wimmer, Andreas (September 2016). "Is Diversity Detrimental? Ethnic Fractionalization, Public Goods Provision, and the Historical Legacies of Stateness".

Comparative Political Studies .

49 (11): 1407– 1445.

doi : 10.1177/0010414015592645 .

S2CID 7998506 .

^ Gerring, John; Hoffman, Michael; Zarecki, Dominic (April 2018). "The Diverse Effects of Diversity on Democracy".

British Journal of Political Science .

48 (2): 283– 314.

doi : 10.1017/S000712341600003X .

S2CID 18860350 .

^ Kislev, Elyakim (May 2016). "The effect of education policies on higher-education attainment of immigrants in Western Europe: A cross-classified multilevel analysis".

Journal of European Social Policy .

26 (2): 183– 199.

doi : 10.1177/0958928716637142 .

S2CID 156140332 .

^ Kustov, Alexander; Pardelli, Giuliana (November 2018). "Ethnoracial Homogeneity and Public Outcomes: The (Non)effects of Diversity".

American Political Science Review .

112 (4): 1096– 1103.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055418000308 .

S2CID 149495272 .

^ Abascal, Maria; Baldassarri, Delia (November 2015). "Love Thy Neighbor? Ethnoracial Diversity and Trust Reexamined".

American Journal of Sociology .

121 (3): 722– 782.

doi : 10.1086/683144 .

PMID 26900618 .

S2CID 20479598 .

^ a b Morrison, Kimberly Rios; Chung, Adrienne H. (January 2011).

" "White" or "European American"? Self-identifying labels influence majority group members' interethnic attitudes" .

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology .

47 (1): 165– 170.

doi : 10.1016/j.jesp.2010.07.019 . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ Lerman, Antony (22 March 2010).

"Guardian.co.uk" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ Susanne Wessendorf, The multiculturalism backlash: European discourses, policies and practices , p. 35; accessed through Google Books, 12 February 2011.

^ Paul C. Gorski, "A Brief History of Multicultural Education" , EdChange.org, November 1999; accessed 12 February 2011.

^ Kymlicka, Will (1996). "Justice and Minority Rights".

Multicultural Citizenship . Oxford University Press. pp.

107– 130.

doi : 10.1093/0198290918.003.0006 .

ISBN 9780198290919 .

^ a b C. James Trotman (2002).

Multiculturalism: roots and realities . Indiana University Press. pp.

9– 10.

ISBN 978-0-253-34002-3 . Retrieved 29 January 2012 .

^ Tariq Modood (2007).

Multiculturalism: a civic idea . Polity. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0-7456-3288-9 .

^ Parekh, Bhikhu C. (2002).

Rethinking multiculturalism: cultural diversity and political theory . Harvard UP. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-674-00995-0 .

^ Gunew, Sneja (2004).

Haunted Nations: The colonial dimensions of multiculturalisms . 11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE: Routledge. p. 80.

ISBN 978-0-415-28483-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ Nagle, John (23 September 2009).

Multiculturalism's double bind: creating inclusivity, cosmopolitanism and difference . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 129.

ISBN 978-0-7546-7607-2 .

^ Rajaee, Farhang (May 2000).

Globalization on trial: the human condition and the information civilization . IDRC. p. 97.

ISBN 9780889369092 .

^ Sandercock, Leonie; Attili, Giovanni; Cavers, Val; Carr, Paula (1 May 2009).

Where strangers become neighbours: integrating immigrants in Vancouver, Canada . Springer. p. 16.

ISBN 978-1-4020-9034-9 .

^ "Report attacks multiculturalism" .

BBC News . 30 September 2005 . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ Song, Sarah (2007).

Justice, Gender, and the Politics of Multiculturalism . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-511-49035-4 .

^ Brian Barry , Culture and Equality ( Polity Press , 2001), p. 148.

^ "Is Multiculturalism Bad For Women?" .

Boston Review . 1 October 1997.

^ Lamm, Richard D. (2005).

"I have a plan to destroy America" .

Snopes.com . Retrieved 12 January 2011 .

^ Hanson, Victor Davis Carnage and Culture: Landmark Battles in the Rise to Western Power , New York: Random House, 2001. p. 205 ^ Johnson, Jay T. (January 2008). "Indigeneity's Challenges to the White Settler-State: Creating a Thirdspace for Dynamic Citizenship".

Alternatives: Global, Local, Political .

33 (1): 29– 52.

doi : 10.1177/030437540803300103 .

S2CID 145192448 .

^ Ulver, Sofia; Laurell, Christofer (October 2020).

"Political Ideology in Consumer Resistance: Analyzing Far-Right Opposition to Multicultural Marketing" .

Journal of Public Policy & Marketing .

39 (4): 477– 493.

doi : 10.1177/0743915620947083 .

^ "CIA – The World Factbook – Argentina" . Cia.gov . Retrieved 16 January 2011 .

^ Karen Faulk (2012).

In the Wake of Neoliberalism: Citizenship and Human Rights in Argentina . Stanford University Press. p. 99.

ISBN 978-0-8047-8391-0 .

^ "Argentine Culture Rich and Diverse" . Argentina.ar. Archived from the original on 31 May 2011 . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ Ley No. 5598 de la Provincia de Corrientes, 22 October 2004 (in Spanish) ^ La educación intercultural bilingüe en Santiago del Estero, ¿mito o realidad?

[ La cámara de diputados de la provincia sanciona con fuerza de ley.

] (in Spanish). Cámara de Diputados de la Nación. p. 1. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020 . Retrieved 21 May 2022 .

Declárase de interés oficial la preservación, difusión, estímulo, estudio y práctica de la lengua Quíchua en todo el territorio de la provincia [..] ^ Ley No. 6604 de la Provincia de Chaco, 28 July 2010, B.O., (9092) ^ "Mapa de pueblos originarios" . 10 November 2020.

^ "Los Pueblos Originarios en Argentina, hoy" .

^ a b "Bolivia" .

iwgia.org . Retrieved 14 July 2018 .

^ a b "The World Factbook – Central Intelligence Agency" .

cia.gov . Retrieved 14 July 2018 .

^ Canessa, Andrew (2016). "Paradoxes of Multiculturalism in Bolivia".

The Crisis of Multiculturalism in Latin America . New York: Palgrave Macmillan US. pp.

75– 100.

doi : 10.1057/978-1-137-50958-1_3 .

ISBN 978-1-137-50957-4 .

^ "Justia Bolivia :: Nueva Constitución Política Del Estado > PRIMERA PARTE > TÍTULO I > CAPÍTULO PRIMERO :: Ley de Bolivia" .

bolivia.justia.com (in Spanish) . Retrieved 14 July 2018 .

^ a b Morin, Rich (18 July 2013).

"A revealing map of the world's most and least ethnically diverse countries" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ Neira, Marcos GARCIA (2017).

"Possíveis relações entre multiculturalismo e teorias curriculares da Educação Física" [Possible relations between multiculturalism and curricular theories of Physical Education].

Utopía y Praxis Latinoamericana (in Portuguese).

22 (79): 41– 55.

^ Wade, Peter (2013).

"Blackness, Indigeneity, Multiculturalism and Genomics in Brazil, Colombia and Mexico" .

Journal of Latin American Studies .

45 (2): 205– 233.

doi : 10.1017/S0022216X13000011 .

^ Anne-Marie Mooney Cotter (28 February 2011).

Culture clash: an international legal perspective on ethnic discrimination . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 176.

ISBN 978-1-4094-1936-5 .

^ Pierre Elliott Trudeau, as cited in The Essential Trudeau, ed. Ron Graham. (pp. 16–20).

"The Just Society" (PDF) . Government of Manitoba . Retrieved 6 December 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Fleras, Augie (26 July 2021).

Canadian Multiculturalism @50: Retrospect, Perspectives, Prospects . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-46656-2 .

^ a b Sonia Sikka (2014).

Multiculturalism and Religious Identity . McGill-Queen's Press. p. 237.

ISBN 978-0-7735-9220-9 .

^ Duncan, James S; Ley, David (1983).

Place/culture/representation . Routledge. pp.

205– 06.

ISBN 978-0-415-09451-1 . Retrieved 12 September 2010 .

^ Li, Peter S. (24 February 2003).

"Cultural Diversity in Canada: The Social Construction of Racial Difference" .

Department of Justice, Research and Statistics Division . Ottawa.

^ "Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (Being Part I of the Constitution Act, 1982)" . Electronic Frontier Canada. 2008. Archived from the original on 12 December 2018 . Retrieved 12 September 2010 .

^ "Canadian Multiculturalism Act (1985, c. 24 (4th Supp.)" . Department of Justice Canada. 14 November 2010. Archived from the original on 18 February 2011 . Retrieved 12 September 2010 .

^ Linda A. White; Richard Simeon (2009).

The Comparative Turn in Canadian Political Science . UBC Press. p. 102.

ISBN 978-0-7748-1428-7 .

^ Stephen J Tierney (2011).

Multiculturalism and the Canadian Constitution . UBC Press. p. 66.

ISBN 978-0-7748-4007-1 .

^ Raboy, Marc; Jeremy Shtern; William J. McIveret (2010).

Media Divides: Communication Rights and the Right to Communicate in Canada . Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press. p. 104.

ISBN 978-0-7748-1775-2 .

^ Mahtani, Minelle (2001). "Representing Minorities: Canadian media and minority identities".

Canadian Ethnic Studies .

33 (3).

^ "A literature review of Public Opinion Research on Canadian attitudes towards multiculturalism and immigration, 2006–2009" . Government of Canada. 2011 . Retrieved 18 December 2015 .

^ Theodore Caplow (2001).

Leviathan Transformed: Seven National States in the New Century . McGill-Queen's Press. p. 146.

ISBN 978-0-7735-2304-3 .

^ a b Stackhouse, John; Martin, Patrick (2 February 2002).

"Canada: 'A model for the world' " .

The Globe and Mail . p. F3 . Retrieved 12 September 2010 .

^ a b "The last liberals Why Canada is still at ease with openness" .

The Economist . 29 October 2016 . Retrieved 10 November 2016 .

^ Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (10 June 2012).

"Evaluation of the Multiculturalism Program" .

aem . Retrieved 19 March 2019 .

^ Tweedie, Gregory; Dressler, Anja; Schmidt, Cora-Leah (12 November 2018).

"Supporting Reconnecting Immigrant Families with English Language Learners in Rural Schools: An Exploratory Study of Filipino Arrivals to Alberta" . Retrieved 17 November 2018 .

^ Page, Index (20 May 2011).

"Ethnic diversity in Mexico : Mexico Travel" . Mexconnect.com . Retrieved 1 July 2013 .

^ "Microsoft Word – Mexico City PR rev[1]-1.doc" (PDF) . Retrieved 1 July 2013 .

^ "El impacto del mestizaje en México" .

Investigación y Ciencia (in Spanish) . Retrieved 25 July 2018 .

^ "Informativo oportuno (Spanish text)" (PDF) . May 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 April 2013 . Retrieved 13 November 2023 .

^ "Peru population. Demographic data, ethnic groups population and demographics from Peru – CountryReports" .

countryreports.org . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .

^ Jeffrey Lehman, ed.

Gale Encyclopedia of Multicultural America (3rd edition; 6 vol. 2014) Online ^ Ann Katherine Isaacs (2007).

Immigration and emigration in historical perspective . Edizioni Plus. p. 38.

ISBN 978-88-8492-498-8 .

^ Zangwill, Israel.

The Melting Pot , 1908.

^ Marcelo M. Suárez-Orozco; Carola Suárez-Orozco (2005).

The new immigration: an interdisciplinary reader . Routledge. p. 39.

ISBN 978-0-415-94916-3 .

^ John Jay , First American Supreme Court Chief Justice , Federalist Paper No. 2 ^ Peter Caputi; Heather Foster; Linda L. Viney (11 December 2006).

Personal construct psychology: new ideas . John Wiley & Sons. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-470-01943-6 .

^ Boening, Astrid B. (May 2007).

"Euro-Islam – A Constructivist Idea or a Concept of the English School?" (PDF) .

European Union Miami Analysis (EUMA) . Vol. 4, no. 12. Miami-Florida European Union Center of Excellence. pp.

3– 10 . Retrieved 30 September 2009 .

^ Terese M. Volk (14 October 2004).

Music, Education, and Multiculturalism: Foundations and Principles . Oxford University Press. p. 160.

ISBN 978-0-19-517975-0 .

^ Jesse Kirkpatrick. (2011).

Miami Beach: Diversity at Work . Miami Beach News. Retrieved from communitynewspapers.com ^ Jayson, Sharon (7 February 2006). " 'Colorblind' Generation Doesn't Blink at Interracial Relationships".

USA Today .

^ Historians speak out against proposed Texas textbook changes Michael Birnbaum, 18 March 2010.

^ The Culture Wars' New Front: U.S. History Classes in Texas , Stephanie Simon, 14 July 2009.

^ Texas Conservatives Win Curriculum Change , James C. McKinley Jr., 12 March 2010.

^ Hewitt, Christopher (March 2000).

"Patterns of American terrorism 1955–1998: An historical perspective on terrorism-related fatalities" .

Terrorism and Political Violence .

12 (1): 1– 14.

doi : 10.1080/09546550008427546 .

ISSN 0954-6553 .

S2CID 146734761 .

^ Jones, Seth G.; Doxsee, Catrina; Harrington, Nicholas (17 June 2020).

"The Escalating Terrorism Problem in the United States" .

Center for Strategic & International Studies . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ Pasley, James.

"Trump frequently accuses the far-left of inciting violence, yet right-wing extremists have killed 329 victims in the last 25 years, while antifa members haven't killed any, according to a new study" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 23 August 2023 .

^ "Oklahoma City Bombing" .

Federal Bureau of Investigation . Retrieved 23 August 2023 .

^ "The downside of diversity" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved 31 December 2018 .

^ Berlett, Tom (15 August 2012).

"Harvard Sociologist Says His Research Was 'Twisted' " .

The Chronicle of Higher Education .

^ "Venezuela Population (2018) – Worldometers" .

worldometers.info . Retrieved 27 July 2018 .

^ "Venezuela" .

nationsencyclopedia.com . Retrieved 27 July 2018 .

^ a b "Venezuela sociedad multietnica y pluricultural" .

slideshare.net . 18 October 2012 . Retrieved 27 July 2018 .

^ "Los idiomas de Venezuela" .

Studycountry (in European Spanish) . Retrieved 27 July 2018 .

^ a b Robert C. Ostergren; Mathias Le Bossé (7 March 2011).

The Europeans: A Geography of People, Culture, and Environment . Guilford Press. p. 226.

ISBN 978-1-59385-384-6 .

^ Conversi, Daniele (2007). "Homogenisation, nationalism and war: Should we still read Ernest Gellner?".

Nations and Nationalism .

13 (3): 371– 394.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-8129.2007.00292.x .

^ a b c Guntram Henrik Herb; David H. Kaplan (22 May 2008).

Nations and Nationalism . ABC-CLIO. p. 522.

ISBN 978-1-85109-907-8 .

^ "Official Web site" . Entoen.nu . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ BBC report at News.BBC.co.uk , full list of questions in German at TAZ.de ^ Jeffrey G. Reitz; Raymond Breton; Karen Kisiel Dion; Kenneth L. Dion (2009).

Multiculturalism and Social Cohesion: Potentials and Challenges of Diversity . Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

17– 20.

ISBN 978-1-4020-9958-8 .

^ Christoph Beat Graber; Mira Burri Nenova (30 November 2008).

Intellectual property and traditional cultural expressions in a digital environment . Edward Elgar Publishing. pp.

87– 88.

ISBN 978-1-84720-921-4 .

^ "Panoramio.com" . panoramio.com. 1 January 1970. Archived from the original on 15 July 2013 . Retrieved 15 July 2013 .

^ Alan Horton.

"Everything you want to know about the country of Bulgaria" . Bulgaria Focus. Archived from the original on 3 January 2012 . Retrieved 29 January 2012 .

^ Detrez, Raymond; Segaert, Barbara, 2008, Europe and the Historical Legacies in the Balkans (Multiple Europes), P.I.E. Peter Lang s.a., ISBN 978-90-5201-374-9 , p. 55 ^ Ban, Ki-moon, The World in the next 20 years Archived 17 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Vagobond in Bulgaria – Part 2 – Sofia Places of Worship – Vagobond" .

vagobond.com . 1 February 2014. Archived from the original on 16 October 2017 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ В.Е. (3 May 2010).

"News.bg – Макет на 4 храма – туристически символ на София" . News.ibox.bg . Retrieved 29 January 2012 .

^ "Sofia's new tourist symbol | Radio Bulgaria" . Bnr.bg. Archived from the original on 22 June 2012 . Retrieved 29 January 2012 .

^ "София – Мъдрост в действие" . Sofiasymbol.bg. Archived from the original on 27 January 2012 . Retrieved 29 January 2012 .

^ Todorov, Tzvetan (2003).

The Fragility of Goodness: Why Bulgaria's Jews Survived the Holocaust . Translated by Arthur Denner. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691115641 . Archived from the original on 9 July 2010 . Retrieved 31 December 2011 .

^ Levi, Primo (2001).

Beyond Hitler's Grasp . Adams Media.

ISBN 978-1580625418 .

^ Leadel.Net.

"Exclusive video: 'Restoring the crown to former glory' " .

The Jerusalem Post | Jpost.com . Jpost.com . Retrieved 29 January 2012 .

^ The Highs and Lows of Ethno-Cultural Diversity: Young People’s Experiences of Chalga Culture in Bulgaria , Apostolov, Apostol, Anthropology of East Europe Review, Vol 26, No 1 (2008), Cambridge University Press ^ Ruegg, Francois, 2007, Interculturalism and Discrimination in Romania: Policies, Practices, Identities and Representations, Lit Verlag, ISBN 978-3-8258-8075-0 ^ Hristova, Svetlana, 2004, Bulgarian Politics of Multiculturalism – uses and abuses , Scientific Research, University Publishing House, South-West University, Blagoevgrad ^ The history of Turkish community in Bulgaria, Ibrahim Yalamov ^ The Human Rights of Muslims in Bulgaria in Law and Politics since 1878, Bulgarian Helsinki Committee, 2003 ^ "Bulgarian MPs Officially Condemn 'Revival Process' " . Pomak.eu. Archived from the original on 16 May 2013 . Retrieved 1 July 2013 .

^ The Bulgarian state and Bulgarian Turks (to the mid-1930s until the early-1990s), Bulgarian Archive State Agency ^ "ЦИК : Резултати" . Rezultati.cik2009.bg. 1 January 1970. Archived from the original on 25 February 2012 . Retrieved 1 April 2012 .

^ "The Political Representation of the Roma Minority in Bulgaria: (1990–2005)" . POLITEIA – Participation for Citizenship and Democracy in Europe. 2005. Archived from the original on 20 April 2012 . Retrieved 1 April 2012 .

^ La Diaspora Vietnamienne en France un cas particulier Archived 3 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine (in French) ^ "Le film: deux siècles d'histoire de l'immigration en France." http://www.histoire-immigration.fr/histoire-de-l-immigration/le-film Archived 2 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ "En 1962, lors de l'Indépendance, ils sont 350 000. En 1975 les émigrants algériens sont 710 000 et constituent le deuxième groupe d'étrangers après les Portugais." "De 1945 à 1975." "De 1945 à 1975 | Cité nationale de l'histoire de l'immigration" . Archived from the original on 12 September 2011 . Retrieved 22 February 2012 .

^ Erik Bleich,. "From international ideas to domestic policies: Educational multiculturalism in England and France." Comparative Politics (1998): 81–100 online .

^ Jeremy Jennings, "Citizenship, Republicanism and Multiculturalism in Contemporary France," British Journal of Political Science (2000) 30#4 575–597.

^ Jennifer A. Selby, "Islam in France reconfigured: Republican Islam in the 2010 Gerin report." Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs 31.3 (2011): 383–398.

^ Murat Akan, "Laïcité and multiculturalism: the Stasi Report in context," British Journal of Sociology (2009) 60#2 pp 237–256 online .

^ a b "Merkel says German multicultural society has failed" .

BBC News . 17 October 2010.

^ Furlong, Ray (30 November 2004).

"Germans argue over integration" .

BBC . Retrieved 18 October 2010 .

^ "Germany's charged immigration debate" .

BBC News . 17 October 2010.

^ "Rauf Ceylan: Muslims in Germany: Religious and Political Challenges and Perspectives in the Diaspora , ^ "Multiculturalism is a sham, says Angela Merkel" .

The Washington Post . 14 December 2015 . Retrieved 24 February 2019 .

^ "Muslims in Germany have rights and obligations" . 18 June 2013 . Retrieved 7 June 2014 .

^ Sarah Krouse, "Piping Hot Gromperekichelcher, Only if You Pass the Sproochentest." WALL STREET JOURNAL, 19 January 2018, p.1 ^ " La progression de la population du Grand-Duché continue: 537 039 résidants au 1er janvier 2013 ." Statnews 16/2013, op statec.lu, 18 April 2013. (in French).

^ a b "Luxembourg, an ever-growing multicultural population" .

JUST ARRIVED . Retrieved 22 July 2018 .

^ "The Trilingual Education system in Luxembourg" .

unavarra.es . Retrieved 22 July 2018 .

^ "Conventions – Luxembourg" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 22 July 2018 .

^ a b c Susanne Wessendorf (2010).

The multiculturalism backlash: European discourses, policies and practices . Taylor & Francis. pp.

73– 75.

ISBN 978-0-415-55649-1 .

^ a b c iStockphoto, Illustrasjonsfoto (28 March 2017).

"Likestillingsidealer gjør muslimske kvinner mer religiøse" .

Kilden (in Norwegian Bokmål) . Retrieved 24 February 2019 .

^ Damhuis, Koen (2019).

" "The biggest problem in the Netherlands": Understanding the Party for Freedom's politicization of Islam" .

Brookings . Retrieved 28 February 2021 .

^ Tariq Modood ; Anna Triandafyllidou; Ricard Zapata-Barrero (6 April 2006).

Multiculturalism, Muslims and citizenship: a European approach . Routledge. p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-415-35515-5 .

^ "Multiculturalism: What does it mean?" .

BBC News Online . 7 February 2011.

^ "Donner: Afscheid van multiculturele samenleving Nederland" .

Elsevier . 16 June 2011. Archived from the original on 29 November 2011.

^ "Imigrantii in Romania nu se bucura de drepturile care li s-ar cuveni" . Ziare.com . Retrieved 8 October 2013 .

^ "Le Monde: Romania, noua destinatie a imigrantilor" . Ziare.com. 13 July 2009 . Retrieved 8 October 2013 .

^ Vuosaari – Uutta Helsinkiä Archived 6 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine (in Finnish) ^ Asukkaat ja kuvasarja kertoo, millainen on Vuosaari – Professori: "Vuosaari on maahanmuuton tienraivaaja" Archived 6 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine (in Finnish) ^ a b c "Multikulturalisme i Skandinavia" .

kjonnsforskning.no (sub-unit of the Research Council of Norway) (in Norwegian Bokmål). 30 May 2006 . Retrieved 24 February 2019 .

^ Harmon, Nikolaj A. (October 2018).

"Immigration, Ethnic Diversity, and Political Outcomes: Evidence from Denmark" (PDF) .

The Scandinavian Journal of Economics .

120 (4): 1043– 1074.

doi : 10.1111/sjoe.12239 .

S2CID 54936991 .

^ "Opråb fra ministre: Problemer med integration af børn af ikkevestlige indvandrere" .

Berlingske .dk (in Danish). 16 December 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 .

Danmarks integrationspolitik har i årtier været bygget op om troen på, at med den rette hjælp vil indvandrere og deres efterkommerne generation for generation falde til. En ny undersøgelse rammer en pæl gennem den forestilling. Den fastslår, at tredjegenerationsindvandrerne ikke får bedre karakterer i folkeskolen end generationen før dem. At der ikke er flere, som færdiggør en ungdomsuddannelse. Og at der ikke er flere, som får et arbejde. Det fremgår af »Analyse af børn af efterkommere med ikke-vestlig baggrund«, som er udarbejdet af Integrationsministeriet og Undervisningsministeriet. Den kortlægger for første gang, hvordan tredjegenerationsindvandrerne klarer sig på centrale parametre. // »Vi ved fra forskningen, at børn, som taler dansk i hjemmet, klarer sig bedre i skolen. Men mange gifter sig med én, som kommer direkte fra hjemlandet. Det vil sige, at integrationen starter forfra i hver generation,« siger Merete Riisager.

^ "Tredjegenerationsindvandrere klarer sig ikke bedre end anden generation – Udlændinge- og Integrationsministeriet" .

uim.dk . Archived from the original on 19 October 2019 . Retrieved 19 October 2019 .

^ "09623: Educational attainment of immigrants, by country background (Single country) 2004 – 2020" .

^ "Lov om utlendingers adgang til riket og deres opphold her (utlendingsloven) – Lovdata" .

lovdata.no (in Norwegian) . Retrieved 2 March 2018 .

^ "Innvandrere og norskfødte med innvandrerforeldre" .

ssb.no (in Norwegian Bokmål) . Retrieved 2 March 2018 .

^ Garvik, Olav (2017).

"Asylsituasjonen i Norge 2015 og 2016" .

Store Norske Leksikon .

^ Amundsen, Bård (23 December 2016).

"Fra 30 000 til 3000 asylsøkere, hva har skjedd?" .

Forskning.no .

^ "EU-Turkey Statement 2016" (PDF) .

^ Radio, Sveriges (14 September 2019).

"Norska IS-resenärer förlorar uppehållstillstånd – Nyheter (Ekot)" .

Sveriges Radio (in Swedish) . Retrieved 15 September 2019 .

^ The Progress Party's politics (In Norwegian) From the official website of the Progress Party (23 November 2014) ^ " Prime minister: Norway still 'an open society' despite 'the horror' " CNN , 25 July 2011 ^ a b Mångfaldsbarometern 2014 (PDF) . Gävle University College. October 2014. p. 57. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 June 2016.

^ "Dags att begrava det multikulturella projektet" (in Swedish). Dagens sahmälle. 17 February 2017 . Retrieved 13 February 2021 .

^ Wickström, Mats (2015).

The multicultural moment: the history of the idea and politics of multiculturalism in Sweden in comparative, transnational and biographical context, 1964–1975 . Åbo Akademi.

ISBN 978-952-12-3133-9 .

^ TT.

"Svenskar vill ha inhägnat boende | SvD" .

SvD.se (in Swedish). Archived from the original on 22 March 2016 . Retrieved 14 July 2018 .

^ Mångfaldsbarometern 2014 (PDF) . Gävle University College. October 2014. pp.

7– 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 June 2016.

^ McShane, Karl (2017).

"Getting used to diversity? Immigration and trust in Sweden" .

Economics Bulletin .

37 (3): 16 . Retrieved 2 January 2018 .

^ McShane, Karl (31 August 2017).

"Getting Used to Diversity? Immigration and Trust in Sweden" (PDF) .

Economics Bulletin .

37 (3): 12 . Retrieved 8 April 2018 .

^ Gojkovic N.

System of minorities’ protection in Serbia Konrad Adenauer Foundation ^ "Покрајинска влада" .

vojvodina.gov.rs .

^ "Autonomous Province of Vojvodina" .

vojvodina.gov.rs .

^ "Error" .

vip.org.rs . Archived from the original on 27 December 2008.

^ "Beogradski centar za ljudska prava" .

bgcentar.org.rs . Belgrade Centre for Human Rights. 29 March 2015.

^ "Chinese Migrants Use Serbia as Gate to Europe" .

ABC News .

^ "I Kinezi napuštaju Srbiju" .

NOVOSTI .

^ "Promotion of Multiculturalism and Tolerance" .

puma.vojvodina.gov.rs . 26 July 2015.

^ Terry Wotherspoon (1995).

Multicultural education in a changing global economy: Canada and the Netherlands . Waxmann Verlag. p. 1.

ISBN 978-3-89325-331-9 .

^ Sylvia Hadjetian (April 2008).

Multiculturalism and Magic Realism? Between Fiction and Reality . GRIN Verlag. p. 31.

ISBN 978-3-638-93283-7 .

^ "State multiculturalism has failed, says David Cameron" .

BBC News Online . 5 February 2011.

^ Erel, Umut; Murji, Karim; Nahaboo, Zaki (13 May 2016).

"Understanding the contemporary race–migration nexus" .

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

39 (8): 1353.

doi : 10.1080/01419870.2016.1161808 .

^ Lentin, Alana; Titley, Gavan (2011).

The Crisis of Multiculturalism: Racism in a Neoliberal Age . London; New York: Zed Books.

ISBN 978-1848135819 .

^ West, Ed (2013).

The Diversity Illusion: What We Got Wrong About Immigration & How to Set it Right , Gibson Square Books Ltd ( ISBN 978-1908096050 ) ^ "Language in India" . Retrieved 29 January 2012 .

^ Mohammada, Malika (2007).

The foundations of the composite culture in India . Aakar Books, 2007.

ISBN 9788189833183 .

^ " India – Caste ".

Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

^ "Indian Census" . Censusindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008 . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ "Hindi, not a national language: Court" .

The Hindu . 25 January 2010 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 – via thehindu.com.

^ "There's no national language in India: Gujarat High Court – Times of India" .

The Times of India . 25 January 2010 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ Nussbaum, Martha (2009).

The Clash Within: Democracy, Religious Violence, and India's Future . Harvard University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-674-04156-1 .

^ "Sachar Committee Report" (PDF) . (Cabinet Secretariat, Govt. of India). November 2006. pp.

9– 25. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2012 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Singh, Deepti; Goli, Srinivas (2011).

"Exploring the Concept of Mixed Marriages in Indian and selected states: First time evidences from large scale survey" .

Princeton University . Archived from the original on 16 May 2016.

^ a b Pande, Rohini (September 2003). "Can Mandated Political Representation Increase Policy Influence for Disadvantaged Minorities? Theory and Evidence from India".

The American Economic Review .

93 (4): 1132– 1151.

doi : 10.1257/000282803769206232 .

JSTOR 3132282 .

^ Datta, Rekha (Summer 1999). "Hindu Nationalism or Pregmatic Party Politics? A Study of India's Hindu Party".

International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society .

12 (4): 573– 588.

doi : 10.1023/A:1025938125870 .

JSTOR 20019991 .

S2CID 141252957 .

^ Clarke, Sathianathan (April 2002). "Hindutva, Religious and Ethnocultural Minorities, and Indian-Christian Theology".

The Harvard Theological Review .

95 (2): 197– 226.

doi : 10.1017/S0017816002000123 .

JSTOR 4150720 .

S2CID 162722809 .

^ Sheth, D.L. (2018).

At Home with Democracy . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-981-10-6412-8 .

^ Basavaraju, C. (Summer 2009). "Reservation Under the Constitution of India: Issues and Perspectives".

Journal of the Indian Law Institute .

51 (2): 267– 274.

JSTOR 43953443 .

^ Kuoni – Far East, A world of difference. p. 88. Published 1999 by Kuoni Travel & JPM Publications ^ "Mengulik Data Suku di Indonesia" .

Badan Pusat Statistik . 18 November 2015 . Retrieved 12 February 2020 .

^ "Pribumi" .

Encyclopedia of Modern Asia . Macmillan Reference USA. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011 . Retrieved 5 October 2006 .

^ a b Suryadinata, Leo; Arifin, Evi Nurvidya; Ananta, Aris (2003).

Indonesia's Population: Ethnicity and Religion in a Changing Political Landscape . Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.

ISBN 978-981-230-212-0 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Ethnologue report for Indonesia" . Ethnologue.com . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ "The Geography of Indonesia" . Indonesia.go.id. Archived from the original on 3 January 2013 . Retrieved 4 August 2014 .

^ "Indonesia: The Violence in Central Kalimantan (Borneo)" . Human Rights Watch. 28 February 2001 . Retrieved 13 August 2008 .

^ "Indonesia flashpoints: Kalimantan" . BBC. 28 June 2004 . Retrieved 13 August 2008 .

^ "Indonesia flashpoints: Sulawesi" .

BBC News . 28 June 2004 . Retrieved 13 October 2012 .

^ Elegant, Simon (17 December 2001).

"Indonesia's Dirty Little Holy War" .

Time . Archived from the original on 23 April 2010 . Retrieved 31 March 2011 .

^ a b "Jakarta's violent identity crisis: behind the vilification of Chinese-Indonesians" .

The Guardian . 25 November 2016.

Archived from the original on 13 February 2022 . Retrieved 13 February 2022 .

^ Tan 2008 , p. 24.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFTan2008 ( help ) ^ Setiono 2003 , p. 1099.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFSetiono2003 ( help ) ^ "In Indonesia, Chinese Deity Is Covered in Sheet After Muslims Protest" .

The New York Times . 10 August 2017.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

^ "In Indonesia, Fears Rise Among Ethnic Chinese Amid Blasphemy Probe" .

Wall Street Journal . 26 November 2016.

ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on 13 February 2022 . Retrieved 13 February 2022 .

^ "30m Chinese idol covered in sheet after Muslim protest" .

ABC News . 11 August 2017.

^ Marmontova, T.V. (18 June 2014).

"Interethnic relations in the Republic of Kazakhstan in the light of multicultural theories" . e-history.kz.

^ "Kazakhstan –The Heaven of interfaith and interethnic harmony" . Dispatch News Desk. 10 December 2014.

^ "Kazakhstan's unique Assembly of People maintains ethnic harmony" . UPI.

^ Michel, Casey (14 July 2017).

"The Reality of Religious Freedom in Kazakhstan" .

The Diplomat .

^ "2020 Report on International Religious Freedom: Kazakhstan" .

United States Department of State . 12 May 2021.

^ "Kazakhstan Targets Beards, Pants In Fight Against 'Destructive Religious Movements' " .

RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty . 4 February 2018.

^ Human Rights Watch (3 December 2020), Kazakhstan: Events of 2020 , retrieved 13 February 2022 ^ Felix Corley (15 April 2021).

"KAZAKHSTAN: Targeting ethnic Dungan Koran teachers" .

Forum 18 .

^ "Dungan Incident Just Kazakhstan's Latest Interethnic Violence" .

RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty . 10 February 2020.

^ "For Kazakhstan's LGBT Community, A Struggle For Recognition And Rights" .

NPR . 21 August 2015.

^ "A Climate of Fear for LGBT People in Kazakhstan" .

Human Rights Watch . 23 July 2015.

^ Malaysia fury at EU envoy remarks , BBC News ^ Treena Becker (16 August 2016).

"Racism drove me from Malaysia. Love brought me to America" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2022 . Retrieved 13 February 2022 .

^ "Honey, I shrunk the Chinese!" . CPI. 9 December 2009. Archived from the original on 25 May 2012.

^ (n.d.) In Housing Development Boards of Singapore website . Retrieved: 18 November 2010 from Policy Changes To Support An Inclusive And Cohesive Home Archived 29 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Goh, Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, cols. 180–183; Edwin Lee (2008), Singapore: The Unexpected Nation , Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, p. 499, ISBN 978-981-230-796-5 .

^ Lim Kim San: a builder of Singapore . Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. 2009.

ISBN 978-9812309280 .

^ "Ethnic Integration Policy and SPR Quota – Housing & Development Board (HDB)" .

Housing and Development Board (HDB) . Retrieved 11 June 2022 .

^ Kaur, Tarra (23 March 2018).

"11 Things You Should Know About Singaporean Culture" .

theculturetrip.com . Culture Trip . Retrieved 11 June 2022 .

^ " Korea's ethnic nationalism is a source of both pride and prejudice, according to Gi-Wook Shin Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ". The Korea Herald. 2 August 2006.

^ " The Life Instability of Intermarried Japanese Women in Korea " (1999), Eung-Ryul Kim (Korea University and University of Southern California, The Center for Multiethnic and Transnational Studies) ^ Chung, Erin Aeran (2020).

Immigration Incorporation in East Asian Democracies . Cambridge University Press.

^ Han, Geon-Soo (December 2007).

"Multicultural Korea: Celebration or Challenge of Multiethnic Shift in Contemporary Korea?" .

Korea Journal .

47 (4): 32– 31.

doi : 10.25024/KJ.2007.47.4.32 .

S2CID 151038291 .

^ Stephen Castles, "Will Labour Migration lead to a Multicultural Society in Korea?", Global Human Resources Forum 2007 / International Migration Institute Archived 25 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Multiculturalism Likely to Prevail in Korea" , Lee Hyo-sik, Korea Times , 24 December 2009 ^ Underwood, Peter (26 August 2010).

"Multiculturalism in Korea" .

JoongAng Ilbo . South Korea. Archived from the original on 2 September 2010 . Retrieved 2 September 2010 .

^ Palmer, James; Park, Ga-Yong (26 July 2018).

"South Koreans Learn to Love the Other: How to manufacture multiculturalism" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 3 December 2019 .

^ Denney, Steven (28 October 2016).

"South Korean Identity: The Return of Ethnic Exclusivism" .

Sino-NK . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ Rauf, Imam Feisal Abdul (2005). "MULTICULTURALISMS: Western, Muslim and Future".

CrossCurrents .

55 (1): 100– 105.

JSTOR 24461190 .

^ Kaya, Ayhan (2013). "Multiculturalism and Minorities in Turkey".

Challenging Multiculturalism . European Models of Diversity. Edinburgh University Press. pp.

297– 316.

ISBN 978-0-7486-6457-3 .

JSTOR 10.3366/j.ctt20q22fw.20 .

^ "The World Factbook – Central Intelligence Agency" .

cia.gov . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .

^ a b Mbenda, Huguette Gaelle Ngassa; Awasthi, Gauri; Singh, Poonam K; Gouado, Inocent; Das, Aparup (September 2014). "Does malaria epidemiology project Cameroon as 'Africa in miniature'?".

Journal of Biosciences .

39 (4): 727– 738.

doi : 10.1007/s12038-014-9451-y .

PMID 25116627 .

S2CID 17219470 .

^ "World Population Prospects – Population Division – United Nations" .

esa.un.org . Archived from the original on 19 September 2016 . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .

^ Asanga Fon, Nguh Nwei (October 2017).

Can Bilingualism Survive in Cameroon?

. The Future of Humanities, Education and Creative Industries. pp.

260– 275.

^ "Cameroon: Africa in Miniature – In what Sense?" .

KINGSLEY SHETEH'S BLOG . 13 December 2012. Archived from the original on 26 July 2018 . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .

^ "Cameroon" .

Ethnologue . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .

^ "Cameroon | Culture, History, & People" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .

^ "Cameroon" .

iwgia.org . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .

^ Nguiffo, Samuel; Amougou, Victor; Schwartz, Brendan; Cotula, Lorenzo (December 2017).

Indigenous peoples' land rights in Cameroon: progress to date and possible futures . IIED Briefing Papers.

International Institute for Environment and Development .

ISBN 9781784315511 . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ "Declaration on land rights from the Gbabandi Platform, Cameroon | Forest Peoples Programme" .

forestpeoples.org . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .

^ Françoise Lionnet; Shumei Shi (16 February 2005).

Minor transnationalism . Duke University Press. p. 203.

ISBN 978-0-8223-3490-3 . Retrieved 29 January 2012 .

^ Ng Tseung-Wong, Caroline; Verkuyten, Maykel (May 2015). "Multiculturalism, Mauritian Style: Cultural Diversity, Belonging, and a Secular State".

American Behavioral Scientist .

59 (6): 679– 701.

doi : 10.1177/0002764214566498 .

hdl : 1874/329780 .

S2CID 144906729 .

^ "Some facts about Mauritius" . Infomauritius.com. Archived from the original on 21 August 2010 . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ Ng, Eddy S.; Bloemraad, Irene (May 2015). "A SWOT Analysis of Multiculturalism in Canada, Europe, Mauritius, and South Korea".

American Behavioral Scientist .

59 (6): 619– 636.

doi : 10.1177/0002764214566500 .

S2CID 147514771 .

^ "The 10 Most Populated Countries in Africa" .

WorldAtlas . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .

^ "Census 2011 Census in Brief" (PDF) . 13 May 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2015 . Retrieved 26 July 2018 .

^ "IMMI.gov.au" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 December 2008 . Retrieved 10 December 2010 .

^ Brian Galligan; John Ravenhill (15 June 1997).

New developments in Australian politics . Macmillan Education AU. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-7329-4304-2 .

^ Wayne A. Cornelius (2004).

Controlling immigration: a global perspective . Stanford University Press. p. 143.

ISBN 978-0-8047-4490-4 .

^ "Document Details" .

Abstract Database . US National Criminal Justice Reference Service . Retrieved 28 April 2010 .

^ Dunn, Andy (June 2000).

"Two-Way Tolerance" .

Police Journal Online .

81 (6). Archived from the original on 28 September 2009 . Retrieved 27 April 2010 .

^ Chilana, Rajwant Singh (2005).

International bibliography of Sikh studies . Springer. p. 444.

ISBN 978-1-4020-3043-7 .

^ A Practical Reference to Religious Diversity for Operational Police (PDF) (1st ed.). National Police Ethnic Advisory Bureau. 1999. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2003.

^ A Practical Reference to Religious Diversity for Operational Police (PDF) (2nd ed.). Australasian Police Multicultural Advisory Bureau. 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 June 2005.

^ White, Rob; Perrone, Santina (2001).

"Racism, Ethnicity and Hate Crime" (PDF) .

Communal/Plural .

9 (2): 161– 81.

doi : 10.1080/13207870120081479 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2010 . Retrieved 18 August 2012 .

^ Ann Curthoys (2007).

"The Volatility of Racism in Australia" . In Katharine Gelber; Adrienne Stone (eds.).

Hate Speech and Freedom of Speech in Australia . Federation Press. pp.

20– 33.

ISBN 9781862876538 .

^ Sawrikar, Pooja; Katz, Ilan (2009).

How useful is the term "Culturally And Linguistically Diverse (CALD)" in the Australian social policy discourse?

. Australian Social Policy Conference: An Inclusive Society? Practicalities and Possibilities.

University of New South Wales .

doi : 10.26190/unsworks/25860 .

hdl : 1959.4/unsworks_39250 . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

: 2 This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license.

^ "What is CALD? A Comprehensive Guide to CALD Communities" . Ethnolink. 16 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ Jeon, Yun-Hee; Chenoweth, Lynn (January 2007).

"Working With a Culturally and Linguistically Diverse (CALD) Group of Nurses" .

Collegian: The Australian Journal of Nursing Practice, Scholarship and Research .

14 (1): 16– 22.

doi : 10.1016/s1322-7696(08)60543-0 .

hdl : 10453/5895 .

PMID 17294682 . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ Socidad Peruana de Medicina Intensiva (SOPEMI) (2000).

Trends in international migration: continuous reporting system on migration .

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development . pp. 276–278.

^ Taonga, New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage Te Manatu.

"History of immigration – Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand" .

Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved 16 July 2018 .

^ Phillips, Jock (11 August 2015). "History of immigration". Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Retrieved 2 June 2017.

^ Taonga, New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage Te Manatu.

"13. – The New Zealanders – Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand" .

Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved 16 July 2018 .

^ a b "New Zealand | Multiculturalism Policies in Contemporary Democracies" .

queensu.ca . Retrieved 16 July 2018 .

^ "Waitangi Tribunal claim – Māori Language Week". Ministry for Culture and Heritage. July 2010. Retrieved 19 January 2011.

^ @Zagzigger2, John Drinnan John Drinnan is the Media writer for the New Zealand Herald jdrinnan@xtra co nz (7 July 2016).

"John Drinnan: 'Maori' will remain in the name Maori Television" .

The New Zealand Herald .

ISSN 1170-0777 . Retrieved 16 July 2018 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Language | Stats NZ" .

stats.govt.nz . Retrieved 16 July 2018 .

^ Fearon, James D.

(1 June 2003).

"Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country" (PDF) .

Journal of Economic Growth .

8 (2): 195– 222.

doi : 10.1023/A:1024419522867 .

S2CID 152680631 . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ "World Population Prospects - Population Division - United Nations" .

esa.un.org . Archived from the original on 19 September 2016 . Retrieved 6 July 2018 .

^ "Papua New Guinea" .

Ethnologue . Retrieved 6 July 2018 .

^ "Papua New Guinea | Culture, History, & People" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 11 July 2018 .

^ "Papua New Guinea" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 28 July 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Barry Brian (30 October 2002).

Culture and Equality: An Egalitarian Critique of Multiculturalism . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-01001-7 .

Baumann, Gerd (22 March 1999).

The Multicultural Riddle: Rethinking National, Ethnic, and Religious Identities . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-92213-5 .

Bennett, David (10 November 1998).

Multicultural States: Rethinking Difference and Identity . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-12159-0 .

Barzilai, Gad (9 February 2005).

Communities And Law: Politics And Cultures of Legal Identities . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-472-03079-8 .

Caravantes, Ernesto (30 June 2010).

From melting pot to witch's cauldron: how multiculturalism failed America . Government Institutes.

ISBN 978-0-7618-5056-4 .

Eriksen, Jens-Martin and Stjernfelt, Frederik (2012).

The democratic contradictions of multiculturalism . Telos Press.

ISBN 978-0914386469 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Fillion, Réal Robert (2008).

Multicultural dynamics and the ends of history: exploring Kant, Hegel, and Marx . University of Ottawa Press.

ISBN 978-0-7766-0670-5 .

Fortier, Anne-Marie (2 April 2008).

Multicultural Horizons: Diversity and the Limits of the Civil Nation . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-415-39608-0 .

Goldber, David Theo (1994).

Multiculturalism: A Critical Reader . Blackwell Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-631-18912-1 .

Gordon, Avery & Newfield, Christopher (1996).

Mapping Multiculturalism . University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 978-0-8166-2547-5 .

Gottfried, Paul (January 2004).

Multiculturalism and the Politics of Guilt: Toward a Secular Theocracy . University of Missouri Press.

ISBN 978-0-8262-1520-8 .

Icart, Jean-Claude (2007).

"Racism in Canada" in Across Cultures Montreal: National Film Board of Canada.

International Progress Organization & UNESCO (1978).

Cultural self-comprehension of nations . International Progress Organization.

ISBN 978-3-7711-0311-8 .

Hesse, Barnor (2000).

Un/settled Multiculturalisms: Diasporas, Entanglements, "transruptions" . Zed Books.

ISBN 978-1-85649-560-8 .

Kymlicka, Will (1 June 1995).

Multicultural Citizenship: A Liberal Theory of Minority Rights . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-152097-6 .

) Kymlicka, Will (8 December 2005).

Multiculturalism in Asia . Oxford University Press. ( ISBN 019927763X ) Ley, David "multiculturalism" in Gregory, Derek (ed.) (2009) The Dictionary of Human Geography (5th ed.) Blackwell Publishers.

Mendola, Louis; Alio, Jacqueline (2013).

The Peoples of Sicily: A Multicultural Legacy . Trinacria.

ISBN 978-0-615-79694-9 .

Modood, Tariq & Werbner, Phina (15 October 1997).

The Politics of Multiculturalism in the New Europe: Racism, Identity, and Community . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-85649-422-9 .

Okin, Susan Moller (9 August 1999).

Is Multiculturalism Bad for Women?

. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-4099-1 .

Parekh, Bhikhu C. (2002).

Rethinking Multiculturalism: Cultural Diversity and Political Theory . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-00995-0 .

Putnam, Robert D.

(June 2007). " E Pluribus Unum : Diversity and community in the twenty-first century".

Scandinavian Political Studies .

30 (2): 137– 174.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9477.2007.00176.x .

S2CID 14234366 .

The 2006 Johan Skytte Prize Lecture .

Russon, John (2003).

Human experience philosophy, neurosis, and the elements of everyday life . Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 9780791486757 .

Sailer, Steve (15 January 2007).

"Fragmented future" .

The American Conservative . Jon Basil Utley. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 19 November 2009 .

Taylor, Charles (20 December 2011).

Multiculturalism (Expanded Paperback ed.). Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-2140-2 .

.

Tremblay, Arjun (2019).

Diversity in Decline: The rise of the political right and the Fate of Multiculturalism . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-3-030-02299-0 .

Žižek, Slavoj (September–October 1997).

"Multiculturalism, or, the cultural logic of multinational capitalism" .

New Left Review .

I (225): 28– 51.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Multiculturalism .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Multiculturalism .

Multiculturalism – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Multiculturalism – Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Multiculturalism in Canada debated – CBC video archives (14 September 2004 – 42:35 min) Canadian Multiculturalism Act v t e Multiculturalism ( cultural mosaic ) Criticism By country Australia Canada Act media Netherlands Related concepts Multiracialism Multiracial democracy Links to related articles v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Spain Poland Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐thbdt
Cached time: 20250814215512
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.673 seconds
Real time usage: 3.005 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18901/1000000
Revision size: 199417/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 708216/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 75122/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 39/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1079231/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.689/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21969007/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2433.529      1 -total
 60.49% 1471.980      1 Template:Reflist
 18.15%  441.752    110 Template:Cite_web
 17.46%  424.893     83 Template:Cite_book
 11.92%  290.031     42 Template:Cite_journal
  7.43%  180.933     42 Template:Cite_news
  4.37%  106.285      2 Template:Sfn
  3.34%   81.397      6 Template:Lang
  3.23%   78.490      1 Template:Short_description
  3.12%   76.009      2 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:51885:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215512 and revision id 1303958936. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Multiculturalism&oldid=1303958936 " Categories : Multiculturalism Cultural politics Identity politics Politics and race Social theories Sociology of culture Human resource management Pluralism (philosophy) Social movements Western culture Hidden categories: CS1 Azerbaijani-language sources (az) CS1 maint: location Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Norwegian Bokmål-language sources (nb) CS1 Danish-language sources (da) CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2021 Harv and Sfn no-target errors CS1: unfit URL Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with weasel words from January 2019 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Indonesian-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 02:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Multiculturalism 64 languages Add topic

