Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins 1.2 Legacy 1.3 Revival 2 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 2.1 Archaeological sources 2.2 Irish and Welsh records 2.3 Greek and Roman records 3 Deities Toggle Deities subsection 3.1 Insular mythology 4 Animistic aspects 5 Burial and afterlife 6 Celtic practice Toggle Celtic practice subsection 6.1 Sacred spaces 6.2 Votive offerings 6.3 Animal sacrifice 6.4 Human sacrifice 6.5 Head cult 7 Priesthood Toggle Priesthood subsection 7.1 Druids 7.2 Poets 8 Calendar Toggle Calendar subsection 8.1 Origin as Festivals 9 Gallo-Roman religion 10 Christianization 11 Folkloristic survivals 12 References 13 Sources 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Ancient Celtic religion 31 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Boarisch Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Occitan Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Religion practised by ancient Celtic people Part of a series on Celtic mythologies Religion ( Proto ) Deities ( list ) Animism Brythonic Breton Cornish Welsh Gaelic Irish Scottish Literary works Mythological Cycle Ulster Cycle Fianna Cycle Kings' Cycles Mabinogion Matter of Britain Welsh Triads Motifs Otherworld Beheading game Champion's portion Tynged and Geas Imbas Sovereignty goddess / Loathly lady Magic mist Niskai Sacred trees Shapeshifting Silver Branch Threefold death Wasteland Well of wisdom Festivals Samhain Calan Gaeaf Imbolc Gŵyl Fair Beltane Calan Mai Lughnasadh Calan Awst Folklore Irish Scottish Welsh Category Mythology portal v t e Model reconstructing the Pillar of the Boatmen in the Musée de Cluny , Paris. After 14 AD.

Ancient Celtic religion , commonly known as Celtic paganism , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] was the religion of the ancient Celtic peoples of Europe. Because there are no extant native records of their beliefs, evidence about their religion is gleaned from archaeology, Greco-Roman accounts (some of them hostile and probably not well-informed), and literature from the early Christian period.

[ 4 ] Celtic paganism was one of a larger group of polytheistic Indo-European religions of Iron Age Europe.

While the specific deities worshipped varied by region and over time, underlying this were broad similarities [ 5 ] in both deities [ 6 ] and "a basic religious homogeneity" among the Celtic peoples.

[ 7 ] Widely worshipped Celtic gods included Lugus , Toutatis , Taranis , Cernunnos , Epona , Maponos , Belenos , and Sucellos .

[ 6 ] [ 4 ] Sacred springs were often associated with Celtic healing deities.

[ 8 ] Triplicity is a common theme, with a number of deities seen as threefold , for example the Three Mothers .

The druids were the priests of Celtic religion, but little is definitively known about them.

[ 9 ] Greco-Roman writers stated that the Celts held ceremonies in sacred groves and other natural shrines , called nemetons , while some Celtic peoples also built temples or ritual enclosures .

[ 6 ] Celtic peoples often made votive offerings which would be deposited in water and wetlands, or in ritual shafts and wells.

[ 6 ] There is evidence that ancient Celtic peoples sacrificed animals , almost always livestock or working animals .

[ 10 ] There is some evidence that ancient Celts sacrificed humans , and Caesar in his accounts of the Gallic wars claims that the Gauls sacrificed criminals by burning them in a wicker man .

[ 11 ] History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] Celtic paganism, as practised by the ancient Celts, is a descendant of Proto-Celtic paganism , itself derived from Proto-Indo-European paganism . Many deities in Celtic mythologies have cognates in other Indo-European mythologies, such as Celtic Brigantia with Roman Aurora , Vedic Ushas , and Norse Aurvandill ; Welsh Arianrhod with Greek Selene , Baltic Mėnuo , and Slavic Myesyats ; and Irish Danu with Hindu Danu and the namesake of multiple hydronyms such as the Danube , Don , and Dnieper .

[ 12 ] Legacy [ edit ] After the Roman Empire 's conquest of Gaul (58–51 BCE) and southern Britain (43 CE), Celtic religion there underwent some Romanization , resulting in a syncretic Gallo-Roman religion with deities such as Lenus Mars , Apollo Grannus , and Telesphorus .

The Gauls gradually converted to Christianity from the third century onward. After the end of Roman rule in Britain (c. 410 CE), Celtic paganism began to be replaced by Anglo-Saxon paganism over much of what became England . The Celtic populations of Britain and Ireland gradually converted to Christianity from the fifth century onward. However, Celtic paganism left a legacy in many of the Celtic nations, influenced mythology and in the 20th century served as the basis for a new religious movement , Celtic neopaganism .

Some figures from medieval Irish mythology are believed to be versions of earlier deities. According to Miranda Aldhouse-Green , the Celts were also animists , believing that every part of the natural world had a spirit.

[ 4 ] Revival [ edit ] Main article: Celtic neopaganism Various Neopagan groups claim association with Celtic paganism. These groups range from the Reconstructionists , who work to practise ancient Celtic religion with as much accuracy as possible; to New Age , eclectic groups who take some of their inspiration from Celtic mythology and iconography, the most notable of which is Neo-Druidry .

[ citation needed ] Sources [ edit ] Comparatively little is known about Celtic paganism because the evidence for it is fragmentary, due largely to the fact that the Celts who practised it wrote nothing down about their religion.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Therefore, all there is to study their religion from is the literature from the early Christian period, commentaries from classical Greek and Roman scholars, and archaeological evidence.

[ 15 ] The archaeologist Barry Cunliffe summarised the sources for Celtic religion as "fertile chaos" , borrowing the term from the Irish scholar Proinsias MacCana . Cunliffe went on to note that "there is more, varied, evidence for Celtic religion than for any other example of Celtic life. The only problem is to assemble it in a systematic form which does not too greatly oversimplify the intricate texture of its detail." [ 16 ] Archaeological sources [ edit ] The Strettweg Cult Wagon , c. 600 BC The archaeological evidence does not contain the bias inherent in the literary sources. Nonetheless, the interpretation of this evidence can be coloured by the 21st century mindset.

[ 13 ] Various archaeological discoveries have aided understanding of the religion of the Celts.

Most surviving Celtic art is not figurative; some art historians have suggested that the complex and compelling decorative motifs that characterize some periods have a religious significance, but the understanding of what that might be appears to be irretrievably lost. Surviving figurative monumental sculpture comes almost entirely from Romano-Celtic contexts, and broadly follows provincial Roman styles, though figures who are probably deities often wear torcs , and there may be inscriptions in Roman letters with what appear to be Romanized Celtic names.  The Pillar of the Boatmen from Paris, with many deity figures, is the most comprehensive example, datable by a dedication to the Emperor Tiberius (r. from 14 AD).

[ 17 ] Monumental stone sculptures from before conquest by the Romans are much more rare, and it is far from clear that deities are represented. The most significant are the Warrior of Hirschlanden and " Glauberg Prince" (respectively 6th and 5th-century BC, from Germany), the Mšecké Žehrovice Head (probably 2nd-century BC, Czech Republic), and sanctuaries of some sort at the southern French oppida of Roquepertuse and Entremont .  There are also a number of Celtiberian standing "warrior" figures, and several other stone heads from various areas.  In general, even early monumental sculpture is found in areas with higher levels of contact with the classical world, through trade.

[ 18 ] It is possible that wooden monumental sculpture was more common.  Small heads are more common, mainly surviving as ornament in metalwork, and there are also animals and birds that may have a religious significance, [ 19 ] as on the Basse Yutz Flagons .

[ 20 ] The Strettweg Cult Wagon is probably associated with libations or sacrifices, and pairs of metal "spoons" probably used for divination have been found.

Celtic coinage , from the late 4th century BC until conquest, clearly copies Greek and Roman examples, sometimes very closely, but the heads and horses that are the most popular motifs may have a local religious significance.

[ 21 ] There are also the coins of the Roman provinces in the Celtic lands of Gaul , Raetia , Noricum , and Britannia .

[ citation needed ] Most of the surviving monuments and their accompanying inscriptions belong to the Roman period and reflect a considerable degree of syncretism between Celtic and Roman gods; even where figures and motifs appear to derive from pre-Roman tradition, they are difficult to interpret in the absence of a preserved literature on mythology.

[ citation needed ] A notable example of this is the horned god that was called Cernunnos ; several depictions and inscriptions of him have been found, but very little is known about the myths that would have been associated with him or how he was worshipped.

Irish and Welsh records [ edit ] One of a pair of British "divining spoons" Literary evidence for Celtic religion also comes from sources written in Ireland and Wales during the Middle Ages, a period when traditional Celtic religious practices had become extinct and had long been replaced by Christianity. The evidence from Ireland has been recognized as better than that from Wales, being viewed as "both older and less contaminated from foreign material." [ 22 ] These sources, which are in the form of epic poems and tales, were written several centuries after Christianity became the dominant religion in these regions, and were written down by Christian monks, "who may not merely have been hostile to the earlier paganism but actually ignorant of it." [ 23 ] Instead of treating the characters as deities, they are allocated the roles of being historical heroes who sometimes have supernatural or superhuman powers; for instance, in the Irish sources the gods are members of the mythological Tuatha Dé Danann tribe.

While it is possible to single out specific texts that can be strongly argued to encapsulate genuine echoes or resonances of the pre-Christian past, opinion is divided as to whether these texts contain substantive material derived from oral tradition as preserved by bards or whether they were the creation of the medieval monastic tradition .

[ 13 ] Greek and Roman records [ edit ] Various Greek and Roman writers of the ancient world commented on the Celts and their beliefs. Barry Cunliffe stated that "the Greek and Roman texts provide a number of pertinent observations, but these are at best anecdotal, offered largely as a colourful background by writers whose prime intention was to communicate other messages." [ 16 ] The Roman general Julius Caesar , when leading the conquering armies of the Roman Republic against Celtic Gaul, made various descriptions of the inhabitants, though some of his claims, such as that the Druids practised human sacrifice by burning people in wicker men , have come under scrutiny by modern scholars.

[ citation needed ] However, the key problem with the use of these sources is that they were often biased against the Celts, whom the classical peoples viewed as "barbarians".

[ 13 ] In the case of the Romans who conquered several Celtic realms, they would have likely been biased in favour of making the Celts look uncivilized, thereby giving the "civilised" Romans more reason to conquer them.

[ 24 ] Deities [ edit ] Image of an antlered figure on the Gundestrup cauldron , interpreted by many archaeologists as being cognate to the god Cernunnos .

Main articles: Celtic deities and Proto-Celtic religion Celtic religion was polytheistic , believing in many deities, both gods and goddesses, some of which were venerated only in a small area or region, or by a particular tribe, but others whose worship had a wider geographical distribution.

[ 6 ] The names of over two hundred Celtic deities have survived (see list of Celtic deities ), although it is likely that many of these were alternative names, regional names or titles for the same deity.

[ 6 ] The various Celtic peoples seem to have had a father god, who was often a god of the tribe and of the dead ( Toutatis probably being one name for him); and a mother goddess who was associated with the land, earth and fertility [ 8 ] ( Matrona probably being one name for her). The mother goddess could also take the form of a war goddess as protectress of her tribe and its land, for example Andraste .

[ 8 ] There also seems to have been a male celestial god—identified with Taranis —associated with thunder, the wheel, and the bull.

[ 8 ] There were gods of skill and craft, such as the pan-regional god Lugus , and the smith god Gobannos .

[ 8 ] Celtic healing deities were often associated with sacred springs , [ 8 ] such as Sirona and Borvo . Other pan-regional deities include the horned god Cernunnos , the horse and fertility goddess Epona , the divine son Maponos , as well as Belenos , Ogmios , and Sucellos .

[ 6 ] [ 4 ] Some deities were seen as threefold , for example the Three Mothers .

[ 25 ] Some Greco-Roman writers, such as Julius Caesar , did not record the native Celtic names of the deities, but instead referred to them by their apparent Roman or Greek equivalents. He declared that the most widely venerated Gaulish god was Mercury , the Roman god of trade, saying they also worshipped Apollo , Minerva , Mars and Jupiter .

[ 26 ] Caesar says the Gauls believed they all descended from a god of the dead and underworld, whom he likened to Dīs Pater .

[ 6 ] According to other classical sources, the Celts worshipped the forces of nature and did not envisage deities in anthropomorphic terms.

[ 27 ] Insular mythology [ edit ] In the Irish and Welsh vernacular sources from the Middle Ages, various human mythological figures were featured who have been thought of by many scholars as being based upon earlier gods. The historian Ronald Hutton however cautioned against automatically characterizing all Irish and Welsh mythological figures as former deities, noting that while some characters "who appear to be human, such as Medb or St Brigit , probably were indeed once regarded as divine ... the warriors who are the main protagonists of the stories have the same status as those in the Greek myths, standing between the human and divine orders. To regard characters such as Cú Chulainn , Fergus Mac Roich or Conall Cernach as former gods turned into humans by a later storyteller is to misunderstand their literary and religious function ... Cú Chulainn is no more a former god than Superman is." [ 28 ] Examining these Irish myths, Barry Cunliffe stated that he believed they displayed "a dualism between the male tribal god and the female deity of the land" [ 29 ] while Anne Ross felt that they displayed that the gods were "on the whole intellectual, deeply versed in the native learning, poets and prophets, story-tellers and craftsmen, magicians, healers, warriors ... in short, equipped with every quality admired and desired by the Celtic peoples themselves." [ 30 ] Insular Celts swore their oaths by their tribal gods, and the land, sea and sky; as in, "I swear by the gods by whom my people swear" and "If I break my oath, may the land open to swallow me, the sea rise to drown me, and the sky fall upon me", [ 31 ] an example of Celtic Threefold death .

Animistic aspects [ edit ] Main article: Celtic animism Some scholars, such as Prudence Jones and Nigel Pennick, [ 32 ] have speculated that the Celts venerated certain trees. Other scholars, such as Miranda Aldhouse-Green , believe that the Celts were animists , believing that all aspects of the natural world contained spirits, and that communication was possible with these spirits.

[ 33 ] Places such as rocks, streams, mountains, and trees may all have had shrines or offerings devoted to a deity residing there. These would have been local deities, known and worshipped by inhabitants living near to the shrine itself, and not pan-Celtic like some of the polytheistic gods.  The importance of trees in Celtic religion may be shown by the fact that the very name of the Eburonian tribe contains a reference to the yew tree , and that names like Mac Cuilinn (son of holly) and Mac Ibar (son of yew) appear in Irish myths [ dubious – discuss ] . In Ireland, wisdom was symbolized by the salmon who feed on the hazelnuts from the trees that surround the well of wisdom ( Tobar Segais ).

[ citation needed ] The relatively few animal figures in early Celtic art include many water-birds, and it is speculated that their ability to move on the air, water, and land gave them a special status or significance among the Celts. Examples include the Torrs Pony-cap and Horns (Scotland), Basse Yutz Flagons (France), Wandsworth Shield (England), and the Dunaverney flesh-hook (late Bronze Age Ireland).

[ 34 ] Burial and afterlife [ edit ] The mound over the rich Hochdorf Chieftain's Grave , near Eberdingen , Germany. Such burials were reserved for the influential and wealthy in Celtic society.

Celtic burial practices, which included burying grave goods of food, weapons, and ornaments with the dead, suggest a belief in life after death .

[ 35 ] A common factor in later mythologies from Christianized Celtic nations was the otherworld .

[ 36 ] This was the realm of the fairy folk and other supernatural beings, who would entice humans into their realm. Sometimes this otherworld was claimed to exist underground, while at other times it was said to lie far to the west. Several scholars have suggested that the otherworld was the Celtic afterlife, [ 36 ] though there is no direct evidence to prove this.

Celtic practice [ edit ] Sacred spaces [ edit ] Reconstruction drawing of Pagans Hill Romano-Celtic temple Eamhain Mhacha , Ireland Evidence suggests that among the Celts, "offerings to the gods were made throughout the landscape – both the natural and the domestic". There were also sacred spaces known by the Gallo-Brittonic word nemeton (plural nemeta ), which typically meant a sacred grove or clearing.

[ 37 ] Greco-Roman accounts tell of the Celts worshipping at sacred groves, with Tacitus describing how his men cut down "groves sacred to savage rites".

[ 38 ] By their very nature, such groves would not survive in the archaeological record, and so we have no direct evidence for them today.

[ 39 ] Certain springs were also seen as sacred and used as places of worship in the Celtic world. Notable Gaulish examples include the sanctuary of Sequana at the source of the Seine in Burgundy and Chamalieres near to Clermont-Ferrand . At both of these sites, a large array of votive offerings have been uncovered, most of which are wooden carvings, although some of which are embossed metal.

[ 40 ] During the Iron Age, the Celtic peoples of Gaul, Belgica and Britain built temples comprising square or circular timber buildings, usually set within a rectangular enclosure. Celtic peoples further east (in what is now southern Germany) built rectangular ditched enclosures known as viereckschanzen ; in some cases, these were sacred spaces where votive offerings were buried in deep shafts.

[ 41 ] In Ireland, religious buildings and enclosures were circular. According to Barry Cunliffe, "the monumentality of the Irish religious sites sets them apart from their British and continental European counterparts", the most notable examples being the Hill of Tara ( Temair ) and Navan Fort ( Emain Macha ).

[ 42 ] In many cases, when the Roman Empire conquered Celtic lands, earlier Iron Age sacred sites were reused and Roman temples built on them.

[ 43 ] Romano-Celtic temples ( Latin : fanum ) are found only in the northwestern Celtic regions of the empire. They differ from classical Roman temples, and their layouts are believed to be hugely influenced by earlier Celtic wooden temples.

[ 44 ] Votive offerings [ edit ] The Celts made votive offerings to their deities, which were buried in the earth or thrown into rivers or bogs. According to Barry Cunliffe, in most cases, deposits were placed in the same places on numerous occasions, indicating continual usage "over a period of time, perhaps on a seasonal basis or when a particular event, past or pending, demanded a propitiatory response." [ 45 ] In particular, there was a trend to offer items associated with warfare in watery areas, evidence for which is found not only in the Celtic regions, but also in Late Bronze Age (and therefore pre-Celtic) societies and those outside of the Celtic area, namely Denmark. One of the most notable examples is the river Thames in southern England, where a number of items had been deposited, only to be discovered by archaeologists millennia later. Some of these, like the Battersea Shield , Wandsworth Shield and the Waterloo Helmet , would have been prestige goods that would have been labour-intensive to make and thereby probably expensive.

[ 45 ] Another example is at Llyn Cerrig Bach in Anglesey , Wales, where offerings, primarily those related to battle, were thrown into the lake from a rocky outcrop in the late first century BC or early first century AD.

[ 45 ] At times, jewellery and other high prestige items that were not related to warfare were also deposited in a ritual context. At Niederzier in the Rhineland for example, a post that excavators believed had religious significance had a bowl buried next to it in which was contained forty-five coins, two torcs and an armlet, all made of gold, and similar deposits have been uncovered elsewhere in Celtic Europe.

[ 46 ] Animal sacrifice [ edit ] The oak and mistletoe ritual depicted by Henri-Paul Motte (1900) There is evidence that ancient Celtic peoples sacrificed animals, which were almost always livestock or working animals .

[ 10 ] The idea seems to have been that ritually transferring a life-force to the Otherworld pleased the gods and established a channel of communication between the worlds. Animal sacrifices could be acts of thanksgiving, appeasement, to ask for good health and fertility, or as a means of divination . It seems that some animals were offered wholly to the gods (by burying or burning), while some were shared between gods and humans (part eaten and part set aside).

[ 10 ] Pliny the Elder , a Roman author and military commander in the 1st century AD, wrote of druids performing a ritual whereby they sacrificed two white bulls, cut mistletoe from a sacred oak with a golden sickle, and used it to make an elixir to cure infertility and poison.

[ 47 ] Archaeologists found that at some Gaulish and British sanctuaries , horses and cattle were killed and their whole bodies carefully buried. At Gournay-sur-Aronde , the animals were left to decompose before their bones were buried around the bounds of the sanctuary along with numerous broken weapons.

[ 48 ] This was repeated at regular intervals of about ten years.

[ 49 ] An avenue of animal pit-burials led to a sacred building at Cadbury .

[ 49 ] In southern Britain, some British tribes carefully buried animals, especially horses and dogs, in grain storage pits. It is believed these were thanksgiving sacrifices to underworld gods once the stores reached the end of their use.

[ 50 ] Irish mythology describes the tarbfeis (bull feast), a shamanistic ritual in which a bull would be sacrificed and a seer would sleep in the bull's hide to have a vision of the future king.

[ 51 ] Following the 12th-century Norman invasion of Ireland , Norman writer Gerald of Wales wrote in his Topographia Hibernica that the Irish kings of Tyrconnell were inaugurated with a horse sacrifice . He writes that a white mare was sacrificed and cooked into a broth, which the king bathed in and drank from.

[ 52 ] This has been seen as propaganda meant to paint the Irish as a barbaric people.

[ 53 ] However, there may be some truth in the account; there are rare mentions of similar horse sacrifices associated with kingship in Scandinavia and India (see ashvamedha ).

[ 52 ] Human sacrifice [ edit ] 18th century illustration of Julius Caesar 's account.

There is some evidence that ancient Celtic peoples practised human sacrifice .

[ 11 ] Accounts of Celtic human sacrifice come from Roman and Greek sources.

Julius Caesar [ 54 ] and Strabo wrote that the Gauls burnt animal and human sacrifices in a large wickerwork figure, known as a wicker man , and that the human victims were usually criminals.

Posidonius wrote that druids who oversaw human sacrifices foretold the future by watching the death throes of the victims.

[ 55 ] Caesar also wrote that slaves of Gaulish chiefs would be burnt along with the body of their master as part of his funeral.

[ 56 ] In the 1st century AD, Roman writer Lucan mentioned human sacrifices to the Gaulish gods Esus , Toutatis and Taranis . In a 4th century commentary on Lucan, an unnamed author added that sacrifices to Esus were hanged from a tree, those to Toutatis were drowned , and those to Taranis were burned .

[ 57 ] According to the 2nd-century Roman writer Cassius Dio , Boudica 's forces impaled Roman captives during her rebellion against the Roman occupation , to the accompaniment of revelry and sacrifices in the sacred groves of Andate .

[ 58 ] Historians note that these Greco-Roman accounts should be taken with caution, as it benefited them to make the Celts sound barbaric.

[ 59 ] There is some archaeological evidence of human sacrifice among Celtic peoples, although it is rare.

[ 11 ] Ritual beheading and headhunting was a major religious and cultural practice which has found copious support in archaeology, including the many skulls found in Londinium 's River Walbrook and the headless bodies at the Gaulish sanctuary of Gournay-sur-Aronde .

[ 60 ] Several ancient Irish bog bodies have been interpreted as kings who were ritually killed, presumably after serious crop failures or other disasters. Some were deposited in bogs on territorial boundaries (which were seen as liminal places) or near royal inauguration sites, and some were found to have eaten a ceremonial last meal.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Head cult [ edit ] Stone head from Mšecké Žehrovice , Czechia, wearing a torc , late La Tène culture See also: Celtic stone idols The iconography of the human head is believed by many archaeologists and historians to have played a significant part in Celtic religion. It has been referred to as a "head cult" [ 63 ] or "cult of the severed head".

[ 64 ] The Celts had a reputation as head hunters among the Romans and Greeks. Writing in the 1st century BC, the Greek historians Posidonius and Diodorus Siculus said Celtic warriors cut off the heads of enemies slain in battle, hung them from the necks of their horses, then nailed them up outside their homes.

[ 63 ] [ 65 ] Strabo wrote in the same century that Celts embalmed the heads of their most esteemed enemies in cedar oil and put them on display.

[ 63 ] [ 66 ] The Roman historian Livy wrote that the Boii beheaded the defeated Roman general after the Battle of Silva Litana , covered his skull in gold, and used it as a ritual cup.

[ 63 ] Archaeologists have found evidence that heads were embalmed and displayed by the southern Gauls.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] In another example, at the southern Gaulish site of Entremont , there was a pillar carved with skulls, within which were niches where human skulls were kept, nailed into position, fifteen of which have been found.

[ 69 ] Roquepertuse nearby has similar heads and skull niches. Many standalone carved stone heads have been found in Celtic regions, some with two or three faces.

[ 70 ] Examples include the Mšecké Žehrovice and Corleck heads.

[ 71 ] Severed heads are a common motif in Insular Celtic myths, and there are many tales in which "living heads" preside over feasts and/or speak prophecies.

[ 63 ] [ 70 ] The beheading game is a trope found in Irish myth and Arthurian legend.

Three-faced Corleck Head , 1st or 2nd century AD, Ireland [ 71 ] John T. Koch says that the efforts taken to preserve and display heads, and the frequency with which severed heads appear, point to a religious importance.

[ 63 ] Barry Cunliffe believed that the Celts held "reverence for the power of the head" and that "to own and display a distinguished head was to retain and control the power of the dead person".

[ 72 ] Likewise, the archaeologist Anne Ross asserted that "the Celts venerated the head as a symbol of divinity and the powers of the otherworld, and regarded it as the most important bodily member, the very seat of the soul".

[ 73 ] The folklorist Hilda Ellis Davidson said the early Celts seem to have venerated the head as "the seat of consciousness and wisdom".

[ 70 ] Miranda Aldhouse-Green has refuted suggestions "that the head itself was worshipped, but it was clearly venerated as the most significant element in a human or divine image representing the whole".

[ 74 ] In contrast, the historian Ronald Hutton has largely dismissed the idea of a head cult, believing that both the literary and archaeological evidence did not warrant this conclusion. He noted "the frequency with which human heads appear upon Celtic metalwork proves nothing more than they were a favourite decorative motif, among several, and one just as popular among non-Celtic peoples." [ 75 ] Priesthood [ edit ] Main articles: Druid , Fili , Bard , and Vates Druids [ edit ] Two druids, from an 1845 publication, based on a bas-relief found at Autun , France.

According to a number of Greco-Roman writers such as Julius Caesar , [ 76 ] Cicero , [ 77 ] Tacitus [ 78 ] and Pliny the Elder , [ 79 ] Gaulish and British society held a group of magico-religious specialists known as the druids in high esteem. Their roles and responsibilities differed somewhat between the different accounts, but Caesar's, which was the "fullest" and "earliest original text" to describe the druids, [ 80 ] described them as being concerned with "divine worship, the due performance of sacrifices, private or public, and the interpretation of ritual questions." He also claimed that they were responsible for officiating at human sacrifices , such as the wicker man burnings.

[ 76 ] Nonetheless, a number of historians have criticized these accounts, believing them to be biased or inaccurate.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Vernacular Irish sources also referred to the druids, portraying them not only as priests but as sorcerers who had supernatural powers that they used for cursing and divination and who opposed the coming of Christianity.

[ 83 ] Various historians and archaeologists have interpreted the druids in different ways; Peter Berresford Ellis for instance believed them to be the equivalents of the Indian Brahmin caste, [ 84 ] while Anne Ross believed that they were essentially tribal priests, having more in common with the shamans of tribal societies than with the classical philosophers.

[ 85 ] Ronald Hutton meanwhile held a particularly sceptical attitude to many claims made about them, and he supported the view that the evidence available was of such a suspicious nature that "we can know virtually nothing of certainty about the ancient Druids, so that – although they certainly existed – they function more or less as legendary figures." [ 86 ] Poets [ edit ] In Ireland the filid were visionary poets, which many [ who?

] get confused with Vates , associated with lorekeeping, versecraft, and the memorization of vast numbers of poems. They were also magicians, as Irish magic is intrinsically connected to poetry , and the satire of a gifted poet was a serious curse upon the one being satirized.

[ 87 ] In Ireland a "bard" was considered a lesser grade of poet than a fili – more of a minstrel and rote reciter than an inspired artist with magical powers. In the Welsh tradition, the poet is always referred to as a "bardd".

The Celtic poets, of whatever grade, were composers of eulogy and satire, and a chief duty was that of composing and reciting verses on heroes and their deeds, and memorizing the genealogies of their patrons. It was essential to their livelihood that they increase the fame of their patrons, via tales, poems and songs. In the 1st century AD, the Latin author Lucan referred to "bards" as the national poets or minstrels of Gaul and Britain.

[ 88 ] In Roman Gaul the institution gradually disappeared, whereas in Ireland and Wales it survived into the European Middle Ages . In Wales, the bardic order was revived, and codified by the poet and forger Iolo Morganwg ; [ citation needed ] this tradition has persisted, centred around the many eisteddfods at every level of Welsh literary society.

Calendar [ edit ] Main article: Celtic calendar Further information: Irish calendar The oldest attested Celtic calendar is the Coligny calendar , dated to the 2nd century and as such firmly within the Gallo-Roman period.

Origin as Festivals [ edit ] Some feast days of the medieval Irish calendar have sometimes been speculated to descend from prehistoric festivals, especially by comparison to terms found in the Coligny calendar. It is not clear what religious festivals the ancient Celts held, but the Insular Celtic peoples celebrated four seasonal festivals, known to the medieval Gaels as Beltaine (1 May), Lughnasadh (1 August), Samhain (1 November) and Imbolc (1 February).

[ 6 ] Beltane , in particular, is attributed ancient origin by medieval Irish writers.

[ citation needed ] The festivals of Samhain and Imbolc are not associated with "paganism" or druidry in Irish legend, but there have nevertheless been suggestions of a prehistoric background since the 19th century, in the case of Samhain by John Rhys and James Frazer who assumed that this festival marked the "Celtic new year".

[ citation needed ] Gallo-Roman religion [ edit ] Main article: Gallo-Roman religion Relief of Mercury and Rosmerta from Eisenberg Gallo-Roman religion was a syncretic belief system that emerged in Roman Gaul through the fusion of indigenous Celtic (Gaulish) traditions with Roman and Hellenistic religious practices. This process, driven by selective acculturation , resulted in the integration of native deities with Roman counterparts—such as Lenus Mars and Sulis Minerva —and the adoption of uniquely Celtic figures like Epona into Roman worship.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Religious monuments like the Jupiter Column and the development of paired deities symbolized the union of Roman and Celtic traditions, while practices such as circumambulation and the prominence of water in temple locations reflect persistent Celtic influences.

[ 89 ] Roman authorities, including Augustus and Tiberius , suppressed traditional druidic hierarchies, replacing them with Roman-style priesthoods and Latin liturgy.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] However, local religious identity endured in forms such as the continued worship of Cernunnos and the adaptation of Roman gods into local iconography.

[ 94 ] Votive offerings , healing sanctuaries , and architectural transformations of sacred sites further illustrate the blending of cultures.

[ 95 ] Despite official bans, practices like Headhunting and possibly human sacrifice persisted or were transformed under Roman rule.

[ 89 ] Christianization [ edit ] Further information: Celtic Christianity The Celtic cross .

Celtic societies under Roman rule presumably underwent a gradual Christianization in similar ways to the rest of the Empire; there is next to nothing in Christian sources about specific issues relating to Celtic people in the Empire, or their religion.

Saint Paul 's Epistle to the Galatians was addressed to a congregation that might have included people from a Celtic background.

In Ireland, the main Celtic country unconquered by the Romans, the conversion to Christianity (Christianization) inevitably had a profound effect on the socio-religious system from the 5th century onward, though its character can only be extrapolated from documents of considerably later date. By the early 7th century the church had succeeded in relegating Irish druids to ignominious irrelevancy, while the filidh , masters of traditional learning, operated in easy harmony with their clerical counterparts, contriving at the same time to retain a considerable part of their pre-Christian tradition, social status, and privilege. But virtually all the vast corpus of early vernacular literature that has survived was written down in monastic scriptoria , and it is part of the task of modern scholarship to identify the relative roles of traditional continuity and ecclesiastical innovation as reflected in the written texts.

Cormac's Glossary (c. 900 AD) recounts that St. Patrick banished those mantic rites of the filidh that involved offerings to "demons", and that the church took particular pains to stamp out animal sacrifice and other rituals repugnant to Christian teaching.

[ citation needed ] What survived of ancient ritual practice tended to be related to filidhecht , the traditional repertoire of the filidh , or to the central institution of sacral kingship. A good example is the pervasive and persistent concept of the hierogamy (sacred marriage) of the king with the goddess of sovereignty: the sexual union, or banais ríghi ("wedding of kingship"), which constituted the core of the royal inauguration, seems to have been purged from the ritual at an early date through ecclesiastical influence, but it remains at least implicit, and often quite explicit, for many centuries in the literary tradition.

Modern scholars emphasize that the so-called "Celtic Church" was not a separate entity but part of Latin Christendom , shaped by regional variations in liturgy, ecclesiastical structure, and monastic practice. The term itself is considered problematic, as it oversimplifies complex local traditions and implies a unity that did not exist.

[ 96 ] Instead, the churches in Ireland and Britain shared certain distinctive features—such as a unique method of calculating Easter , a particular form of monastic tonsure , and the ideal of peregrinatio pro Christo —which, while setting them apart from continental norms, did not amount to a theological schism.

[ 97 ] Folkloristic survivals [ edit ] Beltane festival , Edinburgh , 2019 Nagy has noted the Gaelic oral tradition has been remarkably conservative; the fact that we have tales in existence that were still being told in the 19th century in almost exactly the same form as they exist in ancient manuscripts leads to the strong probability that much of what the monks recorded was considerably older.

[ 98 ] Though the Christian interpolations in some of these tales are very obvious, many of them read like afterthoughts or footnotes to the main body of the tales, which most likely preserve traditions far older than the manuscripts themselves.

The clootie well near Munlochy , on the Black Isle , Scotland.

Mythology based on (though not identical to) the pre-Christian traditions was still commonplace knowledge in Celtic-speaking cultures in the 19th century. In the Celtic Revival , such survivals were collected and edited, thus becoming a literary tradition, which in turn influenced modern mainstream " Celticity ". Several Celtic celebrations have been practised in some form since ancient times, such as the Beltane festival [ 99 ] and the Killorglin Puck Fair (which seems to be a survival of Lughnasadh ).

[ 100 ] Various rituals involving acts of pilgrimage to sites such as hills and sacred wells that are believed to have curative or otherwise beneficial properties are still performed, including the tradition of clootie wells in Scotland , Ireland and Cornwall , and the practice of well dressing in the English Midlands .

[ 101 ] The same applies to wish trees , which are considered part of the clootie well tradition.

[ 102 ] Based on evidence from the European continent, various figures that are still known in folklore in the Celtic countries up to today, or who take part in post-Christian mythology, are known to have also been worshipped in those areas that did not have records before Christianity. On the Inishkea Islands off the west coast of Ireland, Celtic pagan rituals were seemingly performed well into the nineteenth century .

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Other possible remnants of Celtic paganism include the Irish strawboy tradition [ 105 ] and Wren Day traditions, [ 106 ] as well as the Shetlandic practice of Skekling, [ 107 ] all of which involve dressing in unusual costumes made of straw.

In Twilight of the Celtic Gods (1996), Clarke and Roberts describe a number of particularly conservative folkloristic traditions in remote rural areas of Great Britain, including the Peak District and Yorkshire Dales, including claims of surviving pre-Christian Celtic traditions of veneration of stones, trees and bodies of water.

[ 108 ] References [ edit ] ^ Ross 1974 [ page needed ] ^ Hutton 1991 [ page needed ] ^ Jones, Prudence and Pennick, Nigel (1995).

A History of Pagan Europe . Routledge.

^ a b c d Green, Miranda (2012). "Chapter 25: The Gods and the supernatural", The Celtic World . Routledge. pp.465–485 ^ Cunliffe 1997 , p. 184 ^ a b c d e f g h i Cunliffe 1997 , pp. 275–277, 286, 291–296 ^ Ross 1986 , p. 103 ^ a b c d e f Koch 2006 , pp. 1488–1491 ^ Hutton 2009 , p. 17 ^ a b c Green, Miranda (2002).

Animals in Celtic Life and Myth . Routledge. pp.

94– 96.

^ a b c Koch 2006 , pp. 687–690 ^ Mallory, J. P.; Adams, D. Q. (24 August 2006).

The Oxford Introduction to Proto-Indo-European and the Proto-Indo-European World . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-928791-8 .

^ a b c d Miranda J. Green. (2005) Exploring the world of the druids.

London: Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 0-500-28571-3 . p. 24.

^ Emrys Evans 1992 , p. 170 ^ Emrys Evans 1992 , pp. 170–171 ^ a b Cunliffe 1997 , p. 183 ^ Green 1989 Chapters 2 & 4.

^ Stöllner 2014 , pp. 119–125, 133 ^ Green 1989 Chapter 5, in particular pp. 142–144 on birds, pp. 146–149 on horse.

^ Kaul, Fleming, pp. 106–110, "The not so ugly duckling: an essay on meaning" in: Gosden, Christopher, Crawford, Sally, Ulmschneider, Katharina, Celtic Art in Europe: Making Connections , 2014, Oxbow Books, ISBN 1782976582 , 9781782976585, google books ^ Green 1989 , pp. 140, 146–147, 149–150 (and see index) ^ Hutton 1991 , p. 147 ^ Hutton 1991 , p. 148 ^ Dr Ray Dunning (1999) The Encyclopedia of World Mythology Parragon.

ISBN 0-7525-8444-8 .

^ Emrys Evans 1992 , p. 171 ^ Caesar .

Commentarii de Bello Gallico . Book 6.

^ Juliette Wood. ‘Introduction.’ In Squire, C. (2000).

The mythology of the British Islands: an introduction to Celtic myth, legend, poetry and romance . London & Ware: UCL & Wordsworth Editions Ltd.

ISBN 1-84022-500-9 . pp. 12–13.

^ Hutton 1991 , pp. 175–176 ^ Cunliffe 1997 , p. 185 ^ Ross 1986 , p. 102 ^ Marie-Louise Sjoestedt, Gods and Heroes of the Celts , translated by Myles Dillon, Berkeley, CA, Turtle Island Foundation, 1982, p. 17.

ISBN 0-913666-52-1 .

^ Jones, Prudence and Pennick, Nigel (1995).

A History of Pagan Europe . Routledge. p. 81.

^ Miranda Green . (1992:196) Animals in Celtic Life and Myth . London: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-05030-8 .

^ Green 1989 , pp. 142–144 ^ Cunliffe 1997 , pp. 208–210 ^ a b The Celts in The Encyclopedia of World Mythology , Dr Ray Dunning, p. 91.

^ Cunliffe 1997 , p. 197 ^ Tacitus .

Annales . XIV.

^ Cunliffe 1997 , p. 198 ^ Cunliffe 1997 , pp. 198–199 ^ Cunliffe 1997 , p. 200 ^ Cunliffe 1997 , p. 207 ^ Cunliffe 1997 , p. 204 ^ Kiernan, Philip (2020).

Roman Cult Images: The Lives and Worship of Idols from the Iron Age to Late Antiquity . Cambridge University Press. p. 151.

^ a b c Cunliffe 1997 , p. 194 ^ Cunliffe 1997 , p. 195 ^ Koch 2006 , p. 612 ^ Green 1989 , pp. 109–110 ^ a b Green 1989 , p. 121 ^ Green 1989 , p. 100 ^ Davidson 1988 , p. 51 ^ a b Davidson 1988 , p. 54 ^ Byrnes, Michael (2005). "Feis". In Duffy, Seán (ed.).

Medieval Ireland: An Encyclopedia . Routledge. pp.

278– 279.

^ Gaius Julius Caesar Commentaries on the Gallic War – Book VI:16, translated by W. A. McDevitte and W. S. Bohn, New York: Harper & Brothers, 1869 . Archived from the original on 5 September 2003.

^ Davidson 1988 , pp. 60–61 ^ Gaius Julius Caesar Commentaries on the Gallic War – Book VI:19, translated by W. A. McDevitte and W. S. Bohn, New York: Harper & Brothers, 1869 . Archived from the original on 12 January 2013.

^ Maier, Bernhard (1997).

Dictionary of Celtic Religion and Culture . Boydell & Brewer. p. 36.

^ "Roman History, Cassius Dio, p. 95 ch. 62:7, Translation by Earnest Cary, Loeb classical Library" . Retrieved 24 May 2007 .

^ Wells, Peter S. (1999).

The Barbarians Speak: How the Conquered Peoples Shaped Roman Europe . Princeton University Press. pp.

59– 60.

ISBN 0-691-08978-7 .

^ French archaeologist Jean-Louis Brunaux has written extensively on human sacrifice and the sanctuaries of Belgic Gaul . See "Gallic Blood Rites," Archaeology 54 (March/April 2001), 54–57; Les sanctuaires celtiques et leurs rapports avec le monde mediterranéean , Actes de colloque de St-Riquier (8 au 11 novembre 1990) organisés par la Direction des Antiquités de Picardie et l'UMR 126 du CNRS (Paris: Éditions Errance, 1991); "La mort du guerrier celte. Essai d'histoire des mentalités," in Rites et espaces en pays celte et méditerranéen. Étude comparée à partir du sanctuaire d'Acy-Romance (Ardennes, France) (École française de Rome, 2000).

^ Kelly, Eamonn (2013).

"An Archaeological Interpretation of Irish Iron Age Bog Bodies" . In Ralph, Sarah (ed.).

The Archaeology of Violence . SUNY Press. pp.

232– 40.

ISBN 978-1438444420 .

^ Bentley, Diana (March–April 2015).

"The Dark Secrets of the Bog Bodies" .

Minerva: The International Review of Ancient Art & Archaeology . Nashville, Tennessee: Clear Media: 34– 37.

^ a b c d e f Koch 2006 , p. 897–898 ^ Cunliffe, Barry (2010), Druids: A Very Short Introduction , Oxford University Press , pp. 71–72.

^ Diodorus Siculus .

History . 5.29.

^ Strabo .

Geographica . IV.4.5.

^ Salma Ghezal, Elsa Ciesielski, Benjamin Girard, Aurélien Creuzieux, Peter Gosnell, Carole Mathe, Cathy Vieillescazes, Réjane Roure (2019),
" Embalmed heads of the Celtic Iron Age in the south of France ", Journal of Archaeological Science , Volume 101, pp.181–188, doi : 10.1016/j.jas.2018.09.011 .

^ "The Gauls really did embalm the severed heads of enemies, research shows" .

The Guardian . 7 November 2018.

^ Cunliffe 1997 , p. 202 ^ a b c Davidson 1988 , pp. 72–75 ^ a b O'Toole, Fintan . " A history of Ireland in 100 objects: Corleck Head ".

The Irish Times , 25 June 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2023 ^ Cunliffe 1997 , p. 210 ^ Ross 1974 , pp. 161–162 ^ Green, Miranda .

The Gods of the Celts . p. 32.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Hutton 1991 , p. 195 ^ a b Caesar, Julius .

De bello gallico . VI.13–18.

^ Cicero .

De divinatione . I.XVI.90.

^ Tacitus .

Annales . XIV.30.

^ Pliny .

Historiae naturalis . XVI.249.

^ Hutton 2009 , p. 02.

^ Piggott, Stuart (1968).

The Druids . London: Thames & Hudson. p. 111.

^ Hutton 2009 , pp. 04–05.

^ Hutton 2009 , pp. 32–33 ^ Ellis, Peter Berresford (1994).

The Druids . London: Constable. passim.

^ Ross, Anne (1967).

Pagan Celtic Britain . London: Routledge. pp. 52–56.

^ Hutton, Ronald (2007).

The Druids London: Hambledon Continuum. p. xi.

^ Broderick, Shane (2 September 2018).

"The Brehon Laws" .

Ireland's Folklore and Traditions . Retrieved 30 January 2022 .

^ Lucan. Pharsalia, 1.448 ^ a b c Watson, Alasdair (2007).

Religious Acculturation and Assimilation in Belgic Gaul and Aquitania from the Roman Conquest until the End of the Second Century CE . BAR Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4073-0036-8 .

^ Henig, Martin (1984).

Religion in Roman Britain . London: Batsford.

^ Sauer, Eberhard (1996).

"An Inscription from Northern Italy, The Roman Temple Complex in Bath and Minerva as a Healing Goddess in Gallo-Roman Religion" .

Oxford Journal of Archaeology .

15 (1): 63– 93.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0092.1996.tb00074.x .

^ King, Anthony C. (2007). R. Haeussler & A. C. King (ed.).

"The formation of Romano-Celtic religion(s)" .

Continuity and Innovation in Religion in the Roman West, Vol 1 .

^ Woolf, Greg (1998).

Becoming Roman: The Origins of Provincial Civilization in Gaul . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-41445-6 .

^ Newell, A. N. (1934).

"Gallo-Roman Religious Sculpture" .

Greece & Rome .

3 (8): 74– 84.

doi : 10.1017/S0017383500002424 .

^ Pollini, John (2002). "Conclusions: Cultic and Cultural Context".

Gallo-Roman Bronzes and the Process of Romanization: The Cobannus Hoard . Brill. pp.

63– 74.

ISBN 978-90-04-49366-7 .

^ Corning, Caitlin (2006).

The Celtic and Roman Traditions: Conflict and Consensus in the Early Medieval Church . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

1– 4.

ISBN 978-0-230-60115-4 .

^ Koch 2006 , pp. 431–434.

^ Nagy, Joseph Falaky (1985).

The wisdom of the outlaw: the boyhood deeds of Finn in Gaelic narrative tradition . Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 2.

ISBN 0-520-05284-6 .

^ "Beltane | ancient Celtic festival" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ "The pagan origins of King of the goat's Puck Fair" .

IrishCentral.com . 29 October 2020 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ "Well Dressing and Well Flowering Customs in England" .

Historic UK . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ "Clootie Wells: The Celtic Wishing Trees" .

www.amusingplanet.com . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ Religion, Atlantic (1 September 2013).

"The Naomhóg of Inishkea" .

The Atlantic Religion . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ "Inishkea Islands in Co. Mayo in the West of Ireland | mayo-ireland.ie" .

www.mayo-ireland.ie . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ "Wedding Day Traditions" .

www.askaboutireland.ie . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ "Wren Day: An Ancient Irish Christmas Tradition That Survives to This Day" .

Old Moore's Almanac . 19 December 2019 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ "The Honest Truth: A spooky step back in time to skekling, Shetland's ancient form of Halloween guising" .

Sunday Post . 30 October 2020.

^ David Clarke and Andy Roberts, Twilight of the Celtic Gods: An Exploration of Britain's Hidden Pagan Traditions (1996), ISBN 978-0-7137-2522-3 ; review .

Sources [ edit ] Cunliffe, Barry (1997).

The Ancient Celts .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-815010-7 .

Davidson, Hilda Ellis (1988).

Myths and Symbols in Pagan Europe: Early Scandinavian and Celtic Religions . Syracuse University Press.

Emrys Evans (1992).

Mythology . Little Brown & Company.

ISBN 0-316-84763-1 .

Green, Miranda (1989).

Symbol and Image in Celtic Religious Art .

Routledge .

ISBN 9780415080767 .

Hutton, Ronald (1991).

The Pagan Religions of the Ancient British Isles: Their nature and legacy . Blackwell.

ISBN 9780631172888 .

Hutton, Ronald (2009).

Blood and Mistletoe: The History of the Druids in Britain .

Yale University Press .

Koch, John (2006).

Celtic Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO.

Ross, Anne (1974).

Pagan Celtic Britain: Studies in Iconography and Tradition . Sphere Books Ltd.

Ross, Anne (1986).

The Pagan Celts . B.T. Batsford.

Stöllner, Thomas (2014). "Between ruling ideology and ancestor worship: the mos maiorum of the Early Celtic Hero Graves". In Gosden, Christopher; Crawford, Sally; Ulmschneider, Katharina (eds.).

Celtic Art in Europe: Making Connections .

Oxbow Books .

ISBN 9781782976585 .

Further reading [ edit ] Anwyl, Edward (1906), Celtic Religion in Pre-Christian Times .

de Vries, Jan (1961) Keltische Religion, a comprehensive survey .

Duval, Paul-Marie (1976) Les Dieux de la Gaule , new ed. updated and enlarged.

Evans Wentz, W. Y.

(1966, 1990) The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries . Gerrards Cross, Colin Smythe Humanities Press ISBN 0-901072-51-6 Green, Miranda (1986, revised 2004) Gods of the Celts .

Macbain, Alexander (1885), Celtic Mythology and Religion ( Internet Archive online edition ).

MacCana, Proinsias (1970) Celtic Mythology . Middlesex, Hamlyn.

ISBN 0-600-00647-6 MacCulloch, J. A. (1911) The Religion of the Ancient Celts ( Project Gutenberg online edition ; 2009 reprint: ISBN 978-1-60506-197-9 ).

MacCulloch, J. A. (1948) The Celtic and Scandinavian Religions , Hutchinson's University Library (2005 reprint: Cosimo Classics, ISBN 978-1-59605-416-5 ).

MacKillop, James (1998) A Dictionary of Celtic Mythology . Oxford, Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-280120-1 Maier, Bernhard (1997); originally published in German in 1994) Dictionary of Celtic religion and culture , Boydell & Brewer, ISBN 978-0-85115-660-6 .

Raepsaet-Charlier, Marie-Thérèse. "Cultes et territoire, Mères et Matrones, dieux «celtiques»: quelques aspects de la religion dans les provinces romaines de Gaule et de Germanie à la lumière de travaux récents". In: L'antiquité classique , Tome 84, 2015. pp. 173–226. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3406/antiq.2015.3872 ; www.persee.fr/doc/antiq_0770-2817_2015_num_84_1_3872 Rees, Alwyn and Rees, Brinley (1961) Celtic Heritage: Ancient Tradition in Ireland and Wales . New York, Thames and Hudson.

ISBN 0-500-27039-2 Ross, Anne (2010).

Druids: Preachers of Immortality . The History Press.

ISBN 978-0-7524-1433-1 .

Sjoestedt, Marie-Louise (1982) Gods and Heroes of the Celts . Translated by Myles Dillon, Berkeley, CA, Turtle Island Foundation.

ISBN 0-913666-52-1 . Comparisons between deities of the various Celtic cultures vs Classical models.

Stercks, Claude (1986).

Éléments de cosmogonie celtique , contains an interpretive essay on the goddess Epona and related deities.

Vendryes, Joseph ; Tonnelat, Ernest; Unbegaun, B.-O. (1948).

Les Religions des Celtes, des Germains et des anciens Slaves .

External links [ edit ] World History Encyclopedia – Ancient Celtic Religion Celtic folklore and mythology – sacred-texts.com v t e Celts and modern Celts Celtic nations · Celtic studies · Celtic tribes · Celtic languages Peoples Ancient Celtic ethnic groups ( names ) Aedui Aigosages Allobroges Allotriges Ambarri Anartes Arecomici Armorica Astures Arverni Atuatuci Attacotti Atrebates Aulerci Aulerci Cenomani Cenomani Autrigones Bituriges Bituriges Vivisci Belgae Bellovaci Berones Boii Brigantii Britons Caledonians Caleti Cantabri Carni Cantii Carnutes Caristii Carpetani Catubrini Celegeri Cenomani Celtiberians Celtici Cotini Coriosolites Dumnonii Eburones Eburovices Eravisci Haedui Helvetii Gaels Gaesatae Gallaeci Gauls Galatians Helvetii Insubres Latobici Latobrigi Lemovices Lexovii Leuci Ligures Lingones Lusitanians Lepontii Menapii Morini Namnetes Nervii Noricum Orobii Osismii Parisi Parisii Petrocorii Picts Pictones Rauraci Redones Regni Remi Salluvii Santones Sequani Senones Scordisci Scoti Silures Sordones Tectosages Teurisci Tolistobogii Treveri Trinovantes Triboci Tricasses Trocmi Tulingi Turoni Ulidia Varciani Varisci Viromandui Veneti Veliocasses Vennones Vindelici Vocontii Volcae Modern Celtic ethnic groups Bretons Cornish Welsh Gaels Irish Manx Scots Celtic diaspora Cornish diaspora Irish diaspora Scottish diaspora Welsh diaspora Related ethnic groups Anglo-Celtic Breton Americans Cornish Americans English people French people Irish Americans Irish Canadians Scotch-Irish Americans Scottish Americans Scottish Canadians Scots-Irish people Spanish people Studies Places Alesia Avaricum Gergovia Hallstatt Hochdorf La Tène Vix Grave Gaelic Ireland Hill of Tara Newgrange Rathcroghan Dálriata Alba Fortriu Cumbria Brigantia Iron Age Britain Roman Britain Sub-Roman Britain Stonehenge Dumnonia Hen Ogledd Gaul Roman Gaul Britonia Armorica Domnonée Brittany Gallaecia Numantia Gallia Aquitania Gallia Belgica Gallia Celtica Cisalpine Gaul Transalpine Gaul Balkans Transylvania Galatia Ancient religion Proto-Celtic religion Celtic polytheism Celtic deities Celtic Animism Celtic mythology Celtic Christianity Celtic Rites Celtic stone idolss * Druids Monasticism Romano-Celtic temple Practices Mythology Irish Scottish Welsh British Breton Cornish Society Bard Brehon Celtic calendar Celtic festivals Celtic women Celticisation Chief of the Name Derbfine Druid Clan chief Irish Clans Scottish clans ( List ) Gaelicisation Gaelic astrology Fáinne Fili Law Tanistry Seanchaí Sept Túath Vates Warfare ( Gaelic ) Coinage Modern Celts Celtic Revival Celtic nations Pan-Celticism Celtic Congress Celtic League Celtic union Music Rock Neo-Christianity Neopaganism Celtic Wicca Neo-Druidism Nations Celtic League definition Brittany ( Breizh ) Cornwall ( Kernow ) Ireland ( Éire ) Isle of Man ( Mannin ) Scotland ( Alba ) Wales ( Cymru ) Other claimants Asturias Cantabria Cumbria Devon Galicia Norte Portugal Nova Scotia Province of León Y Wladfa England Culture Literature Arthurian Legend Bardic Poetry Breton literature Cornish literature Irish literature Manx literature Scottish literature Welsh-language literature Welsh literature in English Early Irish literature Irish annals Gaelic literature Scottish Gaelic literature National cultures Brittany Cornwall Ireland Isle of Man Scotland Wales Art Bell shrines Brooches Dragonesque Carnyx Celtic cross Knotwork High crosses Insular art Interlace Leaf-crowns Mazes Pictish stones Torcs Triple spiral Clothing Celtic Dress Highland dress Gaelic clothing Tartan Traditional Welsh costume Welsh hat Regional cultures Gaelic culture Highland culture Music Ancient Celtic music Breton Folk music Gaelic music Irish folk music Scottish folk music Welsh folk music Sean-nós singing Carnyx National music scenes Brittany Cornwall Ireland Isle of Man Scotland Wales Festivals Calendar Samhain / Calan Gaeaf Imbolc / Gŵyl Fair Beltane / Calan Mai Lughnasadh / Calan Awst Festival Interceltique de Lorient Pan Celtic Festival Hebridean Celtic Festival Celtic Connections Celtic Media Festival Eisteddfod Sport Bando Bataireacht Camogie Cammag Cnapan Cornish hurling Cornish wrestling Curling Gaelic football ( Ladies' ) Gaelic handball Gouren Rounders Highland games Hurling Road bowls Shinty Welsh handball Politics Nationalism Breton nationalism history reunification Cornish nationalism status Irish nationalism Isle of Man Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles Scottish nationalism national identity Welsh nationalism national identity Autonomy Cornish devolution Scottish devolution Welsh devolution Independence Breton independence Scottish independence Welsh independence United Ireland and Irish republicanism Pan-Celticism Celtic League Celtic Congress Celtic Revival Celtic society Celtic unity Columba Project Languages Brittonic Breton Cornish Welsh Goidelic Irish Manx Scottish Gaelic Mixed Shelta Bungi Creole Beurla Reagaird Ancient Celtic languages Extinct Proto-Celtic Proto-Brittonic Proto-Goidelic Celtiberian Gaulish Galatian Gallaecian Lepontic Noric Cumbric Pictish Hispano-Celtic Cisalpine Gaulish Scottish Gaelic dialects Arran Gaelic Deeside Gaelic Galwegian Gaelic Law and Warfare Law Early Irish law Cyfraith Hywel (Medieval Welsh law) Early Scots law Warfare Gaelic warfare Ceathairne Ceithearn Fianna Gaesatae Gallóglaigh Hobelar Redshanks Trimarcisia Lists Tribes Deities Celtic words in English – in Spanish – in Galician Gaulish words in French Celtic place names in Galicia – in Italy – in Portugal Celts portal v t e Gauls History Battle of the Allia (ca. 387 BC) Celtic settlement of Southeast Europe Galatian War (189 BC) First Transalpine War (125–121 BC) Gallic Wars (58–50 BC) Roman Gaul (50 BC–476 AD) Culture Ambactus Bard Druid Eubages Gallo-Roman culture Nemeton Oppidum Language ( Cisalpine , Galatian ) La Tène culture Religion Vates Vergobret Peoples Belgica Ambiani Aresaces Atrebates Atuatuci Bellovaci Caeracates Caeroesi Caletes Catuslugi Catalauni Condrusi Eburones Leuci Mediomatrici Meldi Menapii Morini Nemetes Nervii Paemani Remi Silvanectes Suessiones Treveri Triboci Vadicassii Veliocasses Viromandui Celtica Abrincatui Ambiliati Aedui Ambarri Andecavi Arouii Arverni Aulerci ( Brannovices , Cenomani , Diablintes , Eburovices ) Bodiocasses Bituriges Cubi Bituriges Vivisci Cadurci Carnutes Coriosolites Durocasses Esuvii Gabali Helvetii Latobrigi Lemovices Lexovii Lingones Mandubii Namnetes Nitiobroges Osismii Parisii Petrocorii Pictones Rauraci Redones Ruteni Sagii Santoni Senones Segusiavi Sequani Tigurini Tricasses Tulingi Turoni Vellavii Venelli Veneti Viducasses Narbonensis Agesinates Albici Allobroges Anatilii Atacini Avatici Bormani Budenicenses Camactulici Cavari Cenomani Comani Dexivates Helvii Libicii Ligauni Longostaletes Memini Nearchi Oxybii Reii Salyes Segobrigii Segovellauni Suelteri Tolosates Tricastini Tricores Tricorii Tritolli Vertamocorii Verucini Vocontii Volcae ( Arecomici and Tectosages ) Vulgientes Alpina Acitavones Adanates Adunicates Alauni Ambidravi Ambilici Ambisontes Aneuniates Ausuciates Avantici Belaci Belouni Benacenses Bergalei Bodiontici Brigantii Brigianii Brixentes Calucones Carni Catenates Catubrini Caturiges Ceutrones Cosuanetes Ecdinii Eguiturii Gallitae Genauni Graioceli Iemerii Ingauni Licates Medulli Nantuates Nemaloni Nemeturii Quariates Rucinates Salassi Savincates Sebaginni Seduni Segovii Segusini Sentii Sogionti Suanetes Suetrii Tebavii Triulatti Ucennii Vediantii Velaunii Venisami Venostes Vennones Veragri Vergunni Vesubiani Vindelici Cisalpina Anamares Anauni Anesiates Arusnates Bagienni Boii Bromanenses Cenomani Gallianates Gennanates Insubres Libicii Marici Montunates Orobii Subinates Taurini Vertamocorii Votodrones Aquitania Boii Cocosates Lactorates Sotiates Tarusates Vasates Eastern Europe Anartes Arabiates Boii Britolagai Cornacates Costoboci Gotini Eravisci Hercuniates Latobici Scordisci ( Dindari and Celegeri ) Serdi Taurisci Varciani Galatia Aigosages Tectosages Tolistobogii Trocmi Pre-Roman settlements Alesia Argentomagus Avaricum Basel-Münsterhügel Bibracte Bibrax Cenabum Cularo Ensérune Entremont Gergovia Magetobria Noreia Tylis Vertillum Part of: Celts v t e History of religions Timeline of religion List of religions and spiritual traditions Major groups Abrahamic Baháʼí Christianity Islam Judaism Rastafari Amerindian Aztec Mayan Inca East Asian Confucianism Taoism Shinto Indian Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Iranian Mithraism Zoroastrianism Manichaeanism Modern Neopaganism Wicca New Thought Kardecist spiritism Historical Prehistoric Paleolithic Near East Egyptian Semitic Mesopotamian Indo-European Baltic Celtic Germanic Greek Gnosticism Neoplatonism Illyro-thracian Roman Slavic Vedic Hinduism Related topics Evolution of morality Evolutionary origin of religions Evolutionary psychology of religion History of atheism History of theology (Greco-Abrahamic) Humanism Irreligion Roman School Secularism v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Paganism (and modern paganism ) Animism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Historical ethnic religions ( list ) (existing and extinct) Asian Ainu Altaic Manchu Mongolian Tengrism Turkic Austroasiatic Sarnaism Vietnamese Indonesia Parmalim Kaharingan Momolianism Kejawèn Malay Philippine Tagalog Marapu Sunda Wiwitan Chinese Hinduism Hindu mythology Dravidian Tamil Kalash Punjabi Vedic Shinto Ryukyuan Korean Miao Tai Ahom Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bathouism Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Bongthingism Burmese Donyi-Polo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism European Albanian Anatolian Hittite Lydian Phrygian Armenian Baltic Old Prussian Latvian Lithuanian Basque Caucasian Circassian Georgian Ossetian Vainakh Celtic Irish Etruscan Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Norse Greek Hellenistic religion Hero cult Sacred mysteries Eleusinian Orphic Samothracian Iberian Cantabrian Castro Gallaecian Lusitanian Italic Camunnian Ligurian Umbrian Minoan Nuragic Paleo-Balkan Dacian Illyrian Thracian Roman Cybele Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Scythian Slavic Uralic Baltic Finnic Hungarian Mari Sami Middle-Eastern and North African Ancient Near Eastern Hurrian Egyptian Nubian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Semitic Arabian Canaanite Iranian Persian Berber Punic Oceanian and Pacific Islander Australian Melanesian Micronesian Nauruan Papuan Polynesian Cook Islander Hawaiian Māori Rapa Nui Tahitian Tongan Sub-Saharan African Akan Bantu Bushongo Kongo Lozi Zulu Dahomean Dinka Efik Hausa Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Odinani San Serer Somali Modern paganism ( movements ) Ethnic African Ausar Auset Godianism American Mexicayotl Native American Church Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Adyghe Habze Uatsdin Celtic Canarian Heathenry Hellenism Hindu Italo-Roman Kemetism Zalmoxianism Romani Semitic Slavic Turko-Mongolic Burkhanism Vattisen Yaly Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mordvin Udmurt Vos Other Neopagan witchcraft Cochrane's Craft Feri Tradition Stregheria Wicca Druidry European Congress of Ethnic Religions Goddess movement Neoshamanism Polytheistic reconstructionism Secular paganism Myth and ritual Veneration of the dead Bear worship Blót Tumulus Dying and rising deity Ethos Folklore Idolatry Magic and religion Megalith Dolmen Menhir Stone row Myth Myth and ritual Mythology Orthopraxy Reincarnation Religion and mythology Ritual Sacred grove Holy well Sacrifice animal human Supernatural magic Trees in mythology Tree of life World tree Totem Virtue Witchcraft Animal worship Christianization Christianity and paganism Christianization of saints and feasts Constantinian shift Neoplatonism Religio licita Virtuous pagan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hj7fp
Cached time: 20250817222822
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.540 seconds
Real time usage: 1.814 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8983/1000000
Revision size: 65163/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 603298/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10181/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 282046/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.818/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18638113/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1268.357      1 -total
 31.74%  402.517      1 Template:Reflist
 17.70%  224.446     28 Template:Cite_book
 11.81%  149.734      4 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.58%  121.565     14 Template:Fix
  8.60%  109.100      1 Template:Celtic_mythology
  8.40%  106.529      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.20%  104.028     25 Template:Navbox
  8.00%  101.473      1 Template:Langx
  6.24%   79.096      1 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2112366:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222822 and revision id 1304562857. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Celtic_religion&oldid=1304562857 " Categories : Ancient Celtic religion Gaulish deities Religion in classical antiquity Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2024 CS1: unfit URL All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from November 2019 Use Oxford spelling from November 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from April 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010 Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles containing Breton-language text Articles containing Cornish-language text Articles containing Irish-language text Articles containing Manx-language text Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language text Articles containing Welsh-language text This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 20:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ancient Celtic religion 31 languages Add topic

