Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Combinatorial computational geometry Toggle Combinatorial computational geometry subsection 1.1 Problem classes 1.1.1 Static problem 1.1.2 Geometric query problems 1.1.3 Dynamic problems 1.1.4 Variations 2 Numerical computational geometry 3 List of algorithms 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 6.1 Journals 6.1.1 Combinatorial/algorithmic computational geometry 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Computational geometry 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Чӑвашла Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenščina کوردی Suomi Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of computer science For the journal, see Computational Geometry (journal) .

Computational geometry is a branch of computer science devoted to the study of algorithms that can be stated in terms of geometry . Some purely geometrical problems arise out of the study of computational geometric algorithms, and such problems are also considered to be part of computational geometry. While modern computational geometry is a recent development, it is one of the oldest fields of computing with a history stretching back to antiquity.

Computational complexity is central to computational geometry, with great practical significance if algorithms are used on very large datasets containing tens or hundreds of millions of points. For such sets, the difference between O ( n 2 ) and O ( n log n ) may be the difference between days and seconds of computation.

The main impetus for the development of computational geometry as a discipline was progress in computer graphics and computer-aided design and manufacturing ( CAD / CAM ), but many problems in computational geometry are classical in nature, and may come from mathematical visualization .

Other important applications of computational geometry include robotics ( motion planning and visibility problems), geographic information systems (GIS) (geometrical location and search, route planning), integrated circuit design (IC geometry design and verification), computer-aided engineering (CAE) (mesh generation), and computer vision ( 3D reconstruction ).

The main branches of computational geometry are: Combinatorial computational geometry , also called algorithmic geometry , which deals with geometric objects as discrete entities. A groundlaying book in the subject by Preparata and Shamos dates the first use of the term "computational geometry" in this sense by 1975.

[ 1 ] Numerical computational geometry , also called machine geometry , computer-aided geometric design (CAGD), or geometric modeling , which deals primarily with representing real-world objects in forms suitable for computer computations in CAD/CAM systems. This branch may be seen as a further development of descriptive geometry and is often considered a branch of computer graphics or CAD. The term "computational geometry" in this meaning has been in use since 1971.

[ 2 ] Although most algorithms of computational geometry have been developed (and are being developed) for electronic computers, some algorithms were developed for unconventional computers (e.g. optical computers [ 3 ] ) Combinatorial computational geometry [ edit ] The primary goal of research in combinatorial computational geometry is to develop efficient algorithms and data structures for solving problems stated in terms of basic geometrical objects: points, line segments, polygons , polyhedra , etc.

Some of these problems seem so simple that they were not regarded as problems at all until the advent of computers . Consider, for example, the closest pair problem : Given n points in the plane, find the two with the smallest distance from each other.

One could compute the distances between all the pairs of points, of which there are n ( n − 1)/2 , then pick the pair with the smallest distance. This brute-force algorithm takes O ( n 2 ) time; i.e. its execution time is proportional to the square of the number of points. A classic result in computational geometry was the formulation of an algorithm that takes O ( n log n ) .

Randomized algorithms that take O ( n ) expected time, [ 4 ] as well as a deterministic algorithm that takes O ( n log log n ) time, [ 5 ] have also been discovered.

Problem classes [ edit ] The core problems in computational geometry may be classified in different ways, according to various criteria. The following general classes may be distinguished.

Static problem [ edit ] In the problems of this category, some input is given and the corresponding output needs to be constructed or found. Some fundamental problems of this type are: Convex hull : Given a set of points, find the smallest convex polyhedron/polygon containing all the points.

Line segment intersection : Find the intersections between a given set of line segments.

Delaunay triangulation Voronoi diagram : Given a set of points, partition the space according to which points are closest to the given points.

Linear programming Closest pair of points : Given a set of points, find the two with the smallest distance from each other.

Farthest pair of points Largest empty circle : Given a set of points, find a largest circle with its center inside of their convex hull and enclosing none of them.

Euclidean shortest path : Connect two points in a Euclidean space (with polyhedral obstacles) by a shortest path.

Polygon triangulation : Given a polygon, partition its interior into triangles Mesh generation Boolean operations on polygons The computational complexity for this class of problems is estimated by the time and space (computer memory) required to solve a given problem instance.

Geometric query problems [ edit ] See also: Spatial query In geometric query problems , commonly known as geometric search problems , the input consists of two parts: the search space part and the query part, which varies over the problem instances. The search space typically needs to be preprocessed , in a way that multiple queries can be answered efficiently.

Some fundamental geometric query problems are: Range searching : Preprocess a set of points, in order to efficiently count the number of points inside a query region.

Point location problem : Given a partitioning of the space into cells, produce a data structure that efficiently tells in which cell a query point is located.

Nearest neighbor : Preprocess a set of points, in order to efficiently find which point is closest to a query point.

Ray tracing : Given a set of objects in space, produce a data structure that efficiently tells which object a query ray intersects first.

If the search space is fixed, the computational complexity for this class of problems is usually estimated by: the time and space required to construct the data structure to be searched in the time (and sometimes an extra space) to answer queries.

For the case when the search space is allowed to vary, see § Dynamic problems .

Dynamic problems [ edit ] Yet another major class is the dynamic problems , in which the goal is to find an efficient algorithm for finding a solution repeatedly after each incremental modification of the input data (addition or deletion input geometric elements). Algorithms for problems of this type typically involve dynamic data structures . Any of the computational geometric problems may be converted into a dynamic one, at the cost of increased processing time. For example, the range searching problem may be converted into the dynamic range searching problem by providing for addition and/or deletion of the points. The dynamic convex hull problem is to keep track of the convex hull, e.g., for the dynamically changing set of points, i.e., while the input points are inserted or deleted.

The computational complexity for this class of problems is estimated by: the time and space required to construct the data structure to be searched in the time and space to modify the searched data structure after an incremental change in the search space the time (and sometimes an extra space) to answer a query.

Variations [ edit ] Some problems may be treated as belonging to either of the categories, depending on the context. For example, consider the following problem.

Point in polygon : Decide whether a point is inside or outside a given polygon.

In many applications this problem is treated as a single-shot one, i.e., belonging to the first class. For example, in many applications of computer graphics a common problem is to find which area on the screen is clicked by a pointer . However, in some applications, the polygon in question is invariant, while the point represents a query. For example, the input polygon may represent a border of a country and a point is a position of an aircraft, and the problem is to determine whether the aircraft violated the border. Finally, in the previously mentioned example of computer graphics, in CAD applications the changing input data are often stored in dynamic data structures, which may be exploited to speed-up the point-in-polygon queries.

In some contexts of query problems there are reasonable expectations on the sequence of the queries, which may be exploited either for efficient data structures or for tighter computational complexity estimates. For example, in some cases it is important to know the worst case for the total time for the whole sequence of N queries, rather than for a single query. See also Amortized analysis .

Numerical computational geometry [ edit ] Main article: computer-aided geometric design This branch is also known as geometric modelling and computer-aided geometric design (CAGD).

Core problems are curve and surface modelling and representation.

The most important instruments here are parametric curves and parametric surfaces , such as Bézier curves , spline curves and surfaces. An important non-parametric approach is the level-set method .

Application areas of computational geometry include shipbuilding, aircraft, and automotive industries.

List of algorithms [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from List of algorithms § Geometry .

[ edit ] Closest pair problem : find the pair of points (from a set of points) with the smallest distance between them Collision detection algorithms: check for the collision or intersection of two given solids Cone algorithm : identify surface points Convex hull algorithms : determining the convex hull of a set of points Chan's algorithm Gift wrapping algorithm or Jarvis march Graham scan Kirkpatrick–Seidel algorithm Quickhull Euclidean distance transform : computes the distance between every point in a grid and a discrete collection of points.

Geometric hashing : a method for efficiently finding two-dimensional objects represented by discrete points that have undergone an affine transformation Gilbert–Johnson–Keerthi distance algorithm : determining the smallest distance between two convex shapes.

Jump-and-Walk algorithm : an algorithm for point location in triangulations Laplacian smoothing : an algorithm to smooth a polygonal mesh Line segment intersection : finding whether lines intersect, usually with a sweep line algorithm Bentley–Ottmann algorithm Shamos–Hoey algorithm Minimum bounding box algorithms : find the oriented minimum bounding box enclosing a set of points Nearest neighbor search : find the nearest point or points to a query point Nesting algorithm : make the most efficient use of material or space Point in polygon algorithms: tests whether a given point lies within a given polygon Point set registration algorithms: finds the transformation between two point sets to optimally align them.

Rotating calipers : determine all antipodal pairs of points and vertices on a convex polygon or convex hull .

Shoelace algorithm : determine the area of a polygon whose vertices are described by ordered pairs in the plane Triangulation Delaunay triangulation Chew's second algorithm : create quality constrained Delaunay triangulations Ruppert's algorithm (also known as Delaunay refinement): create quality Delaunay triangulations Marching triangles : reconstruct two-dimensional surface geometry from an unstructured point cloud Polygon triangulation algorithms: decompose a polygon into a set of triangles Quasitriangulation Voronoi diagrams , geometric dual of Delaunay triangulation Bowyer–Watson algorithm : create voronoi diagram in any number of dimensions Fortune's Algorithm : create voronoi diagram See also [ edit ] List of combinatorial computational geometry topics List of interactive geometry software List of information graphics software List of numerical computational geometry topics List of uniform polyhedra CAD / CAM / CAE Solid modeling Computational topology Computer representation of surfaces Digital geometry Discrete geometry (combinatorial geometry) Space partitioning Tricomplex number Robust geometric computation Wikiversity:Topic:Computational geometry Wikiversity:Computer-aided geometric design References [ edit ] ^ Franco P. Preparata and Michael Ian Shamos (1985).

Computational Geometry – An Introduction .

Springer-Verlag .

ISBN 0-387-96131-3 . 1st edition; 2nd printing, corrected and expanded, 1988.

^ A.R. Forrest, "Computational geometry", Proc. Royal Society London , 321, series 4, 187–195 (1971) ^ Yevgeny B. Karasik (2019).

Optical Computational Geometry .

ISBN 979-8511243344 .

^ S. Khuller and Y. Matias.

A simple randomized sieve algorithm for the closest-pair problem . Inf. Comput., 118(1):34–37, 1995 ( PDF ) ^ S. Fortune and J.E. Hopcroft. "A note on Rabin's nearest-neighbor algorithm". Information Processing Letters, 8(1), pp. 20–23, 1979 Further reading [ edit ] List of books in computational geometry Journals [ edit ] Combinatorial/algorithmic computational geometry [ edit ] Below is the list of the major journals that have been publishing research in geometric algorithms. Please notice with the appearance of journals specifically dedicated to computational geometry, the share of geometric publications in general-purpose computer science and computer graphics journals decreased.

ACM Computing Surveys ACM Transactions on Graphics Acta Informatica Advances in Geometry Algorithmica Ars Combinatoria Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications Communications of the ACM Computer Aided Geometric Design Computer Graphics and Applications Computer Graphics World Computing in Geometry and Topology Discrete & Computational Geometry Geombinatorics Geometriae Dedicata IEEE Transactions on Graphics IEEE Transactions on Computers IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence Information Processing Letters International Journal of Computational Geometry and Applications Journal of Combinatorial Theory , Series B Journal of Computational Geometry Journal of Differential Geometry Journal of the ACM Journal of Algorithms Journal of Computer and System Sciences Management Science Pattern Recognition Pattern Recognition Letters SIAM Journal on Computing SIGACT News ; featured the "Computational Geometry Column" by Joseph O'Rourke Theoretical Computer Science The Visual Computer External links [ edit ] Computational Geometry Computational Geometry Pages Geometry In Action "Strategic Directions in Computational Geometry – Working Group Report" (1996) Journal of Computational Geometry (Annual) Winter School on Computational Geometry Computational Geometry Lab Listen to this article ( 9 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 17 September 2013 ( 2013-09-17 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) v t e Industrial and applied mathematics Computational Algorithms design analysis Automata theory Automated theorem proving Coding theory Computational geometry Constraint satisfaction Constraint programming Computational logic Cryptography Information theory Statistics Mathematical software Arbitrary-precision arithmetic Finite element analysis Tensor software Interactive geometry software Optimization software Statistical software Numerical-analysis software Numerical libraries Solvers Discrete Computer algebra Computational number theory Combinatorics Graph theory Discrete geometry Analysis Approximation theory Clifford analysis Clifford algebra Differential equations Ordinary differential equations Partial differential equations Stochastic differential equations Differential geometry Differential forms Gauge theory Geometric analysis Dynamical systems Chaos theory Control theory Functional analysis Operator algebra Operator theory Harmonic analysis Fourier analysis Multilinear algebra Exterior Geometric Tensor Vector Multivariable calculus Exterior Geometric Tensor Vector Numerical analysis Numerical linear algebra Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations Numerical methods for partial differential equations Validated numerics Variational calculus Probability theory Distributions ( random variables ) Stochastic processes / analysis Path integral Stochastic variational calculus Mathematical physics Analytical mechanics Lagrangian Hamiltonian Field theory Classical Conformal Effective Gauge Quantum Statistical Topological Perturbation theory in quantum mechanics Potential theory String theory Bosonic Topological Supersymmetry Supersymmetric quantum mechanics Supersymmetric theory of stochastic dynamics Algebraic structures Algebra of physical space Feynman integral Poisson algebra Quantum group Renormalization group Representation theory Spacetime algebra Superalgebra Supersymmetry algebra Decision sciences Game theory Operations research Optimization Social choice theory Statistics Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Other applications Biology Chemistry Psychology Sociology " The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences " Related Mathematics Organizations Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Japan Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Société de Mathématiques Appliquées et Industrielles International Council for Industrial and Applied Mathematics European Community on Computational Methods in Applied Sciences Category Mathematics portal / outline / topics list v t e Computer science Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System .

Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very-large-scale integration System on a chip (SoC) Energy consumption (green computing) Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Processor Size / Form Computer systems organization Computer architecture Computational complexity Dependability Embedded system Real-time computing Cyber-physical system Fault tolerance Wireless sensor network Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domain-specific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Control variable Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software engineering Software maintenance Programming team Open-source model Theory of computation Model of computation Stochastic Formal language Automata theory Computability theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Theoretical computer science Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security hacker Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Human–centered computing Interaction design Augmented reality Virtual reality Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Human–computer interaction Mobile computing Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multi-task learning Cross-validation Graphics Animation Rendering Photograph manipulation Graphics processing unit Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing Quantum computing E-commerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Differentiable computing Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Category Outline Glossaries Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐s2zf8
Cached time: 20250816125641
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.446 seconds
Real time usage: 0.587 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1202/1000000
Revision size: 15216/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 78163/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1075/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 32953/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.287/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6186924/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  467.572      1 -total
 22.74%  106.326      4 Template:Navbox
 20.93%   97.854      1 Template:Reflist
 19.50%   91.177      1 Template:Applied_mathematics
 17.81%   83.275      2 Template:Cite_book
 14.72%   68.830      1 Template:Short_description
 13.66%   63.859      1 Template:Spoken_Wikipedia
 11.62%   54.354      1 Template:Excerpt
  8.27%   38.660      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.69%   31.283      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:176927:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816125641 and revision id 1297021882. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computational_geometry&oldid=1297021882 " Categories : Computational geometry Computational fields of study Geometry processing Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 18:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Computational geometry 30 languages Add topic

