Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mural sextants 2 Framed sextants Toggle Framed sextants subsection 2.1 Construction 2.2 Usage 2.3 Well-known framed sextants 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Sextant (astronomy) 8 languages العربية Català Español فارسی हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Sextant (astronomical) ) Measuring instrument in Astronomy In astronomy , sextants are devices depicting a sixth of a circle, used primarily for measuring the position of stars . There are two types of astronomical sextants, mural instruments and frame-based instruments.

They are of significant historical importance, but have been replaced over time by transit telescopes , other astrometry techniques, and satellites such as Hipparcos .

Mural sextants [ edit ] Remains of Ulugh Beg's mural sextant, Samarkand , Uzbekistan, 15th century.

Main article: Mural instrument The first known mural sextant was constructed in Ray, Iran , by Abu-Mahmud al-Khujandi in 994.

[ 1 ] To measure the obliquity of the ecliptic , al-Khujandī invented a device that he called al-Fakhri sextant (al-suds al Fakhrī), a reference to his patron, Buwayhid ruler, Fakhr al Dawla (976–997). This instrument was a sixty-degree arc on a wall aligned along a meridian (north–south) line. Al Khujandi's instrument was larger than previous instruments; it had a radius of about twenty meters.

[ 2 ] The main improvement incorporated in al-Fakhri sextants over earlier instruments was bringing the precision of reading to seconds while older instruments could only be read in degrees and minutes. This was confirmed by al-Birūni , al-Marrākushī and al-Kāshī . Al-Khujandī used his device to measure the sun's angle above the horizon at the summer and winter solstices ; these two measurements allow computation of the latitude of the sextant's location and the obliquity of the ecliptic.

[ 1 ] Ulugh Beg constructed a Fakhri Sextant that had a radius of 40.4 meters, the largest instrument of its type in the 15th century. Housed in the Ulugh Beg Observatory , the sextant had a finely constructed arc with a staircase on either side to provide access for the assistants who performed the measurements.

[ citation needed ] Framed sextants [ edit ] Tycho Brahe 's sextant, used for measuring the angular distances between stars.

A sextant based on a large metal frame had an advantage over a mural instrument in that it could be used at any orientation. This allows the measure of angular distances between astronomical bodies.

[ citation needed ] These instruments differ substantially from a navigator's sextant in that the latter is a reflecting instrument. The navigator's sextant uses mirrors to bring the image of the sun, moon or a star to the horizon and measure the altitude of the object. Due to the use of the mirrors, the angle measured is twice the length of the instrument's arc. Hence, the navigator's sextant measures 120° on an arc with an included angle of 60°. By comparison, the astronomical sextants are large and measure angles directly — a 60° arc will measure at most 60°.

[ citation needed ] Construction [ edit ] These large sextants are made primarily of wood, brass or a combination of both materials. The frame is heavy enough to be stiff and provide reliable measures without flexural changes in the instrument compromising the quality of the observation.  The frame is mounted on a support structure that holds it in position while in use. In some cases, the position of the sextant can be adjusted to allow measurements to be made with any instrument orientation. Owing to the size and weight of the instrument, attention was paid to balancing it so that it could be moved with ease.

[ citation needed ] Observations were typically made with an alidade , though newer versions could use a telescope . In some cases, a system of counter-weights and pulleys were used to allow the observer to manipulate the instrument in spite of its size.

Usage [ edit ] Johannes and Elisabetha Hevelius observing with the sextant.

These instruments were used in much the same way as smaller instruments, with effort possibly scaled due to the size. Some of the instruments might have needed more than one person to operate.

If the sextant is permanently fixed in position, only the position of the alidade or similar index need be determined.  In that case, the observer moved the alidade until the object of interest is centered in the sights and then reads the graduations marked on the arc.

For instruments that could be moved, the process was more complex.  It was necessary to sight the object with two lines.  The edge of the instrument would typically be supplied with sights and the instrument was aligned with one of the two objects of interest. The alidade was then aligned with the second object as well. Once each object was centred in one set of sights, the reading could be taken.  This could be a challenge for a moving star observed with a very large instrument as a single person might not be able to confirm both sights with ease; an assistant was a great benefit. The illustration of the Hevelius instrument to the right shows how two persons would use such a sextant: his wife Elisabetha is aligning the instrument while Johannes sets the alidade.

Well-known framed sextants [ edit ] Taqi al-Din used a sextant for the determination of the equinoxes .

Tycho Brahe used a sextant for many of his stellar position measurements.

Johannes Hevelius used a sextant with a particularly ingenious alidade to provide stellar position measurements of great accuracy.

John Flamsteed , the first Astronomer Royal , used a sextant at the Royal Greenwich Observatory .

See also [ edit ] List of astronomical instruments References [ edit ] ^ a b O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Abu Mahmud Hamid ibn al-Khidr Al-Khujandi" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ Tekeli, Sevim (1958), 'Nasiruddin, Takiyuddin ve Tycho Brahe'nin Rasat Aletlerinin mukayesesi'.

Ankara Universitesi Dil ve Tarih-Cografya Fakültesi Dergesi , XVI, p. 4.

(in Turkish) v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy Portals : Astronomy Stars Solar System Science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sextant_(astronomy)&oldid=1213704238 " Categories : Astronomical instruments Measuring instruments Historical scientific instruments History of astronomy Iranian inventions Hidden categories: Articles with Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 This page was last edited on 14 March 2024, at 17:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sextant (astronomy) 8 languages Add topic

