Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Role 3 Tropical Cyclone Products Issued 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Fiji Meteorological Service 6 languages Deutsch Français Português ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Meteorological service of Fiji Fiji Meteorological Service Agency overview Formed July 1, 1975 ; 50 years ago ( 1975-07-01 ) Preceding agency New Zealand Meteorological Service Headquarters Nadi Airport Nadi, Fiji Agency executive Misaeli Funaki, Director Parent agency Ministry of Infrastructure and Meteorological Services Website Fiji Meteorological Service The Fiji Meteorological Service ( FMS ) is a Department of the government of Fiji responsible for providing weather forecasts and is based on the grounds of Nadi Airport in Nadi .

[ 1 ] The current director of Fiji Meteorological Service is Misaeli Funaki. Since 1985, FMS has been responsible for naming and tracking tropical cyclones in the Southwest Pacific region.  Current Meteorologists working at FMS have a Graduate Diploma in Meteorology from the Australian Bureau of Meteorology .

History [ edit ] Before World War II, weather observations in Fiji were the responsibility of the harbour board and limited to recording various meteorological details at various locations around the island nation.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] During the 1939 Defence Conference in Wellington, New Zealand, Fiji's capital Suva was identified as the location of an upgraded meteorological service for the Pacific region.

[ 3 ] As a result, a facility was established at Laucala Bay during 1940, before it was expanded during the following year to support the operations of the Royal New Zealand Air Force .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] After the United States of America entered the war, meteorological operations were started at the Nadi Airport by the United States Army Air Forces Meteorological Unit during 1942.

[ 3 ] After the war, the Nadi Weather Office (NWO) was converted to a civilian unit, before Laucala Bay's forecasting unit was moved and merged with Nadi's forecasting unit.

[ 3 ] Role [ edit ] Since June 1995, the central weather office of Fiji, Nadi, has been one of six Regional Specialized Meteorological Centers within the World Weather Watch program of the World Meteorological Organization .  Its specialty is forecasting tropical cyclones south of the equator to the 25th parallel south , and between the 160th meridian east and 120th meridian west longitude .  FMS issues public and marine weather bulletins for Kiribati , Northern Cooks, Southern Cooks, Tuvalu , Tokelau , Niue , Nauru and Fiji . The Fiji Meteorological Services, as per agreement with the International Civil Aviation Organization, functions as the Meteorological Watch Office for the Nadi Flight Information Region (FIR), which
extends from Western Kiribati to Tuvalu , Fiji , Vanuatu , Wallis and Futuna and New Caledonia .
However, it still provides certain aviation forecast services to Cook Islands, Christmas Island (Line Islands), Samoa , Niue and Tonga which are situated outside the Nadi FIR boundary. Aviation products issued by FMS include Terminal Aerodrome Forecasts (TAF), Trend Type Forecasts (TTF), Area Forecasts, Route Forecasts, Inclement Weather Warnings for Nadi and Nausori Airports, Sigmets and Tropical Cyclone Advisories (TCA). Routine 24 hour TAF's are issued for Nadi (NFFN), Nausori (NFNA), Rarotonga (NCRG), Fuamotu (NFTF), Vavau (NFTV), Faleolo (NFSA), Niue, Tarawa (NGTA), and Christmas Island (PLCH) airports. 24 hour TAF's are also issued for Funafuti (NGFU) airport on certain days. TAF's (validity periods of less than 24 hours) are also issued for Aitutaki (NCAI), Manihiki (NCMH), Penrhyn (NCPY), Haapai (NFTL), Labasa (NFNL) and Rotuma (NFNR) airports.

Tropical Cyclone Products Issued [ edit ] Special Weather Bulletins (SWB's), Tropical Disturbance Advisories (TDA's), Special Advisory for Samoa , Tropical Cyclone Advisories (TCA's), Tropical Cyclone Sigmets, CREX bulletins, International Marine Warnings associated with tropical cyclones (WTPS and WHPS) and Tropical cyclone forecast and uncertainty tracks are the tropical cyclone products issued by FMS.

See also [ edit ] 2025–26 South Pacific cyclone season Meteorological Service of New Zealand Limited Australian Bureau of Meteorology References [ edit ] ^ "Contact Us" . Fiji Meteorological Service . Retrieved 2022-10-17 .

Fiji Meteorological Service Korowai Road, NAP 0351 Nadi Airport ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-04-22 . Retrieved 2020-06-24 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ a b c d e RA V Tropical Cyclone Committee for the South Pacific and the South-East Indian Ocean.

Fact-Finding Mission to Fiji, Nadi and Suva, Fiji, 9-13 July 2007 (Mission Report). World Meteorological Organization.

^ "Fiji Meteorology Service - Past, Present and Future | Pacific Environment" .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Agencies of Fiji Civil Aviation Authority of Fiji Consumer Council of Fiji Fiji Commerce Commission Fiji Financial Intelligence Unit Fiji Human Rights Commission Fiji Meteorological Service Fiji Sports Council Housing Authority of Fiji National Trust of Fiji Public Service Commission of Fiji v t e National meteorological organizations Africa Algeria Ghana Mozambique South Africa Americas Argentina Bermuda Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Ecuador Guatemala Mexico Peru United States Uruguay Asia Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan China Hong Kong (PRC) India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan North Korea South Korea Macau (PRC) Malaysia Pakistan Palestine Philippines Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Taiwan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Vietnam Europe Austria Belgium Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Ukraine Oceania Australia Fiji New Zealand Réunion (France) Tonga Tuvalu Regional: Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts European Severe Storms Laboratory Global: World Meteorological Organization Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fiji_Meteorological_Service&oldid=1222234073 " Categories : 1975 establishments in Fiji Government agencies established in 1975 Governmental meteorological agencies in Oceania Geography of Fiji Government agencies of Fiji Regional Specialized Meteorological Centres Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 May 2024, at 18:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fiji Meteorological Service 6 languages Add topic

