Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Reza Davari Ardakani 7 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français Igbo مصرى Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Iranian philosopher (born 1933) Reza Davari Ardakani Born ( 1933-07-06 ) 6 July 1933 (age 92) Ardakan , Iran Occupation President of Academy of Sciences of Iran (1998–2023) Relatives Mohammad Jafar Eghbal (son-in-law) [ 1 ] Awards Order of Knowledge (1st class) [ 2 ] Philosophical work Era 21st century Philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental Main interests Heidegger 's philosophy Occidentalism Notable ideas Criticism of the West One or more poems read by Reza Davari Ardakani Reza Davari Ardakani ( Persian : رضا داوری اردکانی ; born 6 July 1933, in Ardakan ) is an Iranian philosopher who was influenced by Martin Heidegger , and a distinguished emeritus professor of philosophy at the University of Tehran . He is also the current member of the Iranian Academy of Sciences and former President of Academy from 1998 to 2023. He is known for his works on Intellect, politics, and underdevelopment.

[ 3 ] Abdolhossein Nikgohar, Reza Davari and Siroos Sahami , Tomb of Sadegh Hedayat , Père Lachaise Cemetery, Paris, April 9, 1974 Life [ edit ] Davari received primary and secondary education in Ardakan, and after finishing school became a teacher in 1951. In 1954, he entered the University of Tehran as an undergraduate, gaining a BA and in 1967 a PhD in philosophy .

[ 4 ] He is currently professor Emeritus of philosophy at Tehran University. From 1979 to 1981, he was dean at the faculty of literature and humanities , University of Tehran, and the head of Iranian National Commission for UNESCO from 1979 to 1982. Davari was the editor-in-chief of Farhang Journal .

[ 5 ] Davari and Abdolkarim Soroush have engaged in a series of philosophical debates in post-revolutionary Iran.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Intellectual movements in Iran References [ edit ] ^ "About the different celebration of the 80th birthday of the Iranian philosopher/ a ceremony that has been the topic of debate in the media and elites for a week" .

www.khabaronline.ir (in Persian). 14 July 2013 . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ نشان‌های دولتی در روزهای پایانی خاتمی و احمدی‌نژاد به چه‌کسانی رسید؟ .

Tasnim News Agency (in Persian). 24 August 2013 . Retrieved 15 April 2016 .

^ A Comparative Investigation of Political Thoughts of Davari and Soroush Regarding the West ^ a b Şerif Mardi, Cultural transitions in the Middle East , 1994, BRILL, p. 238.

^ Davari's Life ^ Jacques Waardenburg, Muslims and others , 2003, Walter de Gruyter, pp. 491–2 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Reza Davari Ardakani .

Reza Davari Ardakani's official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat 2 National Germany United States Czech Republic Poland Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX This biography of an Iranian philosopher is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reza_Davari_Ardakani&oldid=1299646585 " Categories : People from Ardakan University of Tehran alumni Academic staff of the University of Tehran 1933 births Living people Academic staff of the Islamic Azad University Heidegger scholars Existentialists 20th-century Iranian philosophers 21st-century Iranian philosophers Philosophers of culture Phenomenologists Philosophers of nihilism Recipients of the Order of Knowledge Farabi scholars Iranian Science and Culture Hall of Fame recipients in Philosophy Faculty of Letters and Humanities of the University of Tehran alumni Academy of Sciences of Iran members Iranian philosophy academics Asian philosopher stubs Iranian academic biography stubs Hidden categories: CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) CS1 uses Persian-language script (fa) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles containing Persian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 16:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reza Davari Ardakani 7 languages Add topic

