Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Context 2 Content 3 Divino Afflante Spiritu 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Providentissimus Deus 13 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Papal encyclical Providentissimus Deus Latin for 'The most provident God' Encyclical of Pope Leo XIII Signature date 18 November 1893 Subject On the Study of Holy Scripture Number 49 of 85 of the pontificate Text In English ← Non Mediocri Caritatis → Providentissimus Deus , "On the Study of Holy Scripture ", was an encyclical letter issued by Pope Leo XIII on 18 November 1893. In it, he reviewed the history of Bible study from the time of the Church Fathers to the present, spoke against the errors of the Rationalists and " higher critics ", and outlined principles of scripture study and guidelines for how scripture was to be taught in seminaries .
He also addressed the issues of apparent contradictions between the Bible and physical science , or between one part of scripture and another, and how such apparent contradictions can be resolved.

Leo XIII, 1885 Context [ edit ] Providentissimus Deus followed earlier efforts on the part of Pope Leo to promote Catholic education. In 1878, he had encouraged the study of history and archaeology. The 1879 encyclical Aeterni Patris promoted the study of scholastic philosophy. In 1887 he encouraged the study of the natural sciences, and in 1891 opened the Vatican Observatory.

[ 1 ] Catholic studies in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries avoided the use of critical methodology because of its rationalist tendencies. Frequent political revolutions, bitter opposition of liberalism to the church, and the expulsion of religious orders from France and Germany, made the church understandably suspicious of the new intellectual currents of the period.

[ 2 ] In 1892 Leo authorized the École Biblique in Jerusalem , the first Catholic school specifically dedicated to the critical study of the Bible. At the turn of the 20th century the official Catholic attitude to the study of Holy Scripture was one of cautious advance, and at the same time of a growing appreciation of what had promise for the future.

[ 3 ] [ permanent dead link ] With Providentissimus Deus , Pope Leo gave the first formal authorization for the use of critical methods in biblical scholarship.

[ 4 ] In 1902, Pope Leo XIII instituted the Pontifical Biblical Commission , which was to adapt Roman Catholic Biblical studies to modern scholarship and to protect Scripture against attacks.

[ 5 ] Content [ edit ] The encyclical contains both a polemic against rationalism, and a defense of divine authorship, inspiration, and inerrancy.

[ 4 ] Leo responded to two challenges to biblical authority, both of which arose during the 19th century.

The historical-critical method of analyzing scripture questioned the reliability of the Bible.  Leo acknowledged the possibility of errors introduced by scribes but forbade the interpretation that only some of scripture is inerrant, while other elements are fallible. Leo condemned that use that certain scholars made of new evidence, clearly referring to Alfred Firmin Loisy and Maurice d'Hulst , although not by name.

[ 6 ] "[T]hose who maintain that an error is possible in any genuine passage of the sacred writings, either pervert the Catholic notion of inspiration, or make God the author of such error." [ 7 ] Leo then quotes Augustine: "And if in these Books I meet anything which seems contrary to truth, I shall not hesitate to conclude either that the text is faulty, or that the translator has not expressed the meaning of the passage, or that I myself do not understand." [ 8 ] "But he must not on that account consider that it is forbidden, when just cause exists, to push inquiry and exposition beyond what the Fathers have done; provided he carefully observes the rule so wisely laid down by St. Augustine-not to depart from the literal and obvious sense, except only where reason makes it untenable or necessity requires./" [ 9 ] Leo argued that as science and theology are separate disciplines they do not contradict each other, provided that scholars keep to their respective areas of expertise. The scientist should not view the biblical writers as explaining the visible world, as that was not their intent. Biblical scholars should be aware that the writers may have used figurative language or descriptions from appearances.

[ 4 ] Leo endorsed the study of the Oriental languages and of the art of criticism. "...[I]t is most proper that Professors of Sacred Scripture and theologians should master those tongues in which the sacred Books were originally written; …" [ 10 ] At first, both conservatives and liberals found elements in the encyclical to which to appeal. Over the next decade, however, Modernism spread and the encyclical was increasingly interpreted in a conservative sense.

[ 6 ] This encyclical was part of an ongoing conflict between Modernists and conservatives.

Divino Afflante Spiritu [ edit ] On September 30, 1943, Pope Pius XII issued his encyclical on “The Most Opportune Way to Promote Biblical Studies,” Divino Afflante Spiritu (“Inspired by the Divine Spirit”), in commemoration of Providentissimus Deus .

See also [ edit ] Divino afflante Spiritu – Pius XII on study of scripture List of encyclicals of Pope Leo XIII Laetitiae sanctae Fundamentalist–Modernist controversy – Similar debates about critical biblical scholarship in the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America Biblical criticism § Catholic criticism – A history of Catholic attitudes toward biblical criticism References [ edit ] ^ Murphy, Richard T. (1943).

"The Teachings of the Encyclical "Providentissimus Deus" " .

The Catholic Biblical Quarterly .

5 (2): 125– 140.

ISSN 0008-7912 .

JSTOR 43718495 .

^ Donahue, John (1993-09-18).

"Biblical Scholarship 50 years After Divino Afflante Spiritu: From September 18, 1993" .

America Magazine . Retrieved 2025-03-30 .

^ "Regarding history of Biblical interpretation" .

Catholic Sentinel . 2011-12-13 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .

^ a b c Prior, Joseph G. (1999).

The Historical Critical Method in Catholic Exegesis . Pontificia università gregoriana.

ISBN 978-88-7652-825-5 .

^ Cross, Frank Leslie; Livingstone, Elizabeth A. (2005). "Biblical Commission".

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ a b Cross, Frank Leslie; Livingstone, Elizabeth A. (2005). "Provdentissimus Deus".

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ Providentissimus Deus, §21 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFProvidentissimus_Deus,_§21 ( help ) ^ Augustine. Ep. lxxxii., i. et crebrius alibi ^ Pope Leo XIII (1893-11-18).

"Providentissiumus Deus" .

The Vatican . §15 . Retrieved 2025-03-30 .

^ Providentissimus Deus, §17 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFProvidentissimus_Deus,_§17 ( help ) External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Providentissimus Deus Text of Providentissimus Deus v t e Catholic Church and the Bible Background Biblical canon ( Canon of Trent and Deuterocanonical books ) Septuagint Vetus Latina Vulgate ( Sixtine Vulgate and Sixto-Clementine Vulgate ) Post-Vatican II theology Events Council of Rome (382) Synod of Hippo (393) Councils of Carthage (397 and 419) Council of Florence (1431) Council of Trent (1545) Documents Prologus Galeatus Gelasian Decree Providentissimus Deus Lamentabili sane exitu Pascendi Dominici gregis Divino afflante Spiritu Dei verbum ( Second Vatican Council ) Holy See Pontifical Biblical Institute ( Biblica · Elenchus of Biblica · Pontifical Biblical Institute Library ) Pontifical Biblical Commission Organisations École Biblique ( Revue Biblique ) Studium Biblicum Franciscanum ( Liber Annuus ) Catholic Biblical Association ( Catholic Biblical Quarterly ) Bible portal · Catholicism portal Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Providentissimus_Deus&oldid=1300800602 " Categories : Catholic Church and science Biblical studies 1893 in Christianity 1893 documents Encyclicals of Pope Leo XIII Hidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 13:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Providentissimus Deus 13 languages Add topic

