Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Mythology Toggle Mythology subsection 2.1 Oreithyia 2.2 Other love affairs 2.3 Other traditions 3 Aquilo (Septentrio) 4 Outside Greco-Roman culture 5 Genealogy 6 Gallery 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Boreas 43 languages العربية Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Frysk Galego Հայերեն Ido Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Boreas (god) ) Greek god of the north wind For other uses, see Boreas (disambiguation) .

Boreas God of the north wind, storms, and winter Member of the Anemoi Greco-Buddhist fragment of the god Boreas with billowing cloak ( velificatio ) overhead.

Hadda, Afghanistan .

Abode Sky , Mount Olympus Symbol Conch shell Genealogy Parents Astraeus and Eos Siblings Winds ( Eurus , Notus and Zephyrus ), Eosphorus , the Stars, Memnon , Emathion , Astraea Consort Oreithyia Children Boreads , Chione , Cleopatra , Butes , Haemus , Upis , Cyparissia, twelve colts Equivalents Roman Aquilo Boreas ( / ˌ b ɔː r i .

ə s / , UK : / ˌ b ɒ r i .

ə s / , UK : / ˌ b ɒ r i .

æ s / , [ 1 ] Βορέας , Boréas ; also Βορρᾶς , Borrhâs ) [ 2 ] is the Greek god of the cold north wind , storms, and winter. Although he was normally taken as the north wind, the Roman writers Aulus Gellius and Pliny the Elder both took Boreas as a northeast wind, equivalent to the Roman god Aquilo or Septentrio .

[ 3 ] Boreas is depicted as being very strong, with a violent temper to match. He was frequently shown as a winged old man or sometimes as a young man with shaggy hair and beard, holding a conch shell and wearing a billowing cloak.

[3] Boreas's most known myth is his abduction of the Athenian princess Oreithyia .

Description [ edit ] Boreas' rape of Oreithyia, Apulian red-figure oenochoe, 360 BC, Louvre.

Boreas, like the rest of the wind gods, was said to be the son of Eos , the goddess of the dawn, by her husband Astraeus , a minor star-god.

[ 4 ] He is thus brother to the rest of the Anemoi (the wind gods), the five star-gods and the justice goddess Astraea .

Boreas was closely associated with horses, storms, and winter. He was said to have fathered twelve colts, after taking the form of a stallion, to the mares of Erichthonius , king of Dardania . These were said to be able to run across a field of grain without trampling the plants.

Pliny the Elder ( Natural History iv.35 and viii.67) thought that mares might stand with their hindquarters to the North Wind and bear foals without a stallion. The Greeks believed that his home was in Thrace, and Herodotus and Pliny both describe a northern land known as Hyperborea "Beyond the North Wind" where people lived in complete happiness and had extraordinarily long lifespans.

He is said to have fathered three giant Hyperborean priests of Apollo by Chione .

Pausanias wrote that Boreas had snakes instead of feet, though in art he was usually depicted with winged human feet. In ancient art, he is usually depicted as a bearded older man.

Mythology [ edit ] Oreithyia [ edit ] Boreas abducts Oreithyia, ca 500s BC, Archaeological Museum of Delos .

Boreas was said to have kidnapped Orithyia , an Athenian princess, from the Ilisos . Boreas had taken a fancy to Orithyia and had initially pleaded for her favours, hoping to persuade her. When this failed, he reverted to his usual temper and abducted her as she danced on the banks of the Ilisos. Boreas wrapped Orithyia up in a cloud, raped her, and with her, Boreas fathered two sons—the Boreads , Zethes and Calais, who were part of the crew of the Argo as Argonauts [ 5 ] [ 6 ] —and two daughters— Chione and Cleopatra .

From then on, the Athenians saw Boreas as a relative by marriage. When Athens was threatened by Xerxes , the people prayed to Boreas, who was said to have then caused winds to sink 400 Persian ships. A cult was established in Athens in 480 B. C. E. in gratitude to the Boreas for destroying the approaching Persian fleet.

[ 7 ] A similar event had occurred twelve years earlier, and Herodotus writes: [ 8 ] Now I cannot say if this was really why the Persians were caught at anchor by the stormwind, but the Athenians are quite positive that, just as Boreas helped them before, so Boreas was responsible for what happened on this occasion also. And when they went home they built the god a shrine by the River Ilissus.

Two other cases of Boreas being honored by Greek states for similar assistance have been described, in Megalopolis (against Laconia ) and in Thurii (against Syracuse ). The latter case had Boreas being granted citizenship and a land plot.

[ 9 ] The abduction of Orithyia was popular in Athens before and after the Persian War, and was frequently depicted on vase paintings. In these paintings, Boreas was portrayed as a bearded man in a tunic, with shaggy hair that is sometimes frosted and spiked. The abduction was also dramatized in Aeschylus 's lost play Oreithyia .

Other love affairs [ edit ] Relief of Boreas in the Tower of the Winds , Athens .

In some versions of Hyacinthus 's story, Boreas supplants his brother Zephyrus as the wind-god that bore a one-sided love for the beautiful Spartan prince, who preferred Apollo over him.

[ 10 ] In other accounts, Boreas was the father of Butes (by another woman) and the lover of the nymph Pitys . In one story, both Pan and Boreas vied for Pitys's affections, and tried to make her choose between them. To impress her, Boreas uprooted all the trees with his might. Pan only laughed, and Pitys chose him instead of Boreas. Angry, Boreas chased Pitys down and threw her off a cliff, killing her. Gaia, pitying the girl, changed her dead body into a pine tree.

[ 11 ] During the journey of the Argo , Argonauts Zetes and Calais, Boreas's sons, describe Apollo as "beloved of our sire", perhaps implying a romantic connection between the two gods.

[ 12 ] Phoebus and Boreas , Jean-Baptiste Oudry 's cosmic interpretation of La Fontaine's fable, 1729/34 King Erichthonius of Troy had in his possession three thousand mares. Boreas fell in love with them as they pastured in the grasslands, and took the form of a dark-maned stallion in order to mate with them. Thus he fathered twelve colts on these mares.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] In the words of William Smith , this was "commonly explained as a mere figurative mode of expressing the extraordinary swiftness of those horses." [ 14 ] Other traditions [ edit ] Boreas is featured in the oldest tale concerning the creation of the cypress tree; the myth goes that in order to honour his dead daughter Cyparissia, Boreas planted a new tree, the cypress. The inclusion of Boreas in the story continues the pattern of a wind god appearing in the story of a plant (like he does in the story of Pitys, or Zephyrus in the stories of Cyparissus and Hyacinthus).

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] When the goddess Leto , pregnant with Artemis and Apollo, was due, Boreas was ordered by Zeus to bring her to Poseidon , who in turn led her to the island of Ogygia where she could give birth to the twins, as Zeus' wife Hera had ordered all places and land to shun Leto.

[ 17 ] In an Aesop fable , Boreas and his uncle Helios the sun god argued about which one between them was the strongest god. They agreed that whoever was able to make a passing traveller remove his cloak would be declared the winner. Boreas was the one to try his luck first; but no matter how hard he blew, he could not remove the man's cloak, instead making him wrap his cloak around him even tighter. Helios shone bright then, and the traveller, overcome with the heat, removed his cloak, giving him the victory (the moral being that persuasion is better than force).

[ 18 ] According to Pausanias , Boreas blessed Musaeus with the gift of flight.

[ 19 ] When Sirius , the dog star, began to burn hot after he could not have his beloved Opora , a minor goddess connected to the harvest, Boreas dealt with the intense heat by ordering his sons to deliver Opora to Sirius, while he cooled the earth down with blast of cold wind.

[ 20 ] Aquilo (Septentrio) [ edit ] Terracotta lekythos with Boreas abducting Orithyia, 400–375 AD NAMA Greece .

The Roman equivalent of Boreas was Aquilo .

[ 21 ] [ non-primary source needed ] This north (and slightly east) wind [ 22 ] was associated with winter. The poet Virgil writes: [ 23 ] Interea magnum sol circumvolvitur annum, et glacialis hiemps aquilonibus asperat undas.

Now had the sun rolled through the year's full circle, and the waves were rough with icy winter's northern gales [ 24 ] For the wind which came directly from the north the Romans sometimes used the name Septentrio , which refers to the seven ( septem ) stars of the Plow or Big Dipper constellation. The name "Septentrio" gave rise to the pre-modern compass point Septentrionalis .

[ 25 ] Outside Greco-Roman culture [ edit ] Greek deities were abundantly used in Greco-Buddhist art , so too Boreas and its velificatio depiction element. Boreas became the Japanese wind god Fujin through the Greco-Buddhist Wardo /Oado and Chinese Feng Bo /Feng Po ("Uncle Wind"; among various other names).

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Genealogy [ edit ] Boreas's family tree [ 29 ] Uranus Gaia Pontus Oceanus Tethys Hyperion Theia Crius Eurybia The Rivers The Oceanids Helios Selene [ 30 ] Eos ' Astraeus Pallas Perses BOREAS Anemoi Astraea [ 31 ] Stars Cronus Rhea Coeus Phoebe Hestia Hera Hades Zeus Leto Asteria Demeter Poseidon Iapetus Clymene (or Asia ) [ 32 ] Mnemosyne (Zeus) Themis Atlas [ 33 ] Menoetius Prometheus [ 34 ] Epimetheus The Muses The Horae Gallery [ edit ] Boreas in Art Boreas and Oreithyia , oil o canvas, ca 1896 Evelyn De Morgan .

Boreas abducts Oreithyia, engraving by Stefano della Bella.

Boreas takes Oreithyia as Herse tries to help her sister, Attic red-figure pointed amphora, 470–460 BC.

Boreas detail from an Attic red figure pointed amphora.

Boreas and fallen leaves, Evelyn de Morgan.

Boreas and Oreithyia, Attic red-figure.

The abduction by German painter and illustrator Heinrich Lossow (1840-1897).

Boreas and Oreithyia on a mirror, pos-300 BC, from Eretria.

Boreas abducting Oreithyia , ca. 1800-1812, wood statue by Jan Frans van Geel .

The Rape of Orithyia by Boreas , oil on canvas, by Peter Paul Rubens .

References [ edit ] ^ Wells, John C. (1990).

Longman pronunciation dictionary . Harlow, England: Longman. p. 85.

ISBN 0582053838 .

^ Βορέας , Βορρᾶς .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ [1] Archived 2020-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Aulus Gellius , 2.22.9 ; [2] Archived 2020-11-28 at the Wayback Machine Pliny the Elder N.H. 2.46 .

^ Hesiod , Theogony 378 , Hyginus , Preface ; Nonnus , 6.18 ^ Apollonius Rhodius , 1.211–223 & 2.231–239 ; Apollodorus, 1.9.16 ; Diodorus Siculus , 4.44.2;  Grimal, p. 54 ^ Βορεάδης in Liddell and Scott .

^ Roman, Luke; Roman, Monica (2010).

Encyclopedia of Greek and Roman Mythology . Infobase Publishing. p. 105.

ISBN 978-1-4381-2639-5 .

^ Herodotus , 7.189.3 ^ the Boreas entry at theoi.com ^ Smith 1873 , s.v.

Hyacinthus .

^ Libanius , Progymnasmata , 1.4 ^ Valerius Flaccus , 4.465 ^ Homer , Iliad 20.219 ^ a b Smith 1873 , s.v.

Boreas .

^ Asclepiades FGH 12 F 19.

^ Forbes Irving 1990 , p. 261.

^ Hyginus, Fabulae 140 ; March s.v.

Leto ^ Aesop , Fables 183 ^ Pausanias , 1.22.7 ^ Käppel, Lutz (2006).

"Opora" . In Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.).

Brill's New Pauly . Translated by Christine F. Salazar.

Kiel : Brill Reference Online.

doi : 10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e832290 . Retrieved June 20, 2023 .

^ Aulus Gellius , 2.22.9; Pliny the Elder N.H. 2.46.

^ Lewis and Short, s.v. aquilo .

^ Aeneid 3, lines 284–285 .

^ "P. Vergilius Maro, Aeneid, Book 3, line 278" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu .

^ Vitruvius 1.6.13 Archived 2020-11-28 at the Wayback Machine ; Pliny the Elder 2.51 Archived 2020-11-28 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Konidaris, Dimitrios (2020-06-12).

Chinese Civilisation and Its Aegean Affinities (in Greek). D. N. Konidarēs.

ISBN 978-618-84901-1-6 .

^ Tanabe, Katsumi (2003).

Alexander the Great: East-West Cultural Contact from Greece to Japan . Tokyo: NHK Puromōshon and Tokyo National Museum.

OCLC 937316326 .

^ The Global Connections of Gandhāran Art . Archaeopress Archaeology. 2020.

doi : 10.32028/9781789696950 .

ISBN 978-1-78969-695-0 .

^ Hesiod , Theogony 132–138 , 337–411 , 453–520 , 901–906, 915–920 ; Caldwell, pp. 8–11, tables 11–14.

^ Although usually the daughter of Hyperion and Theia, as in Hesiod , Theogony 371–374 , in the Homeric Hymn to Hermes (4), 99–100 , Selene is instead made the daughter of Pallas the son of Megamedes.

^ Astraea is not mentioned by Hesiod, instead she is given as a daughter of Eos and Astraeus in Hyginus Astronomica 2.25.1 .

^ According to Hesiod , Theogony 507–511 , Clymene, one of the Oceanids , the daughters of Oceanus and Tethys , at Hesiod , Theogony 351 , was the mother by Iapetus of Atlas, Menoetius, Prometheus, and Epimetheus, while according to Apollodorus , 1.2.3 , another Oceanid, Asia was their mother by Iapetus.

^ According to Plato , Critias , 113d–114a , Atlas was the son of Poseidon and the mortal Cleito .

^ In Aeschylus , Prometheus Bound 18, 211, 873 (Sommerstein, pp.

444–445 n. 2 , 446–447 n. 24 , 538–539 n. 113 ) Prometheus is made to be the son of Themis .

Bibliography [ edit ] Diodorus Siculus , Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1–2 . Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888–1890.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Forbes Irving, Paul M. C. (1990).

Metamorphosis in Greek Myths . Oxford, New York, Toronto: Oxford University Press , Clarendon Press .

ISBN 0-19-814730-9 .

Hesiod , Theogony , in The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White , Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Homer , The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PhD in two volumes . Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Hyginus, Gaius Julius , The Myths of Hyginus . Edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960.

Nonnus , Dionysiaca ; translated by Rouse, W H D , I Books I–XV.

Loeb Classical Library No. 344, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1940.

Internet Archive Pausanias , Pausanias Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes.

Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Smith, William (1873).

A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . London: John Murray, printed by Spottiswoode and Co.

Online version at the Perseus.tufts library.

Vergil , Aeneid .

Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Boreas .

Look up Boreas in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

BOREAS from the Theoi Project The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Boreas) v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dr7qt
Cached time: 20250817050602
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.048 seconds
Real time usage: 1.279 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5528/1000000
Revision size: 25588/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 504063/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3468/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 82041/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.550/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16267765/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  907.332      1 -total
 31.14%  282.539     27 Template:Navbox
 18.34%  166.392      1 Template:Reflist
 17.23%  156.303      7 Template:Lang
 16.31%  147.965      1 Template:Greek_religion
 12.69%  115.124      6 Template:Cite_book
  9.63%   87.408      1 Template:Infobox_deity
  7.01%   63.597      1 Template:Short_description
  5.33%   48.322      1 Template:Infobox
  4.69%   42.575     20 Template:Tree_chart Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:32954998:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050602 and revision id 1305312391. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boreas&oldid=1305312391 " Categories : Anemoi Helios in mythology Deities in the Aeneid Zoophilia in culture Male lovers of Apollo Mythological rapists Shapeshifters in Greek mythology Winter deities Ice and snow deities Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Greek-language sources (el) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from March 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 09:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boreas 43 languages Add topic

