Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Apodictic a priorism 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Apodicticity 12 languages Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Occitan Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Propositions that are demonstrably, necessarily or self-evidently true " Apodictic ", also spelled " apodeictic " ( Ancient Greek : ἀποδεικτικός , "capable of demonstration"), is an adjectival expression from Aristotelean logic that refers to propositions that are demonstrably, necessarily or self-evidently true.

[ 1 ] Apodicticity or apodixis is the corresponding abstract noun , referring to logical certainty .

Apodictic propositions contrast with assertoric propositions, which merely assert that something is (or is not) true, and with problematic propositions, which assert only the possibility of something's being true. Apodictic judgments are clearly provable or logically certain. For instance, "Three plus one equals four" is apodictic, because it is true by definition. "Chicago is larger than Omaha" is assertoric. "A corporation could be wealthier than a country" is problematic. In Aristotelian logic, "apodictic" is opposed to " dialectic ", as scientific proof is opposed to philosophical reasoning .

Kant contrasted "apodictic" with "problematic" and "assertoric" in the Critique of Pure Reason (A70/B95 - A76/B101).

[ 2 ] Apodictic a priorism [ edit ] Hans Reichenbach , one of the founders of logical positivism , offered a modified version of Immanuel Kant 's a priorism by distinguishing between apodictic a priorism and constitutive a priorism .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Apophantic – Specific type of declaratory statement References [ edit ] ^ Dictionary definitions of apodictic , from dictionary.com, including material from the Random House Unabridged Dictionary , Random House, Inc.

(2006), The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language , Fourth Edition, 2006 by Houghton Mifflin Company , and WordNet 3.0, Princeton University 2006.

^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Apodictic" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 183.

^ Mormann, Thomas (2012).

"Toward a Theory of the Pragmatic a Priori: From Carnap to Lewis and Beyond" . In Creath, Richard (ed.).

Rudolf Carnap and the Legacy of Logical Empiricism .

Vienna Circle Institute Yearbook . Vol. 16 (2012. ed.). Dordrecht: Springer Science+Business Media. pp.

113-132 .

doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-3929-1_7 .

ISBN 978-94-007-3928-4 .

S2CID 170999667 .

Antony Flew .

A Dictionary of Philosophy - Revised Second Edition .

St. Martin's Press , NY, 1979 External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of apodictic at Wiktionary v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apodicticity&oldid=1283375220 " Categories : Necessity Term logic Ancient Greek logic Concepts in logic Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 1 April 2025, at 03:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Apodicticity 12 languages Add topic

