Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Membership 2 History 3 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 3.1 Internal Organizations 3.2 Directly Affiliated Institutions 3.2.1 Research Units Directly Affiliated to 3.2.1.1 Beijing units 3.2.1.2 Shenyang Branch 3.2.1.3 Changchun Branch 3.2.1.4 Shanghai Branch 3.2.1.5 Nanjing Branch 3.2.1.6 Wuhan Branch 3.2.1.7 Guangzhou Branch 3.2.1.8 Chengdu Branch 3.2.1.9 Kunming Branch 3.2.1.10 Xi'an Branch 3.2.1.11 Lanzhou Branch 3.2.1.12 Xinjiang Branch 3.2.2 Directly under the higher education institutions 3.2.3 Direct Management and Public Support Units 3.2.4 Direct News Publishing Units 3.2.5 Other Directly Affiliated Institutions 3.3 Enterprise units directly under the Chinese Academy of Sciences 3.4 Co-builders 3.5 Groups and Other Organizations 4 Scientific integrity 5 Publications 6 Awards 7 Ranking and reputation 8 International cooperation 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Citations 10.2 Sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Chinese Academy of Sciences 39 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National academy for natural sciences of China This article is about the national academy of the People's Republic of China. For the separate institution located in Taipei, see Academia Sinica .

Chinese Academy of Sciences Seal of the Academy Other name 中国科学院 (Native Name) Parent institution State Council of China Founder Government Administration Council of the Central People's Government (emerged to the State Council in 1954) Established 1 November 1949 ; 75 years ago ( 1949-11-01 ) Focus Natural sciences President Hou Jianguo Staff 71,300 (2023) [ 1 ] Key people Wu Zhaohui , Vice President Budget CN¥171 billion (2023) [ 2 ] Subsidiaries See list Formerly called Academia Sinica (1949–1980s) Address 52 Sanlihe Rd, Xicheng , Beijing , China Location Nationwide , China Website english .cas .cn Chinese Academy of Sciences Simplified Chinese 中国科学院 Traditional Chinese 中國科學院 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōngguó Kēxuéyuàn The Chinese Academy of Sciences ( CAS ; 中国科学院 ) [ 3 ] is the national academy for natural sciences and the highest consultancy for science and technology of the People's Republic of China .

[ 4 ] It is the world's largest research organization, with 106 research institutes, 2 universities, 71,300 full-time employees, and 79 thousand graduate students.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The Chinese Academy of Sciences has historical origins in the Academia Sinica during the Republican era and was formerly also known by that name until the 1980s. The academy functions as the national scientific think tank and academic governing body, providing advisory and appraisal services on issues stemming from the national economy, social development , and science and technology progress. It is headquartered in Beijing , with affiliate institutes throughout China. It has also created hundreds of commercial enterprises, Lenovo being one of the most famous.

The academy also runs the University of Science and Technology of China and the University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences , [ 7 ] both of which were among the world's top three academic institutions in the Nature Index rankings as of 2024.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Membership [ edit ] Main article: Academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences CAS headquarters building front in 2017 Membership of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, also known by the title Academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences ( 中国科学院院士 ), is a lifelong honor given to Chinese scientists who have made significant achievements in various fields. According to the Bylaws for Members of the Chinese Academy of Sciences adopted in 1992 and recently amended in the year 2014, it is the highest academic title in China. A formal CAS member must hold Chinese citizenship , although foreign citizens may be elected as CAS foreign academicians. Members older than 80 are designated as "senior members" and may no longer hold leading positions in the organization.

[ 10 ] Academicians of the Chinese Academy of Sciences carry an obligation to advance science and technology, to advocate and uphold scientific spirit, to develop a scientific and technological workforce, to attend member meetings and receive consultation and evaluation tasks, and to promote international exchanges and cooperation. Academicians can give suggestions and influence Chinese state policy related to science and technology.

[ 11 ] History [ edit ] In 1956, China formally began its computing program when it launched the Twelve-Year Science Plan and formed the Beijing Institute of Computing Technology under the CAS.

[ 12 ] : 100 In 1964, CAS debuted China's first self-developed large digital computer , the 119.

[ 12 ] : 101 The 119 was a core technology in facilitating China's first successful nuclear weapon test ( Project 596 ), also in 1964.

[ 12 ] : 101 Beginning in 1972, CAS began promoting the idea of balancing applied research with more theoretical research and in having scientific exchanges with other developing countries.

[ 13 ] : 74 As vice premier, Deng Xiaoping in 1975 also sought to re-orient CAS towards more theoretical research, which had not been a focus during the Cultural Revolution .

[ 13 ] : 74 Deng emphasized that "the Academy of Sciences is an Academy of Sciences, not an Academy of Cabbage." [ 13 ] : 74 Deng assigned CAS vice president Hu Yaobang to draft a plan for overhauling CAS.

[ 13 ] : 74 Deng and his aide Hu Qiaomu revised the draft and in September 1974 issued "The Outline Report on the Work of the Academy of Sciences".

[ 13 ] : 74 The Outline described scientific research in China as lagging behind the needs of socialist construction and the state of the advanced countries, and stated that to catch up, China should emphasize basic science in order to develop a sound theoretical foundation.

[ 13 ] : 74 This approach to scientific reform fell out of political favor in 1976 when Deng was purged, although it continued to be supported by many members within CAS.

[ 13 ] : 75 A month before Deng's political return in 1977 however, the Outline Report was revived and adopted as CAS's official policy.

[ 13 ] : 81 Shortly after his return, Deng hosted a series of meetings on science and education in which he stated that science should become the forerunner of China's modernization.

[ 13 ] : 82 Following these remarks, CAS prepared its goals for natural science disciplines to be achieved by 1985, stating that as a developing socialist country, China should strengthen basic scientific research through foreign exchanges.

[ 13 ] : 82 To further promote this agenda, Deng began a campaign to promote the National Science Conference.

[ 13 ] : 82 A team led by CAS vice president Fang Yi instructed schools, factories, and communes to organize youth-focused events celebrating science and technology.

[ 13 ] : 82 In 1977, the Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences was split off of CAS and reorganized into the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and led by Hu Qiaomu.

[ 13 ] : 86–87 The Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) was established in 2001 as a successor to the Graduate School of the University of Science and Technology of China (Beijing).The Ministry of Education (MOE) approved the Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) application to change its name to the University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS) on July 23, 2012. Additionally, the MOE recommended that CAS discontinue the operation of the CAS Graduate School. In 2023, the Pasteur Institute suspended ties with CAS.

[ 14 ] Organization [ edit ] Main entrance to Ningbo Institute of Industrial Technology, CAS, in Ningbo, Zhejiang Institute of Computing Technology Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing The Chinese Academy of Sciences maintains a large number of subordinate institutions nationwide.

Internal Organizations [ edit ] According to the "Regulations on Functional Configuration, Internal Organizations and Staffing of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)", CAS has set up the following constitute departments at its headquarters: [ 15 ] [ failed verification ] Office of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Bureau of Academic Departments Bureau of Frontier Science and Basic Research Bureau of Major Science and Technology Tasks Bureau of Sustainable Development Research Bureau of Science and Technology Basic Capabilities Development Planning Bureau Finance and Asset Management Bureau Personnel Bureau Party Committee of the Immediate Organs Bureau of International Cooperation Bureau of Supervision and Audit Bureau of Retired Cadres Work Directly Affiliated Institutions [ edit ] Research Units Directly Affiliated to [ edit ] Beijing units [ edit ] Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science Institute of Physics Institute of Theoretical Physics Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Acoustics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Physical and Chemical Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences National Center for Nanoscience Ecological and Environmental Research Center Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Geographic Sciences and Resources National Astronomical Observatory Yunnan Astronomical Observatory, Chinese Academy of Sciences Xinjiang Astronomical Observatory Changchun Artificial Satellite Observatory Nanjing Institute of Astronomy and Optics Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Tibetan Plateau Studies, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Psychology Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Agricultural Resources Research Center, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology Beijing Institute of Genomics (National Center for Biological Information) Institute of Computing Technology Institute of Software Research Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Space and Astronautical Information Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Automation Institute of Electrical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Engineering Thermophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences National Space Science Center Institute of History of Natural Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Science and Technology Strategy Consulting, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences Research and Education Center for Data and Communication Protection Center for Space Application Engineering and Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shenyang Branch [ edit ] Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Metals Shenyang Institute of Applied Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Oceanography, Chinese Academy of Sciences Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Processes, Chinese Academy of Sciences Yantai Institute of Coastal Zone Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences Changchun Branch [ edit ] Changchun Institute of Optical Precision Machinery and Physics Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry Northeast Institute of Geography and Agroecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Northeast Institute of Geography and Agroecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences National Astronomical Observatory Changchun Artificial Satellite Observatory Shanghai Branch [ edit ] Tianma 65-meter Radio Telescope in Shanghai Astronomical Observatory Shanghai Institute of Microsystems and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Physics for Technology Shanghai Institute of Optical Precision Machinery, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Silicates, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics Shanghai Astronomical Observatory Center of Excellence for Molecular Cell Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences Innovation Center of Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligent Technology Innovation Center of Excellence in Molecular Plant Science Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and Health Shanghai Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences Shanghai Institute of Immunity and Infection Shanghai Institutes for Advanced Studies Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Microsatellite Innovation Fujian Institute of Materials and Structures Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering Institute of Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences Hangzhou Institute of Medical Sciences Nanjing Branch [ edit ] Purple Mountain Observatory Nanjing Institute of Geology and Paleontology Nanjing Institute of Soil Research Nanjing Institute of Geography and Lakes Purple Mountain Observatory Suzhou Institute of Nanotechnology and Nanobionics Suzhou Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Technology Ganjiang Innovation Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences Wuhan Branch [ edit ] Wuhan Institute of Geotechnics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Precision Measurement Science and Technological Innovation Wuhan Institute of Virology Institute of Aquatic Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Water Engineering and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ministry of Water Resources Guangzhou Branch [ edit ] South China National Botanical Garden South China Sea Institute of Oceanography, Chinese Academy of Sciences South China Botanical Garden (formerly South China Botanical Research Institute) Guangzhou Energy Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Changsha Mineral Resources Exploration Center Guangzhou Institute of Biomedicine and Health Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology Institute of Subtropical Agroecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Deep Sea Science and Engineering Chengdu Branch [ edit ] Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Chengdu Institute of Mountain Hazards and Environment Institute of Photovoltaic Technology Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Kunming Branch [ edit ] Kunming Institute of Botany Kunming Institute of Zoology Kunming Institute of Botany Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences Yunnan Observatory Xi'an Branch [ edit ] Xi'an Institute of Optical Precision Machinery National Timing Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Earth Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanxi Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences Lanzhou Branch [ edit ] Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences Northwest Institute of Ecological and Environmental Resources Qinghai Salt Lake Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences Northwest Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Xinjiang Branch [ edit ] Xinjiang Institute of Physics and Chemistry Technology Xinjiang Institute of Ecology and Geography Xinjiang Observatory Directly under the higher education institutions [ edit ] UCAS University of Science and Technology of China University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Direct Management and Public Support Units [ edit ] Chinese Academy of Sciences Documentation and Intelligence Center Science and Technology Innovation and Development Center Administration of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Computer Network Information Center Documentation and Intelligence Center (National Science Library) Chengdu Literature and Intelligence Center Wuhan Center for Documentation and Intelligence Direct News Publishing Units [ edit ] China Science Daily Other Directly Affiliated Institutions [ edit ] Beijing Integrated Research Center Qingdao Sanatorium of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Zhiyuanlou Hotel) Chinese Academy of Sciences Lushan Sanatorium (Poyangkou Hotel) Enterprise units directly under the Chinese Academy of Sciences [ edit ] The enterprise units directly under the Chinese Academy of Sciences are wholly owned or controlled by Chinese Academy of Sciences State-owned Assets Management Co.

Chinese Academy of Sciences Holdings Limited Legend Holdings China Science Industrial Group (Holdings) Limited Oriental Science and Technology Holding Group Limited China Science & Technology Publishing & Media Group China Science and Technology Industry Investment Management Beijing Zhongke Keji Beijing CAS Software Center Chinese Academy of Sciences Architectural Design and Research Institute Beijing Zhongke Resources Shenyang Institute of Computing Technology Shenyang Scientific Instrument Nanjing Astronomical Instrument Guangzhou Chemistry Guangzhou Electronic Technology Chengdu Organic Chemistry Chengdu Information Technology Chinese Academy of Sciences Science and Technology Services Shanghai Bike Clean Energy Technology Shenzhen CAS Intellectual Property Investment Guoke Jiahe (Beijing) Investment Management Guoke Health Biotechnology Chinese Academy of Sciences Innovation Incubation Investment Guoke Health Management Beijing Konowei Technology Guoke Quantum Communication Network Kasma Holdings Co-builders [ edit ] Shanghai : Shanghai University of Science and Technology China National Petroleum Corporation : Institute of Seepage Fluid Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences China National Nuclear Corporation : China Institute of Atomic Energy Science Shanghai Censhan Botanical Garden Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region : Guangxi Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences Ministry of Water Resources : Institute of Water Engineering and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences Jiangxi Province : Lushan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences Jiangsu Province : Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Jiangsu Province Shaanxi Province : Qinling National Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences Guangdong Province : Shenzhen University of Technology , Chinese Academy of Sciences Xianhu Botanical Garden Ministry of Education : Research Center for Soil and Water Conservation and Ecological Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences Major Special Project Center of National Bureau of Defense Science, Technology and Industry (NDSTI) Groups and Other Organizations [ edit ] CAS Leading Group Office of Network Security and Informatization Women's Working Committee of Chinese Academy of Sciences CAS Youth League Committee Trade Union of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Association of Old Science and Technology Workers of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Federation of Literature and Art of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Scientific integrity [ edit ] On 26 February 2007, CAS published a Declaration of Scientific Ideology and set up a commission for scientific integrity to promote transparency, autonomy and accountability of scientific research in the country. Around that same time, the Ministry of Science and Technology also initiated measures to address misconduct in state-funded programs.

[ 16 ] CAS also publishes the Early Warning List, which notes journals with a lack of rigor and possible predatory practices.

[ 17 ] Publications [ edit ] Science China Language English Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM · MathSciNet ISO 4 Sci. China Together with the National Natural Science Foundation of China , the academy publishes the peer-reviewed academic journal , Science China (also known as Science in China ).

Science China comprises seven series: [ 18 ] A: Mathematics B: Chemistry C: Life Sciences D: Earth Sciences E: Technological Sciences F: Information Sciences G: Physics, Mechanics and Astronomy CAS also promotes the China Open Access Journals (COAJ) platform, [ 19 ] a national variant of the international Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ).

Awards [ edit ] Since 1999, the CAS has issued the annual State Preeminent Science and Technology Award , presented by the President of China to the recipient.

[ 20 ] Ranking and reputation [ edit ] CAS has been ranked the No. 1 research institute in the world by Nature Index since the list's inception in 2014 by Nature Portfolio .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ excessive citations ] It was the most productive institution publishing articles on sustainable development indexed in the Web of Science from 1981 to 2018 among all universities and research institutions in the world.

[ 28 ] The academy also runs the University of Science and Technology of China and the University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences , [ 7 ] both of which were among the world's top three universities in the Nature Index ranking as of 2024.

[ 8 ] In 2024, Clarivate 's Highly Cited Researchers list contained 308 CSA members. This made CSA researchers the largest group on the list by institution, and the sixth largest by country.

[ 29 ] International cooperation [ edit ] The Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth is a branch of CAS. The Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth was a customer of Swedish Space Corporation (SSC), which provides data transmission services from satellites for a wide range of societal functions.

[ 30 ] It was reported by Reuters on 21 September 2020 that SSC decided not to renew the contracts with China to help operate Chinese satellites from SSC's ground stations, or seek new business with China.

[ 31 ] See also [ edit ] Academia Sinica CAS Star CAS Space China Science Publishing & Media Chinese Academy of Engineering Chinese Academy of Social Sciences Chinese Science Citation Database Hanlin Academy History of science and technology in the People's Republic of China International Journal of Software and Informatics (IJSI) International Society of Zoological Sciences Legend Holdings Science and technology in China Scientific publishing in China Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences ShanghaiTech University University of Chinese Academy of Sciences University of Science and Technology of China University of Chinese Academy of Social Sciences Academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Profile----Chinese Academy of Sciences" .

^ "www.cas.cn" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2024 . Retrieved 20 November 2024 .

^ KÜHNER, HANS (1984).

"Between Autonomy and Planning: The Chinese Academy of Sciences in Transition" .

Minerva .

22 (1): 13– 44.

doi : 10.1007/BF02207555 .

ISSN 0026-4695 .

JSTOR 41820552 .

PMID 11611662 .

S2CID 21494880 .

Archived from the original on 10 July 2022 . Retrieved 10 July 2022 .

^ "中国科学院章程----中国科学院" .

www.cas.cn . Retrieved 1 October 2023 .

^ "cas.cn" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2024 . Retrieved 20 November 2024 .

^ "Profile----Chinese Academy of Sciences" .

^ a b "中国科学院教育简介 — 中国科学院" .

Chinese Academy of Sciences .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2017 . Retrieved 24 January 2022 .

^ a b "2024 Research Leaders: Leading academic institutions | Nature Index" .

nature.com .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 18 January 2025 .

^ "2024 Research Leaders: Leading institutions | Nature Index" .

nature.com .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2024 . Retrieved 18 January 2025 .

^ "中国科学院院士章程 [Bylaws for Members of the Chinese Academy of Sciences]" . Chinese Academy of Sciences . Retrieved 16 September 2014 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Obligations and Rights of a CAS Member" . Academic Divisions of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 16 September 2014 .

^ a b c Mullaney, Thomas S. (2024).

The Chinese Computer: a Global History of the Information Age . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press .

ISBN 9780262047517 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Minami, Kazushi (2024).

People's Diplomacy: How Americans and Chinese Transformed US-China Relations during the Cold War . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 9781501774157 .

^ Mallapaty, Smriti (8 March 2023).

"Prestigious Pasteur Institute severs ties with China infectious disease lab" .

Nature .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-023-00694-x .

PMID 36890326 .

^ "机构设置----中国科学院办公厅" .

中国科学院办公厅 (in Chinese).

Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 September 2024 .

^ The Lancet (17 March 2007). "Reforming research in China".

The Lancet .

369 (9565): 880.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60419-X .

PMID 17368128 .

S2CID 205948464 .

^ "国际期刊预警名单-中国科学院文献情报中心 期刊分区表团队" .

ewl.fenqubiao.com . Retrieved 9 April 2025 .

^ "Science in China Press" .

Science in China Press . Archived from the original on 13 April 2016 . Retrieved 16 December 2021 .

^ "中国科技期刊开放获取平台" .

China Open Access Journals . Archived from the original on 1 October 2020 . Retrieved 16 December 2021 .

^ "China in Brief – Science and Technology – Awards" . China Internet Information Center (State Council Information Office and the China International Publishing Group).

Archived from the original on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 21 November 2012 .

^ "Nature Index tables 2012–2013" .

Nature .

515 (7526): S98 – S108 . 2014.

doi : 10.1038/515S98a .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 25390156 .

^ "Nature Global Institutions Ranking, 2013–2014" .

Nature .

522 (7556): S34 – S44 . 2015.

doi : 10.1038/522S34a .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

^ "2016 tables: Institutions" .

Nature Index . Springer Nature. 2016.

Archived from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

^ "2017 tables: Institutions" .

Nature Index . Springer Nature. 2017.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

^ "2018 tables: Institutions" .

Nature Index . Springer Nature. 2018.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

^ "2023 Research Leaders: Leading institutions | Nature Index" .

www.nature.com . Retrieved 13 June 2025 .

^ "2025 Research Leaders - 2025 Research Leaders" .

www.nature.com . Retrieved 13 June 2025 .

^ Li, Rita Yi Man; Li, Yi Lut; Crabbe, M. James C.; Manta, Otilia; Shoaib, Muhammad (24 May 2021).

"The Impact of Sustainability Awareness and Moral Values on Environmental Laws" .

Sustainability .

13 (11): 5882.

Bibcode : 2021Sust...13.5882L .

doi : 10.3390/su13115882 .

hdl : 10547/624990 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

^ Parr, Chris (19 November 2024).

"China increases share of highly cited researchers as US declines" .

Research Professional News .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2024 . Retrieved 19 November 2024 .

^ SSC.

"Appendix of SSC's Chinese customers" (PDF) .

SSC . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 June 2020 . Retrieved 21 September 2020 .

^ Ahlander, Johan; Barrett, Jonathan (21 September 2020).

"Swedish space agency halts new business helping China operate satellites" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on 21 September 2020 . Retrieved 21 September 2020 .

Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0. Text taken from UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030​ , 621–641, UNESCO Publishing.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Chinese Academy of Sciences at Wikimedia Commons Official website v t e Academicians of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Division of Mathematics and Physics Chen Jingrun Chen Jia'er Chen Jiangong Chen Xianhui Cheng Kaijia Cheng Minde Dai Chuanzeng Deng Jiaxian Feng Duan Feng Kang Ge Tingsui (Ke Ting Sui) Gu Chaohao Guo Yonghuai Hao Bailin He Xiantu He Zehui He Zuoxiu Hu Hesheng Hu Jimin Hu Ning Hua Luogeng Huang Kun Ke Zhao Li Minhua Li Yinyuan Liu Yingming Peng Huanwu Qian Sanqiang Qian Weichang Qian Xuesen Qu Qinyue Rao Yutai Shi Zhongci Su Buqing Tian Gang Wang Ganchang Wang Yuan Wang Zhuxi Wu Wenjun Wu Youxun Wu Zhonghua Xi Zezong Xia Daoxing Xie Jialin Xie Xide Yang Fujia Yang Zhenning (Chen-Ning Yang) Ye Qisun Yu Min Zhang Jie Zhang Yuzhe Zhao Zhongyao (Chung-Yao Chao) Zhou Guangzhao Zhou Peiyuan Zhu Guangya Division of Chemistry Bai Chunli Cai Qirui Hou Debang Hu Hongwen Huang Minlon Liu Yuanfang Lu Jiaxi Lu Ke Min Enze Peng Shaoyi Shen Panwen Shen Tianhui Su Qiang Wang You Xing Qiyi Xu Guangxian Yan Dongsheng You Xiaozeng Yuan Chengye Zhou Qifeng Division of Life Sciences and Medical Sciences Bei Shizhang Cai Qiao Chen Shixiang (Sicien H. Chen) Chen Zhongwei Chen Zhu Chen Ziyuan Ding Ying Duan Shumin Han Qide Huang Jiasi Jin Guozhang Li Bo Li Zhensheng Liang Boqiang Lin Qiaozhi Lo Tsung-lo Niu Jingyi Qiu Fazu Sheng Tongsheng Tan Jiazhen Tang Feifan Tong Dizhou Wang Shizhen Wu Jieping Wu Mengchao Wu Zhengyi Xu Zhihong Yang Fuyu Yang Huanming Yao Zhen Zhang Xiangtong (Hsiang-Tung Chang) Zhang Xiaoqian Zhu Futang Zhu Zuxiang Division of Earth Sciences Ding Zhongli Fu Jiamo Gao Shan Jia Lanpo Li Siguang Liu Dongsheng Ouyang Ziyuan Pei Wenzhong Ren Mei'e Tan Qixiang Weng Wenhao Xie Xuejin Shi Yafeng Ye Duzheng Zhang Benren Zhao Jiuzhang Zhu Kezhen (Coching Chu) Division of Information Technical Sciences He Jifeng Huang Hongjia Song Jian Wang Xuan Yao Qizhi Zhou Chaochen Division of Technological Sciences Chen Da Chen Nengkuan Gu Binglin Guo Kexin Han Zhenxiang Hu Haiyan Hu Haichang Hu Haiyan Ke Jun Li Guohao Li Tian Li Zhijian Liang Sicheng Liang Sili Liu Gaolian Lu Yongxiang Mao Yisheng Pan Jiazheng Qi Kang Ren Xinmin Shao Xianghua Shi Changxu Tu Shou'e Xu Caidong Xu Zuyao Ye Peijian Zhang Guangdou Zhang Zhongjun Zheng Zhemin Zhou Guozhi Zhou Yaohe Zhu Wuhua Foreign Members Cai Nanhai (Nam-Hai Chua) Chen Xingsheng (Shiing-Shen Chern) Ding Zhaozhong (Samuel C. C. Ting) Feng Yuanzhen (Yuan-Cheng Fung) Gao Kun (Charles K. Kao) Ge Shouren (Ernest S. Kuh) Huang Xutao (Thomas Huang) Li Zhengdao (Tsung-Dao Lee) Joseph Needham Qian Xu (Shu Chien) Qiu Chengtong (Shing-Tung Yau) Xu Lizhi (Lap-Chee Tsui) Mao Heguang (Ho-Kwang Mao) Shen Yuanrang (Yuen-Ron Shen) Sumio Iijima Tian Changlin (Chang-Lin Tien) Chien-Shiung Wu Zhu Jingwu (Paul Chu) Zhuo Yihe (Alfred Yi Cho) v t e Education in China Education system History Imperial examination Mandarin (bureaucrat) Scholar-bureaucrats Taixue Academies of Classical Learning Chinese educators Burning of books and burying of scholars Guozijian Beijing Guozijian Hundred Schools of Thought Scouting in China Digital divide in China Challenge Cup Competition of Science Achievement in China May Fourth Movement 1952 reorganization Simplified Chinese Education inequality in China Academies Chinese Academy of Sciences Chinese Academy of Social Sciences Chinese Academy of Engineering Projects Plan 111 Project 211 Project 985 Double First-Class Construction Project Hope Thousand Talents Plan Administration Ministry of Education National Education Examinations Authority Basic Primary education Secondary education Boarding schools Private and public schools Zhongkao Vocational Vocation education Higher Gaokao National Key Disciplines College English Test National Key Universities Academic grading in China State Key Laboratories JUPAS for HKSAR students Academic ranks in China Self-Taught Higher Education Examinations Libraries Archives in China Book collecting in China National Library of China Nanjing Library Shanghai Library Specialist Medical schools Business schools Law schools Foreign-language schools Schools of Journalism and Communication Int'l cooperation Association of East Asian Research Universities Association of Pacific Rim Universities Global U8 Consortium International Alliance of Research Universities Universitas 21 Worldwide Universities Network Subject areas English education Ideological and political education Morality and the Rule of Law Patriotic education Exams Hanyu Shuiping Kaoshi Putonghua Proficiency Test Zhíyè Hànyŭ Nénglì Cèshì Common Recruitment Examination Language Proficiency Assessment for Teachers College English Test Quanguo Waiyu Shuiping Kaoshi Public English Test System Rankings List of universities and colleges ARWU BCUR Wu Shulian CUAA Netbig See also: Rankings of universities in China , Science and technology in China , and Types of universities and colleges in China v t e Science and technology in China Advanced materials Aircraft carrier Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Automotive industry Aviation Battery Biotechnology Bioenergy Canal Cloud Chemical Cyberwarfare Drone Interbank Payment System Internet Logic Manufacturing Mathematics Medicine Metallurgy Mining Mobile payments Navigation System Nuclear power Petroleum Railways Rare earth Renewable energy Semiconductors Shipping Skyscrapers Software Space program Steel Supercomputing Telecommunications Telescope Thorium Reactor Virology History Inventions Discoveries History of measurement systems Calendar History of metallurgy Ancient coinage Printing Cartography Maritime history Military history Education Academic grading Higher education Research institutes Science museums People Astronomers Biologists Chemists Computer programmers Computer scientists Earth scientists Engineers Food scientists Inventors Mathematicians Nobel laureates Pharmacologists Physicians Physicists Science writers Social scientists Institutes and programs 863 Program Research institutes Chinese Academy of Engineering Chinese Academy of Sciences Chinese Academy of Social Sciences National Natural Science Foundation of China v t e State Council of China Incumbent ( 14th ): Li Qiang Cabinet State Council Members Executive meeting Premier Vice Premiers State Councilors Secretary-General Ministers in charge of ministries/commissions Auditor-General Departments Foreign Defense Development Education Science Industry and Information Tech Ethnic Public Security State Security Civil Justice Finance Human Resources and Social Security Natural Resources Ecology and Environment Housing Transport Water Agriculture Commerce Culture and Tourism Health Veterans Emergency People's Bank Audit Office Agencies General Office Secretary-General Deputy Secretaries-General Special State Assets Affiliated Customs Taxation Market Regulation Anti-Monopoly Standardization Cert. & Accred.

Financial Regulation Securities Radio and TV Sport Complaints & Proposals Statistics Intellectual Property International Development Healthcare Security Counsellors Government Offices Press and Publication (☭ Publicity Dept.) Religious ( ☭ United Front Dept.

) Offices Research Hong Kong and Macao ( ☭ Leading Group ) Overseas Chinese ( ☭ United Front Dept.

) Taiwan ( ☭ Leading Group ) Cyberspace ( ☭ Cyberspace ) Information ( ☭ Publicity ) Institutions Xinhua News Agency Development Research China Media Group Meteorology Academies Sciences Engineering Social Sciences Governance ( a.k.a.

☭ Central Party School ) Bureaus Food and Strategic Reserves Energy Data Defense Industry Tobacco Immigration Forestry and Grassland Railway Civil Aviation Post Cultural Heritage Traditional Medicine Disease Control Mine Safety Fire & Rescue Foreign Exchange Medical Products State Secrets ( ☭ Secrecy Comm.

) National Archives ( a.k.a.

☭ Central Archives) Civil Service ( ☭ Org. Dept.

) Cryptography ( ☭ Leading Group ) State Council = Central People's Government ( constitutionally since 1954 ) ☭ denotes name reserved by Communist Party agencies .

v t e Universities and colleges in Beijing Education , Higher education , and Universities in China National Beihang Electronic Science and Technology Foreign Studies Forestry Institute of Technology Jiaotong Language and Culture Normal People's Police Sport Chemical Technology Chinese Medicine Posts Central Drama Central Fine Arts Central Music Central Finance and Economics Agricultural Foreign Affairs Industrial Relations Geosciences Mining and Technology Petroleum Political Science and Law Women's Youth for Political Sciences Communication Minzu North China Electric Power Open Union Medical Peking People's Public Security Renmin Tsinghua Social Sciences Academy University International Business International Relations Science and Technology University of Academy Civil Affairs Municipal Dance Film Information Science and Technology Clothing Technology Machinery Petrochemical Technology International Studies Materials Technology and Business Agriculture Technology Capital Medical Capital Normal Capital Economics and Business College of Music North China Technology Private City See also: List of universities in China v t e International Network of Pasteur Institutes Europe Paris, France Lille, France Middle East and Africa Algiers, Algeria Tunis, Tunisia Tehran, Iran Dakar, Senegal Asia-Pacific Shanghai, China Hong Kong, China Gyeonggi, South Korea Coonoor, India Hanoi, Vietnam Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam Nha Trang, Vietnam Phnom Penh, Cambodia Former/corresponding institutes Pasteur Institute of Dalat Bio Farma Oswaldo Cruz Foundation Louis Pasteur List of things named after Louis Pasteur UNESCO/Institut Pasteur Medal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Norway Latvia Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hcwsp
Cached time: 20250817045325
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.063 seconds
Real time usage: 1.303 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9641/1000000
Revision size: 41828/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 260040/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6781/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 179490/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.592/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18914094/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1041.103      1 -total
 26.32%  273.999      1 Template:Reflist
 17.11%  178.089     22 Template:Cite_web
 13.61%  141.743      2 Template:Infobox
 12.79%  133.116      1 Template:Infobox_institute
 11.77%  122.495      1 Template:Infobox_Chinese
  8.71%   90.650     16 Template:Rp
  8.54%   88.873      1 Template:Chinese_Academy_of_Sciences
  8.32%   86.580      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.96%   82.844     16 Template:R/superscript Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:377856:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045325 and revision id 1303709701. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chinese_Academy_of_Sciences&oldid=1303709701 " Categories : Universities and colleges in Beijing Chinese Academy of Sciences 1949 establishments in China National academies of sciences Schools in Xicheng District Scientific organizations established in 1949 Universities and colleges established in 1949 Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2021 Articles containing Chinese-language text All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from January 2025 Pages calling infobox journal with no website parameter Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from August 2025 Free-content attribution Free content from UNESCO Publishing Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 16:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chinese Academy of Sciences 39 languages Add topic

