Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biblical origins 2 Rabbinic views 3 Modern Jewish views Toggle Modern Jewish views subsection 3.1 Modern Orthodox views 3.2 Conservative views 3.3 Reform views 3.4 Reconstructionist views 3.5 Chabad Hasidism 3.6 Spinoza 3.7 Einstein 4 Views of other religions Toggle Views of other religions subsection 4.1 Islam 4.2 Christianity 5 Zionism and chosenness 6 Debated areas Toggle Debated areas subsection 6.1 Influence on Judaism's relationship with other religions 6.2 Ethnocentrism 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Jews as the chosen people 20 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית مصرى 日本語 پنجابی پښتو Português Simple English Српски / srpski Türkçe اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article uses texts from within a religion or faith system without referring to secondary sources that critically analyse them.

Please help improve this article .

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Jews and Judaism Etymology Who is a Jew?

Jewish studies Religion God in Judaism ( names ) Principles of faith Mitzvot ( 613 ) Halakha Shabbat Holidays Prayer Tzedakah Land of Israel Brit Bar and bat mitzvah Marriage Bereavement Baal teshuva Philosophy Ethics Kabbalah Messiah Claimants Customs Rites Synagogue Rabbi Texts Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Talmud Mishnah Gemara Rabbinic Midrash Tosefta Targum Beit Yosef Mishneh Torah Tur Shulchan Aruch Zohar History General Timeline Land of Israel Name "Judea" Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Persecution Leaders Modern historiography Historical population comparisons Ancient Israel Twelve Tribes of Israel Kingdom of Judah Kingdom of Israel Jerusalem ( in Judaism timeline ) Temple in Jerusalem ( First Second ) Assyrian captivity Babylonian captivity Second Temple period Yehud Medinata Maccabean Revolt Hasmonean dynasty Sanhedrin Schisms ( Pharisees , Sadducees , Essenes , Zealots , Sicarii ) Second Temple Judaism ( Hellenistic Judaism ) Jewish–Roman wars ( Great Revolt , Diaspora , Bar Kokhba ) Rabbinic period and Middle Ages Rabbinic Judaism History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire Christianity and Judaism ( Jews and Christmas ) Hinduism and Judaism Islamic–Jewish relations Middle Ages Golden Age Expulsion from Spain Modern era Haskalah Sabbateans Hasidism Jewish atheism Emancipation Old Yishuv Zionism Soviet Union The Holocaust Israel Arab–Israeli conflict Communities Ashkenazim Galician Litvak Mizrahim Sephardim Teimanim (Yemenite Jews) Beta Israel Gruzinim (Georgian Jews) Juhurim (Mountain Jews) Bukharim Italkim Romanyotim Cochinim Bene Israel Berber Crimean Karaites Krymchaks Kaifeng Jews Related groups Bnei Anusim Lemba Igbo Jews Samaritans Crypto-Jews Anusim Dönmeh Marranos Neofiti Xueta Mosaic Arabs Subbotniks Noahides Population Judaism by country Lists of Jews Diaspora Historical population by country Population by city Genetic studies Israel and Palestine Old Yishuv New Yishuv Israeli Jews Palestinian Jews Africa Algeria Angola Bilad-el-Sudan Botswana Cameroon Cape Verde Benin Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Ethiopia Beta Israel Eritrea Eswatini Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria ( Igbo ) Republic of the Congo São Tomé and Príncipe Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Uganda ( Abayudaya ) Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Bahrain Cambodia China Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kurdistan Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lebanon Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia South Korea Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Romaniote Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Italkim Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Moldova Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Soviet Union Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sephardim Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern America Canada United States Greenland Latin America and Caribbean Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Puerto Rico Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia Fiji Guam New Zealand Palau Denominations Orthodox Modern Haredi Hasidic Reform Conservative Karaite Reconstructionist Renewal Science Haymanot Humanistic Culture Customs Minyan Wedding Clothing Niddah Pidyon haben Kashrut Shidduch Zeved habat Conversion to Judaism Aliyah Hiloni Music Religious Secular Art Ancient Yiddish theatre Dance Humour Cuisine American Ashkenazi Bukharan Ethiopian Israeli Israelite Mizrahi Sephardic Literature Israeli Yiddish Judeo-Tat American Surnames Ashkenazi Mizrahi Sephardic Languages Hebrew Biblical Mishnaic Medieval Modern Bukharian Ghardaïa Sign Jewish Koine Greek Judeo-Arabic Judeo-Aramaic Judeo-Berber Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Georgian Judaeo-Iranian Judeo-Italian Judeo-Malayalam Judaeo-Spanish Judeo-Tat Knaanic Shassi Yeshivish Yevanic Yiddish Zarphatic Politics Jewish political movements Autonomism Bundism Feminism Leftism Secularism Territorialism World Agudath Israel Zionism General Green Labor Kahanism Maximalism Neo-Zionism Religious Revisionist Post-Zionism Category Portal v t e Part of a series on Jewish philosophy Hellenistic Positions: Hasmonean Sadducean Pharisee Boethusian People: Aristobulus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Medieval Influenced by: Brethren of Purity ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ismaili philosophy Jewish Kalam Kabbalah Rabbinic Judaism Spanish and European: Hasdai ibn Shaprut Ibn Gabirol Abraham bar Hiyya Bahya ibn Paquda Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Joseph ibn Tzaddik Abraham ibn Ezra Maimonides Nachmanides Samuel ibn Tibbon Joseph ben Judah Shem-Tov ibn Falaquera Gersonides Moses of Narbonne Isaac ben Sheshet Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Elia del Medigo Judah Minz Isaac Abarbanel Judah Leon Abravanel Yemenite: Natan'el al-Fayyumi Mansur ibn Sulayman al-Ghamari Other: Isaac Israeli Saadia Gaon al-Muqqamaṣ Hibatullah ibn Malka Ibn Kammuna Positions: Maimonidean / Anti-Maimonidean Kabbalist Karaism Talmudic Tosafist Modern Positions: Orthodox Sephardic Chabad Chassidic Conservative Reform Existentialist Reconstructionist Holocaust Renewal Neo-Hasidic Mussar Rambamist People: Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa Baruch Spinoza Salomon Maimon Joseph Solomon Delmedigo Elijah Ba'al Shem of Chelm Eliezer ben Elijah Ashkenazi Tzvi Ashkenazi Jacob Emden Samuel Hirsch Shneur Zalman of Liadi Simcha Bunim of Peshischa Samson Raphael Hirsch Jacob Abendana Isaac Cardoso David Nieto Isaac Orobio de Castro Moses Mendelssohn Samuel David Luzzatto Elijah Benamozegh Moses Hess Eliezer Berkovits Eliyahu Dessler Monsieur Chouchani Emmanuel Levinas Martin Buber Gershom Scholem Abraham Isaac Kook Joseph Soloveitchik Menachem Mendel Schneerson Topics Anger Chosen people Cosmology Eschatology Ethics Faith God Happiness Holiness Holocaust Messiah Microcosm–macrocosm Righteousness v t e The concept of Jews as the chosen people is the belief that the Jewish people , via the Mosaic and Abrahamic covenants, are selected to be in a covenant with God . It is a core element of Judaism , although its meaning has been interpreted in different ways and has varied over time.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Much has been written about these topics in rabbinic literature .

In modern times, the three largest Jewish denominations — Orthodox Judaism , Conservative Judaism and Reform Judaism — maintain the belief that Jews have been chosen by God for a purpose. Sometimes this choice is seen by believers as charging the Jewish people with a specific mission—to be a light unto the nations , and to exemplify the covenant with God as described in the Torah .

Biblical origins [ edit ] In the Hebrew Bible, chosenness or election [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ a ] refers to God’s decision to enter a series of covenants – i.e. binding agreements – with Abraham and later a group of his descendants, the Israelites ; [ 5 ] some descendants were later to be excluded.

[ 6 ] The term " chosen people " ( Hebrew : הָעָם הַנִבְחַר hāʿām hanīvḥar ) is a rabbinic term, not used directly in the Bible. The biblical terms ʿ am segullah and ʿ am nahallah mean “treasure people” and “heritage people” respectively.

[ 7 ] Israelites being properly the chosen people of God is found directly in the Book of Deuteronomy 7:6 [ 8 ] as the verb baḥar (בָּחַר), and is alluded to elsewhere in the Hebrew Bible using other terms such as goy kadosh meaning "holy people", Book of Exodus 19:6.

[ 9 ] According to the Torah, the nations which inhabited Canaan after Jacob left violated God's laws and were to be vomited out of the land as a result, however their iniquity was not sufficiently great to deserve that result until a few hundred years later, which was when God then brought Jacob's descendants back to the land, with a warning that they too would be cast out if they violated God's rules regarding idolatry and other 'abominations'. In Deuteronomy , the Torah states: "when the Lord delivers the Israelites to the land, the other nations will be cast out, and "thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor show mercy unto them" [ 10 ] Deuteronomy 7:5-7:6, "But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their graven images with fire. For thou art a holy people unto the LORD thy God: the LORD thy God hath chosen thee to be His own treasure, out of all peoples that are upon the face of the earth." [ 11 ] A similar passage speaking of Israel as the chosen people follows prohibitions on baldness [ 12 ] and cutting yourself in mourning, "For thou art a holy people".

[ 13 ] Prophet Amos as depicted by Gustave Doré The Torah also says, "Now therefore, if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then you shall be a peculiar treasure unto me from all the peoples, for all the earth is mine." [ 14 ] God promises that he will never exchange his people with any other: "And I will establish My covenant between Me and you and your descendants after you in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be God to you and your descendants after you." [ 15 ] Other Torah verses about chosenness, "And you shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation" [ 16 ] "The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because you were more in number than any people; for you were the fewest of all people; but because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your ancestors." [ 17 ] The obligation imposed upon the Israelites was emphasized by the prophet Amos : [ 18 ] "You only have I singled out of all the families of the earth: therefore will I visit upon you all your iniquities." Isaiah and Jeremiah viewed God's loving choice of Israel as a means to teaching monotheism, combatting idolatry, curbing human arrogance, ending violence, lust, greed, extreme chauvinism and warfare, and ushering in a new society.

Rabbinic views [ edit ] Most Jewish texts do not state that "God chose the Jews" by itself. Rather, this is usually linked with a mission or purpose, such as proclaiming God's message among all the nations, even though Jews cannot become "unchosen" if they shirk their mission. This implies a special duty, which evolves from the belief that Jews have been pledged by the covenant which God concluded with the biblical patriarch Abraham , their ancestor, and again with the entire Jewish nation at Mount Sinai .

[ 7 ] In this view, Jews are charged with living a holy life as God's priest-people.

In the Jewish prayerbook (the Siddur) , chosenness is referred to in a number of ways. The blessing for reading the Torah reads, "Praised are You, Lord our God, King of the Universe, Who has chosen us out of all the nations and bestowed upon us His Torah." In the " Kiddush ", a prayer of sanctification, in which the Sabbath is inaugurated over a cup of wine, the text reads, "For you have chosen us and sanctified us out of all the nations, and have given us the Sabbath as an inheritance in love and favour. Praised are you, Lord, who hallows the Sabbath." In the "Kiddush" recited on festivals it reads, "Blessed are You ... who have chosen us from among all nations, raised us above all tongues, and made us holy through His commandments." The Aleinu prayer refers to the concept of Jews as a chosen people: "It is our duty to praise the Master of all, to exalt the Creator of the Universe, who has not made us like the nations of the world and has not placed us like the families of the earth; who has not designed our destiny to be like theirs, nor our lot like that of all their multitude. We bend the knee and bow and acknowledge before the Supreme King of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, that it is he who stretched forth the heavens and founded the earth. His seat of glory is in the heavens above; his abode of majesty is in the lofty heights.

[ 19 ] Sometimes this choice is seen as charging the Jewish people with a specific mission—to be a light unto the nations, and to exemplify the covenant with God as described in the Torah. This view, however, does not always preclude a belief that God has a relationship with other peoples—rather, Judaism held that God had entered into a covenant with all humankind, and that Jews and non-Jews alike have a relationship with God.
Biblical references as well as rabbinic literature support this view:  Moses refers to the "God of the spirits of all flesh", [ 20 ] and the Tanakh [ 21 ] also identifies prophets outside the community of Israel.  Based on these statements, some rabbis theorized that, in the words of Natan'el al-Fayyumi , a Yemenite Jewish theologian of the 12th century, "God permitted to every people something he forbade to others...[and] God sends a prophet to every people according to their own language." [ 22 ] The Mishnah states that "Humanity was produced from one man, Adam, to show God's greatness. When a man mints a coin in a press, each coin is identical. But when the King of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be He, creates people in the form of Adam not one is similar to any other." [ 23 ] The Tosefta, a collection of important post-Talmudic discourses, also states: "Righteous people of all nations have a share in the world to come ." [ 24 ] Within Judaism, the status as a "chosen people" does not connote ethnic supremacy , nor does it preclude a belief that God has a relationship with other peoples—rather, Judaism holds that God had entered into a covenant with all humankind, and that Jews and non-Jews alike have a relationship with God. Biblical references as well as rabbinic literature support this view: Moses refers to the "God of the spirits of all flesh", [ 20 ] the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible) also identifies prophets outside the community of Israel and the prophet Jonah is explicitly told to go prophesize to the non-Jewish people of Nineveh . Jewish tradition is clear that there were interactions of non-Jewish prophets with God which are not recounted in the Torah.  Based on these statements and stories, some rabbis theorized that, in the words of Natan'el al-Fayyumi , a Yemenite Jewish theologian of the 12th century, "God permitted to some people that which he forbade to others ... [and] God sends a prophet to every people according to their own language." (Levine, 1907/1966) The Mishnah states that "Humanity was produced from one man, Adam, to show God's greatness. When a man mints a coin in a press, each coin is identical. But when the King of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be He, creates people in the form of Adam not one is similar to any other" (Mishnah Sanhedrin 4:5).

According to the Rabbis, "Israel is of all nations the most willful or headstrong one, and the Torah was to give it the right scope and power of resistance, or else the world could not have withstood its fierceness." [ 25 ] "The Lord offered the Law to all nations; but all refused to accept it except Israel." [ 26 ] How do we understand "A Gentile who consecrates his life to the study and observance of the Law ranks as high as the high priest", says R. Meïr, by deduction from Lev. xviii. 5; II Sam. vii. 19; Isa. xxvi. 2; Ps. xxxiii. 1, cxviii. 20, cxxv. 4, where all stress is laid not on Israel, but on man or the righteous one.

[ 27 ] Monument to Maimonides in Córdoba, Spain Maimonides states: It is now abundantly clear that the pledges Hashem made to Avraham and his descendants would be fulfilled exclusively first in Yitzchak and then in Yaakov, Yitzchak son. This is confirmed by a passage that states, "He is ever mindful of His covenant ... that He made with Avraham, swore to Yitzchak, and confirmed in a decree for Yaakov, for Yisrael, as an eternal covenant." [ 28 ] [ 29 ] The Gemara states this regarding a non-Jew who studies Torah [his 7 mitzvot] [ clarification needed ] and regarding this, see Shita Mekubetzes, Bava Kama 38a who says that this is an exaggeration.

[ clarification needed ] In any case, this statement was not extolling the non-Jew. The Rishonim explain that it is extolling the Torah.

Tosfos explains that it uses the example of a kohen gadol (high priest), because this statement is based on the verse, " y'kara hi mipnimim " (it is more precious than pearls). This is explained elsewhere in the Gemara to mean that the Torah is more precious pnimim (translated here as "inside" instead of as "pearls"; thus that the Torah is introspectively absorbed into the person), which refers to lifnai v'lifnim (translated as "the most inner of places"), that is the Holy of Holies where the kahon gadol went.

In any case, in Midrash Rabba [ 30 ] this statement is made with an important addition: a non-Jew who converts and studies Torah etc.

The Nation of Israel is likened to the olive. Just as this fruit yields its precious oil only after being much pressed and squeezed, so Israel's destiny is one of great oppression and hardship, in order that it may thereby give forth its illuminating wisdom.

[ 31 ] Poverty is the quality most befitting Israel as the chosen people.

[ 32 ] Only on account of its good works is Israel among the nations "as the lily among thorns", [ 33 ] or "as wheat among the chaff." [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Nachman of Breslov believed that Jewishness is a level of consciousness, and not an intrinsic inborn quality. He wrote that, according to the Book of Malachi , one can find "potential Jews" among all nations, whose souls are illuminated by the leap of "holy faith", which "activated" the Jewishness in their souls. These people would otherwise convert to Judaism, but prefer not to do so. Instead, they recognize the Divine unity within their pagan religions.

[ 36 ] Isaac Arama , an influential philosopher and mystic of the 15th century, believed that righteous non-Jews are spiritually identical to the righteous Jews.

[ 37 ] Rabbi Menachem Meiri , a famous Catalan Talmudic commentator and Maimonidian philosopher, considered all people, who sincerely profess an ethical religion, to be part of a greater "spiritual Israel". He explicitly included Christians and Muslims in this category. Meiri rejected all Talmudic laws that discriminate between Jews and non-Jews, claiming that they only apply to the ancient idolators, who had no sense of morality. The only exceptions are a few laws related directly or indirectly to intermarriage, which Meiri did recognize. Meiri applied his idea of "spiritual Israel" to the Talmudic statements about unique qualities of the Jewish people. For example, he believed that the famous saying that Israel is above astrological predestination ( Ein Mazal le-Israel ) also applied to the followers of other ethical faiths. He also considered countries, inhabited by decent moral non-Jews, such as Languedoc , as a spiritual part of the Holy Land .

[ 38 ] Modern Jewish views [ edit ] Modern Orthodox views [ edit ] Rabbi Lord Immanuel Jakobovits , former Chief Rabbi of the United Synagogue of Great Britain (Modern Orthodox Judaism), stated that he saw chosenness as a universal principle, with every people having a providential role; the specific covenantal mission is to pioneer religion and morality.

[ 39 ] Modern Orthodox theologian Michael Wyschogrod wrote in 1984 that election of Abraham is God’s free choice without stated rationale; chosenness is rooted in God’s sovereign will, formalized through Abraham’s calling, rather than human merit.

[ 40 ] Rabbi Norman Lamm , a leader of Modern Orthodox Judaism , links chosenness exclusively to Torah and mitzvot, revealed at Sinai (the Sinaitic covenant). Lamm sees it as both communal holiness and priestly service to humanity.

[ 41 ] Conservative views [ edit ] The Jewish Theological Seminary of America , the main rabbinical seminary of Conservative Judaism Conservative Judaism emphasizes in its 1988 Statement of Principles that chosenness is not innate superiority but a covenantal responsibility. The statement cites Amos 3:2 to show election implies accountability, framing it as a mission to build a just society, especially in the Land of Israel, as a light unto the nations.

[ 42 ] Rabbi Reuven Hammer commented in 2003 on the excised sentence in the Aleinu prayer mentioned above, clarifying that even historically polemical liturgical phrases weren’t about ethnic superiority, but about monotheism over paganism; chosenness is about belief and calling, not intrinsic worth.

[ 43 ] Reform views [ edit ] Reform Judaism views the concept of chosenness as follows: "Throughout the ages it has been Israel's mission to witness to the Divine in the face of every form of paganism and materialism. We regard it as our historic task to cooperate with all men in the establishment of the kingdom of God, of universal brotherhood, Justice, truth and peace on earth. This is our Messianic goal." [ 44 ] In 1999 the Reform movement stated, "We affirm that the Jewish people are bound to God by an eternal covenant, as reflected in our varied understandings of Creation, Revelation and Redemption. ... We are Israel, a people aspiring to holiness, singled out through our ancient covenant and our unique history among the nations to be witnesses to God's presence. We are linked by that covenant and that history to all Jews in every age and place." [ 45 ] Reconstructionist views [ edit ] Reconstructionist Judaism rejects the concept of chosenness. This rejection of chosenness is made explicit in the movement's siddurim (prayer books).  For example, the original blessing recited before reading from the Torah contains the phrase, "asher bahar banu mikol ha’amim"—"Praised are you Lord our God, ruler of the Universe, who has chosen us from among all peoples by giving us the Torah."  The Reconstructionist version is rewritten as "asher kervanu la’avodato", "Praised are you Lord our God, ruler of the Universe, who has drawn us to your service by giving us the Torah." In the mid-1980s, the Reconstructionist movement issued its Platform on Reconstructionism . It states that the idea of chosenness is "morally untenable", because anyone who has such beliefs "implies the superiority of the elect community and the rejection of others." [ 46 ] Not all Reconstructionists accept this view.  The newest siddur of the movement, Kol Haneshamah , includes the traditional blessings as an option, and some modern Reconstructionist writers have opined that the traditional formulation should be embraced. An original prayer book by the Reconstructionist feminist poet Marcia Falk , The Book of Blessings , has been accepted by many Reform and Reconstructionist Jews. Falk rejects all concepts which are related to hierarchy or distinction; she sees any distinction as leading to the acceptance of other kinds of distinctions, thus leading to prejudice . She writes that as a politically liberal feminist, she must reject distinctions made between men and women, homosexuals and heterosexuals, Jews and non-Jews, and to some extent even distinctions between the Sabbath and the other six days of the week. She thus rejects the idea of chosenness as unethical. She also rejects Jewish theology in general, and instead holds to a form of religious humanism.

[ 47 ] Reconstructionist author Judith Plaskow also criticises the idea of chosenness, for many of the same reasons as Falk. A politically liberal lesbian, Plaskow rejects most distinctions made between men and women, homosexuals and heterosexuals, and Jews and non-Jews. In contrast to Falk, Plaskow does not reject all concepts of difference as inherently leading to unethical beliefs, and holds to a more classical form of Jewish theism than Falk.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] A number of responses to these views have been made by Reform and Conservative Jews; they hold the view that these criticisms are against teachings that do not exist within liberal forms of Judaism, and such teachings are rare in Orthodox Judaism (outside certain Haredi communities, such as Chabad ). A separate criticism stems from the very existence of feminist forms of Judaism in all denominations of Judaism , which do not have a problem with the concept of chosenness.

[ 50 ] Chabad Hasidism [ edit ] Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson , the "Lubavitcher Rebbe" See also: Kabbalah § Distinction between Jews and non-Jews The Tanya contains statements to the effect that the Jewish soul is qualitatively different from the non-Jewish soul.  A number of known Chabad rabbis offered alternative readings of the Tanya, did not take this teaching literally, and even managed to reconcile it with the leftist ideas of internationalism and class struggle . The original text of the Tanya refers to the "idol worshippers" and does not mention the "nations of the world" at all, although such interpretation was endorsed by Menachem Mendel Schneerson and is popular in contemporary Chabad circles.

Hillel Paricher , an early Tanya commentator, wrote that the souls of righteous Gentiles are more similar to the Jewish souls, and are generally good and not egoistic. This teaching was accepted by Schneerson and is considered normative in Chabad.

[ 51 ] According to the author of the Tanya himself, a righteous non-Jew can achieve a high level of spirituality, similar to an angel, although his soul is still fundamentally different in character, but not value, from a Jewish one.

[ 52 ] Tzemach Tzedek , the third rebbe of Chabad, wrote that the Muslims are naturally good-hearted people. Rabbi Yosef Jacobson, a popular contemporary Chabad lecturer, teaches that in today's world most non-Jews belong to the category of righteous Gentiles, effectively rendering the Tanya's attitude anachronistic.

[ citation needed ] An anti-Zionist interpretation of Tanya was offered by Abraham Yehudah Khein , a prominent Ukrainian Chabad rabbi, who supported anarchist communism and considered Peter Kropotkin a great Tzaddik . Khein basically read the Tanya backwards; since the souls of idol worshipers are known to be evil, according to the Tanya, while the Jewish souls are known to be good, he concluded that truly altruistic people are really Jewish, in a spiritual sense, while Jewish nationalists and class oppressors are not. By this logic, he claimed that Vladimir Solovyov and Rabindranath Tagore probably have Jewish souls, while Leon Trotsky and other totalitarians do not, and many Zionists, whom he compared to apes , are merely "Jewish by birth certificate".

[ 53 ] Spinoza [ edit ] Tractatus Theologico-Politicus One Jewish critic of chosenness was the philosopher Baruch Spinoza .

[ 54 ] In the third chapter of his Theologico-Political Treatise , Spinoza mounts an argument against a naive interpretation of God's choice of the Jewish people. Bringing evidence from the Bible itself, he argues that God's choice of Israel was not unique (he had chosen other nations before choosing the Hebrew nation) and that the choice of the Jewish people is neither inclusive (it does not include all Jews, but only the 'pious' ones) nor exclusive (it also includes 'true gentile prophets'). Finally, he argues that God's choice is not unconditional. Recalling the numerous times God threatened the complete destruction of the Hebrew nation, he asserts that this choice is neither absolute, nor eternal, nor necessary.

Einstein [ edit ] In a German-language letter to philosopher Eric Gutkind , dated 3 January 1954, the physicist Albert Einstein explained that while he valued his Jewish identity culturally, he rejected religious belief, the divine origin of the Bible, and the idea that Jews are “chosen”.

[ 55 ] Views of other religions [ edit ] Islam [ edit ] See also: Islamic-Jewish relations The children of Israel enjoy a special status in the Islamic holy book, the Quran (2:47 and 2:122).

[ 56 ] However, Muslim scholars point out that this status did not confer upon Israelites any racial superiority, and was only valid so long as the Israelites maintain their covenant with God.

[ 57 ] Christianity [ edit ] See also: Jewish-Christian relations and People of God Artist's depiction of Saint Paul Writing His Epistles , 16th century (Blaffer Foundation Collection, Houston, Texas).

Paul was the first major figure in Christian history to hold the view that Jewish law is no longer valid.

Some Christians believe that the Jews were God's chosen people, [ 58 ] but because of Jewish rejection of Jesus , the Christians in turn received that special status.

[ 59 ] This doctrine is known as Supersessionism .

Other Christians, such as the Christadelphians , believe that God has not rejected Israel as his chosen people [ 60 ] and that all Jews will in fact accept Jesus as their Messiah at his Second Coming, resulting in their salvation.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] The view that Jews still retain their status as the chosen people is also associated with Dispensational theology , promoted by John Nelson Darby and Cyrus Scofield .

[ 63 ] Augustine criticized Jewish chosenness as "carnal." He reasoned that Israel was chosen "according to the flesh." [ 64 ] The Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentary similarly argues that God made Israel the "holy nation" to exclusively uphold the promises made to their "pious forefathers". They argue that Jewish supremacist views are unsound, with Jews being frequently described as a small people that engaged in "perverse" moral conduct in the Bible.

[ 65 ] The Catechism of the Catholic Church describes the "People of God" as referring to all people who have faith in Christ and are baptized. They have characteristics "that distinguish it from all other religious, ethnic, political, or cultural groups found in history".

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Zionism and chosenness [ edit ] See also: Promised Land Zionism , while emerging as a largely secular nationalist movement, incorporated diverse interpretations of Jewish chosenness, ranging from political pragmatism to religious messianism, reframing the idea as a justification for both Jewish self-determination and global moral leadership. Classical Zionists often downplayed theological exclusivity but retained a sense of Jewish uniqueness and superiority, using chosenness as a motivating force for national liberation and the establishment of a homeland in Palestine. For religious Zionists, however, chosenness remained rooted in divine decree, making Jewish control over the biblical land of Canaan non-negotiable and part of a divinely guided process of redemption. In this view, shared by Christian Zionists as well as Jewish religious Zionists, the land promised in his covenant with Abraham belongs solely to the Jewish people, with Palestinians excluded as non-chosen “ Ishmaelites ”.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Debated areas [ edit ] Influence on Judaism's relationship with other religions [ edit ] Main article: Jewish views on religious pluralism Avi Beker , an Israeli scholar and former Secretary General of the World Jewish Congress , regarded the idea of the chosen people as Judaism's defining concept and "the central unspoken psychological, historical, and theological problem which is at the heart of Jewish-Gentile relations." In his book The Chosen: The History of an Idea, and the Anatomy of an Obsession , Beker expresses the view that the concept of chosenness is the driving force behind Jewish-Gentile relations, explaining both the admiration and, more pointedly, the envy and the hatred which the world has felt towards Jews in both religious and secular terms. Beker argues that while Christianity has modified its doctrine on the displacement of the Jewish people, Islam has neither reversed nor reformed its theology concerning the succession of both the Jews and the Christians. According to Beker, this presents a major barrier to conflict resolution in the Arab-Israeli conflict.

[ 70 ] [ page needed ] Ethnocentrism [ edit ] The Israeli philosopher Ze'ev Levy writes that chosenness can be "(partially) justified only from the historical angle" with respect to its spiritual and moral contribution to Jewish life through the centuries as "a powerful agent of consolation and hope". He points out, however, that modern anthropological theories "do not merely proclaim the inherent universal equality of all people [as] human beings; they also stress the equivalence [emphasis in original] of all human cultures." He continues that "there are no inferior and superior people or cultures but only different, other , ones." He concludes that the concept of chosenness entails ethnocentrism , "which does not go hand in hand with otherness, that is, with unconditional respect of otherness".

[ 71 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Judaism Antisemitism Criticism of Judaism Promised Land Religious nationalism Notes [ edit ] ^ The word "chosen" or “elected" in the Bible is the Hebrew word בָּחִיר bachir in the Masoretic text and ἐκλεκτός eklektos in the Septuagint References [ edit ] ^ Levy 1993 , p. 91: "The concept of ‘chosenness’ or ‘election’ has been a central idea throughout the long history of Jewish thought from the Bible, through the Talmud, rabbinic thought, medieval Jewish philosophy and mysticism, to modern and contemporary Jewish philosophy and theology. It certainly was and still is one of the most perplexing and controversial concepts of the Jewish religious tradition and, at the same time, one of the most important and decisive ones for Jewish life and history…every discussion of chosenness today has to take into consideration two chief distinct aspects: 1. The important role that the concept of chosenness fulfilled in Jewish life and history in the past; 2. The questionability of its essential meaning today from theoretical, ethical, and humanist viewpoints." ^ Gürkan 2008 , p. 1: "The idea of chosenness, which basically denotes the special relationship between God and the people of Israel, is the raison d’être of the Jewish religion as well as Jewish people… what is unique about the Jewish idea of chosenness is related to the fact that it provides Judaism with the elements of religion and nationality at once. This is why the Jewish religion is bound up with the existence and experience of the Jewish people as a physical collective entity." ^ Frank 1993 , p. 1: “ …the very idea of ‘chosenness’ or ‘election’…the doctrine of chosenness (or election)…” ^ Coogan 2019 , p. 2: “The concept of chosenness—often called election….” ^ Novak 1995 , p. 31: “In the classical biblical presentations of election, the event of election is concretized in the covenant.” ^ Coogan 2019 , p. 1: “Beginning in the early chapters of the book of Genesis, chosenness is attached to individuals whom God supposedly preferred — Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob — and is inherited by their descendants, who have a special status because God chose their ancestors. Although in the pages of the Bible some of those originally chosen eventually became excluded, the concept of chosenness continued to be applied to subgroups within the original chosen people.” ^ a b "Chosen people." Encyclopedia Britannica .  20 February 2018.

^ Clements, Ronald (1968).

God's Chosen People: a Theological Interpretation of the Book of Deuteronomy . In series, Religious Book Club , 182. London: S.C.M. Press ^ Gürkan 2008 , p. 9.

^ Deuteronomy 7:1–2 ^ Deuteronomy 7:5–6 ^ See concordance qarach (קָרַח) ; qorchah or qorcha (קָרְחָה) ^ Deuteronomy 14:1–2 ^ Exodus 19:5 ^ "(Genesis 17:7)" .

^ Exodus 19:6 ^ Deuteronomy 7:7–8 ^ Amos 3:2 ^ Translation by Philip Birnbaum, "High Holyday Prayerbook" ^ a b Numbers 27:16 ^ Hebrew Bible ^ Levine, 1907/1966 ^ Mishnah Sanhedrin 4:5 ^ Sanhedrin 105a) ^ Beẓah, 25b ^ Mek. Yitro, Pes. R. K. 103b, 186a, 200a ^ Sifra, Aḥare Mot, 86b; Bacher, "Ag. Tan." ii. 31 ^ Tehillim 105: 8,9 ^ Avraham Yaakov Finkel.

The essential Maimonides. Translations of the Rambam , Jason Aronson Inc , Northvale New Jersey London ^ Bamidbar 13:15 ^ Ex. R. xxxvi:1.

^ Ḥag. 9b ^ Cant. R. ii. 2 ^ Midr. Teh. i. 4 ^ Weber's "System der Altsynagogalen Theologie", etc., pp. 59–69, is full of glaring errors and misstatements on the subject of Israel as the chosen people ^ Likutei Moharan, Part 2 ,5 ^ Isaac Arama, Akedat Yitzchak, Ch. 60 ^ Gregg Stern.

Philosophy and Rabbinic Culture: Jewish Interpretation and Controversy in Medieval Languedoc . Routledge Jewish Studies Series ^ qtd. in Mackenzie : "Yes, I do believe that the chosen people concept as affirmed by Judaism in its holy writ, its prayers, and its millennial tradition. In fact, I believe that every people—and indeed, in a more limited way, every individual—is "chosen" or destined for some distinct purpose in advancing the designs of Providence. Only, some fulfill their mission and others do not. Maybe the Greeks were chosen for their unique contributions to art and philosophy, the Romans for their pioneering services in law and government, the British for bringing parliamentary rule into the world, and the Americans for piloting democracy in a pluralistic society. The Jews were chosen by God to be 'peculiar unto Me' as the pioneers of religion and morality; that was and is their national purpose." ^ Wyschogrod, Michael.

The Body of Faith, Judaism as a Corporeal Election . 1984.  pp. 174–177: "[T]he initial election of Abraham himself was not earned.  ... We are simply told that God commanded Abraham to leave his place of birth and go to a land that God would show him .  He is also promised that his descendants will become a numerous people.  But nowhere does the Bible tell us why Abraham rather than someone else was chosen.  The implication is that God chooses whom He wishes and that He owes no accounting to anyone for His choices." ^ Lamm, Norman.

"Seventy Faces: Articles of Faith, Volume 1." Google Books .  16 February 2018: "The chosenness of Israel relates exclusively to its spiritual vocation embodied in the Torah; the doctrine, indeed, was announced at Sinai. Whenever it is mentioned in our liturgy—such as the blessing immediately preceding the Shema....it is always related to Torah or Mitzvot ( commandments ). This spiritual vocation consists of two complementary functions, described as "Goy Kadosh", that of a holy nation, and "Mamlekhet Kohanim", that of a kingdom of priests. The first term denotes the development of communal separateness or differences in order to achieve a collective self-transcendence. ... The second term implies the obligation of this brotherhood of the spiritual elite toward the rest of mankind; priesthood is defined by the prophets as fundamentally a teaching vocation." ^ Emet Ve-Emunah: Statement of Principles of Conservative Judaism , JTSA, New York, 1988, p.33–34: "Few beliefs have been subject to as much misunderstanding as the 'Chosen People' doctrine.  The Torah and the Prophets clearly stated that this does not imply any innate Jewish superiority.  In the words of Amos (3:2) 'You alone have I singled out of all the families of the earth—that is why I will call you to account for your iniquities.' The Torah tells us that we are to be "a kingdom of priests and a holy nation" with obligations and duties which flowed from our willingness to accept this status. Far from being a license for special privilege, it entailed additional responsibilities not only toward God but to our fellow human beings. As expressed in the blessing at the reading of the Torah, our people have always felt it to be a privilege to be selected for such a purpose. For the modern traditional Jew, the doctrine of the election and the covenant of Israel offers a purpose for Jewish existence which transcends its own self interests. It suggests that because of our special history and unique heritage we are in a position to demonstrate that a people that takes seriously the idea of being covenanted with God can not only thrive in the face of oppression, but can be a source of blessing to its children and its neighbors. It obligates us to build a just and compassionate society throughout the world and especially in the land of Israel where we may teach by example what it means to be a 'covenant people, a light unto the nations.'" ^ Reuven Hammer, Or Hadash , The Rabbinical Assembly, New York, 2003: "Originally the text read that God has not made us like the nations who "bow down to nothingness and vanity, and pray to an impotent god", ... In the Middle Ages these words were censored, since the church believed they were an insult to Christianity. Omitting them tends to give the impression that the Aleinu teaches that we are both different and better than others. The actual intent is to say that we are thankful that God has enlightened us so that, unlike the pagans, we worship the true God and not idols. There is no inherent superiority in being Jewish, but we do assert the superiority of monotheistic belief over paganism. Although paganism still exists today, we are no longer the only ones to have a belief in one God." ^ The Guiding Principles of Reform Judaism , Columbus, Ohio , 1937 ^ Statement of Principles for Reform Judaism , adopted at the 1999 Pittsburgh Convention, Central Conference of American Rabbis ^ Federation of Reconstructionist Congregations and Havurot, newsletter, September 1986, pages D, E.

^ Falk, 1996: "The idea of Israel as God's chosen people ... is a key concept in rabbinic Judaism. Yet it is particularly problematic for many Jews today, in that it seems to fly in the face of monotheistic belief that all humanity is created in the divine image—and hence, all humanity is equally loved and valued by God. ... I find it difficult to conceive of a feminist Judaism that would incorporate it in its teaching: the valuing of one people over and above others is all too analogous to the privileging of one sex over another." ^ "Feminist Theology" .

Jewish Women's Archive . Retrieved 2022-05-01 .

^ Plaskow, Judith (1991).

Standing Again at Sinai: Judaism form a Feminist Perspective .

HarperOne .

ISBN 978-0060666842 .

^ Plaskow, Judith.

"Feminist Theology" .

Jewish Women's Archive . Retrieved January 23, 2023 .

^ Lessons in Tanya, Vol. 1, Ch. 1 ^ סידור הרב, שער אכילת מצה ^ ר' אברהם חן, במלכות היהדות (Rabbi Abraham Chen, "In the Kingdom of Judaism") ^ Levy,
 Zeev.

"Spinoza and the Philosophical Impossibility of a Chosen People." My Jewish Learning .  1993.  20 February 2018.

^ Dvorsky, George (23 October 2012).

“Einstein's 'I don't believe in God' letter has sold on eBay..." “ The word God is for me nothing more than the expression and product of human weaknesses, the Bible a collection of honorable, but still primitive legends which are nevertheless pretty childish. No interpretation no matter how subtle can (for me) change this.... For me the Jewish religion like all other religions is an incarnation of the most childish superstitions. And the Jewish people to whom I gladly belong and with whose mentality I have a deep affinity have no different quality for me than all other people.... I cannot see anything “chosen” about them”.

^ "The Jews and the Qur'an - AskMusa.org - English" . Archived from the original on 2018-03-31 . Retrieved 2010-09-04 .

^ M. Abdulsalam. " Is the Quran Anti-Semitic?: The Semites, a Chosen People ." ^ Liberation and reconciliation: a Black theology p.  24 ^ The Collegeville Bible Commentary: Based on the New American Bible , Robert J. Karris, Liturgical Press, 1992, p. 1042 ^ Romans 11:2 ^ Zechariah 12:10 , Romans 11:26 ^ Israel: God's People, God's Land Archived 2018-05-12 at the Wayback Machine , David M. Pearce, Christadelphian Magazine and Publishing Association Ltd (UK) ^ Frey, Jörg (2022-04-04), "Anti-Judaism, Philosemitism, and Protestant New Testament Studies: Perspectives and Questions" , Protestant Bible Scholarship: Antisemitism, Philosemitism and Anti-Judaism , Brill, pp.

149– 181, ISBN 978-90-04-50515-5 , retrieved 2024-03-12 ^ Augustine.

Adversius Judaios .

^ "Deuteronomy 7 Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentary" .

Biblehub . 2023.

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church, 781-786 ^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church" .

www.catholicculture.org . Retrieved 2023-05-03 .

^ Gürkan 2008 , p. 92-93: “The question of how Zionists understood the idea of chosenness was also part of their evaluation of the past, present, and future of the Jewish people, and was not free of ambiguity. Zionism, as a secular national movement, ended up including a variety of positions, ranging from secular political to religious messianic ones… [the] programme of normalization did not mean depriving of the Jews of their ‘privileged’ or ‘unique’ position as the chosen people, but rather abandoning their ‘abnormal’ condition as a people without a home. In other words, while Zionists, for the most part, did away with the element of ‘difference’ embedded in chosenness, they retained, to a great extent, the notions of ‘uniqueness’ and ‘superiority’. Although it was difficult to combine an aspiration for normality with an ongoing sense of chosenness, either in terms of divine election or the unique national genius of the Jewish people, classical Zionism softened the apparent contradiction, turning the notion of chosenness into a useful factor for Jewish national liberation and a necessary element for the improvement of world civilization. Accordingly, the notion of chosenness provided the Zionist movement with a missionary role. In this way, the universalist and redemptive implications of the traditional doctrine of chosenness, particularly in terms of ‘leading the world’, were employed to a great extent by the Zionists to justify their goal of establishing a Jewish state in Palestine… The traditional notion of chosenness, which originally referred to the Jewish people as a physical collective entity, was transformed in this way into the Jewish nationhood as a political–ethical entity. The theme of ‘leading the world’ was also used by the socialist Jews of the Diaspora. They would attribute a ‘vanguard’ role to the Jews, as ‘a chosen people not of God but of history’, a people ‘preaching a salvation open to all mankind’... On the other hand, the sense of uniqueness attached to Jewish chosenness rendered Zionism a unique form of nationalism, which might be seen in connection with the above-mentioned missionary role… Thus, the Zionist formula built around the secular notion of chosenness would be that the Jews, as a great and model nation deserved to have a homeland as much as, or even more than, any other people, for their own sake as well for the sake of the world. In other words, the secularized notion of the chosen people, in terms of the greatness of the Jews, would be used as a justification for the Jewish colonization in Palestine.” ^ Coogan 2019 , p. 110, 114: “But for ultrareligious Zionists, recognition of Palestinian territorial sovereignty is not negotiable, because Jewish control of the original land of Canaan is divinely ordained. Harold Fisch, himself a religious Zionist and former rector of Bar-Ilan University, put it this way: From scattered colonies to a National Home; from a National Home to a state in a fraction of the land; and from that to the liberation of the land of Israel as a whole on behalf of the Jewish people: here was a process that we did not initiate; at each stage we had no option but to respond to a demand made on us; we are manifestly coerced by the logic of tragedy and redemption. The concept of a chosen people, originally one group’s self-definition as superior to others, has again become God’s immutable decree. A similar reading of the Bible as God’s detailed revelation about our own times is shared by fundamentalist Christians, many of whom are also ardent Zionists… Both Jewish and Christian fundamentalists indulge in a facile interpretation of the Bible as written not for its original audiences, but as a kind of secret code that only they have truly deciphered. According to their readings, although mutually inconsistent in detail, the land God promised to Abraham belongs only to the Jews, and they have now reclaimed it as God had planned. The Palestinian Arabs are not chosen, and have no share in the Promised Land, as God decreed long ago: they are Ishmaelites.” ^ Avi Beker, The Chosen: The History of an Idea, and the Anatomy of an Obsession, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008, Preface ^ Ze'ev Levy, Judaism and Chosenness: On Some Controversial Aspects from Spinoza to Contemporary Jewish Thought , in Daniel H. Frank, ed. (1993).

A People apart: chosenness and ritual in Jewish philosophical thought . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1631-0 .

, p. 104 Bibliography [ edit ] Singer, I.; Adler, C. (1901). "Chosen People".

The Jewish Encyclopedia: A Descriptive Record of the History, Religion, Literature, and Customs of the Jewish People from the Earliest Times . Vol. 4. Ktav Publishing House. pp.

45– 46.

Eisen, Arnold M.

(1990). "The Rhetoric of Chosenness and the Fabrication of American Jewish Identity". In Lipset, Seymour Martin (ed.).

American pluralism and the Jewish community .

Transaction Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-88738-286-4 .

Frank, Daniel H. (1993). "Introduction". In Daniel H. Frank (ed.).

A People Apart: Chosenness and Ritual in Jewish Philosophical Thought . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1632-7 .

JSTOR jj.18254037.3 . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

Novak, David (1993). "The Election of Israel: Outline of a Philosophical Analysis". In Daniel H. Frank (ed.).

A People Apart: Chosenness and Ritual in Jewish Philosophical Thought . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1632-7 .

JSTOR jj.18254037.4 . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

Kellner, Menachem (1993). "Chosenness, Not Chauvinism: Maimonides on the Chosen People". In Daniel H. Frank (ed.).

A People Apart: Chosenness and Ritual in Jewish Philosophical Thought . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1632-7 .

JSTOR jj.18254037.5 . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

Levy, Ze’ev [in German] (1993). "Judaism and Chosenness: On Some Controversial Aspects from Spinoza to Contemporary Jewish Thought". In Daniel H. Frank (ed.).

A People Apart: Chosenness and Ritual in Jewish Philosophical Thought . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1632-7 .

JSTOR jj.18254037.6 . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

Novak, David (1995).

The Election of Israel . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-04482-0 .

Gürkan, Salime Leyla [in Turkish] (2008-12-05).

The Jews as a Chosen People: Tradition and transformation . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-134-03707-0 .

Beker, Avi (2008-05-12).

The Chosen: The History of an Idea, the Anatomy of an Obsession . Springer.

ISBN 978-0-230-61168-9 . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

Lohr, Joel N. (2009-06-30).

Chosen and Unchosen: Conceptions of Election in the Pentateuch and Jewish-Christian Interpretation . Penn State Press.

ISBN 978-1-57506-615-8 . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

Gitlin, Todd ; Leibovitz, Liel (2010-09-14).

The Chosen Peoples: America, Israel, and the Ordeals of Divine Election . Riverside: Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4391-4877-8 .

El-Bizri, N. (2015-05-01).

"God's Chosen People: Judah Halevi's Kuzari and the Sh Im m Doctrine By EHUD KRINIS, translated from Hebrew by ANN BRENER and TAMAR LIZA COHEN" .

Journal of Islamic Studies .

26 (2): 208– 211.

doi : 10.1093/jis/etu083 .

ISSN 0955-2340 . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

Brueggemann, Walter (2015-08-19).

Chosen?: Reading the Bible Amid the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict . Presbyterian Publishing Corp.

ISBN 978-1-61164-612-2 .

Coogan, Michael (2019-04-02).

God's Favorites: Judaism, Christianity, and the Myth of Divine Chosenness . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0-8070-0194-3 .

Sutcliffe, Adam (2020-06-16).

What Are Jews For?: History, Peoplehood, and Purpose . Princeton ; Oxford: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-20193-1 .

Zighelboim, Oshri (2022-10-02).

" "You Have Chosen Us from among All Nations": The Chosenness Concept in Israeli Ultra-Orthodox School Anthologies" .

Journal of Jewish Education .

88 (4): 261– 285.

doi : 10.1080/15244113.2022.2146551 .

ISSN 1524-4113 . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

Kaminsky, Joel S.; Lohr, Joel N. (2024-04-09).

"Election in the Bible" .

Oxford Bibliographies Online . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

External links [ edit ] The Contemporary Rivalry over the Chosen People: Jewish, Christian, and Muslim Perspectives – Avi Beker Archived 2012-04-01 at the Wayback Machine at the Institute for Global Jewish Affairs Archived 2021-02-11 at the Wayback Machine Chosen people at the Jewish Encyclopedia Beliefs of Reform Judaism The Jewish concept of chosenness Archived 2008-06-05 at the Wayback Machine When God Wanted to Destroy the Chosen People, Dr Gili Kugler The Chosen People FAQs Some are Chosen, All are Loved. Rabbi Gilbert S. Rosenthal The Chosen People: Reclaiming Our Sacred Myth , Mitchell Max How does Jewish Pride differ from Nazi Supremacy?

, Rabbi Tzvi Freeman Anti-Defamation League paper on Christian Identity The Covenant, the Sword, and the Arm of the Lord – a Christian Identity movement Archived 2006-10-02 at the Wayback Machine The Real Truth About The Talmud by Rabbi Gil Student . Exposes fraudulent or distorted Talmud quotes used by antisemites Are the Jews the Chosen People?

chabad.org OzTorah – Isn't it arrogant and exclusionist for Jews to regard themselves as the Chosen People?

v t e Jews and Judaism Outline of Judaism Index of Jewish history-related articles History Timeline Israelites Origins of Judaism Ancient Israel and Judah Second Temple period Synagogal Judaism Rabbinic Judaism Middle Ages Zionism Population Assimilation Atheists Buddhists Israeli Jews Karaites Samaritans Lists of Jews Persecution Antisemitism Xueta Christianity Zionism, race and genetics Gentile Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites Diaspora Ashkenazim Afrikaner-Jode Chuts Galitzianers Lita'im Oberlander Jews Ostjuden Udmurt and Tatar Jews Unterlander Jews Yekkes Beta Israel Beta Abraham Falash Mura Desi Jews Bene Israel Kochinim Dönmeh Gruzínim Italkim Neofiti Kaifeng Jews Karaites Constantinopolitan Karaites Crimean Karaites Kurdish Jews Krymchaks Lemba Maghrebi Berber Jews Mizrahi Afghan Jews Alexandrian Jews Baghdadi Bukharan Jews Egyptian Jews Mountain Jews Palestinian Jews Persian Jews Urfalim Teimanim Adeni Jews Ḥabbanim Hadhrami Jews Saada Jews Mustaʿravim Jewish tribes of Arabia Romaniote Sephardim Eastern Sephardim Livornese Jews North African Sephardim Paradesi Meshuchrarim Sephardic Bnei Anusim Xuetes Languages ( Diasporic ) Hebrew Modern Ashkenazi Sephardi Mizrahi Yemenite Tiberian Samaritan Signed Medieval Mishnaic Biblical Babylonian Palestinian Catalanic Judeo-Amazigh Judeo-Arabic Yahudic Judeo-Baghdadi Judeo-Moroccan Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Judeo-Yemeni Judaeo-Aramaic Targum Barzani Betanure Hulaulá Lishana Deni Lishán Didán Lishanid Noshan Biblical Talmudic Palestinian Galilean Judeo-Aragonese Jewish English Yeshivish Yinglish Heblish Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Greek Judeo-Italian Judaeo-Piedmontese Judeo-Latin Judeo-Malay Judeo-Malayalam Judeo-Marathi Judaeo-Occitan Judeo-Persian Bukhori Judeo-Borujerdi Judeo-Golpaygani Judeo-Hamedani Judeo-Shirazi Juhuri Judaeo-Portuguese Judeo-Urdu Karaim Kayliñña Kivruli Knaanic Koiné Greek Krymchak Lachoudisch Ladino Haketia Tetuani Lotegorisch Qwareña Shassagh Shassi Shuadit Yiddish dialects Eastern Galitzish Litvish Poylish Klezmer-loshn Western Judeo-Alsatian Lachoudisch Scots-Yiddish Zarphatic Philosophy Beliefs Mitzvah Rabbinic authority Chosen people Conversion Eschatology Messiah Ethics Holiness God Names of God Halakha Haskalah Kabbalah Sefirot Land of Israel Who is a Jew?

Branches Religious movements Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Litvaks Modern Conservative Reform Reconstructionist Humanistic Neo-Hasidism Renewal Neolog relations Haymanot Hellenistic Karaite Samaritanism Science Secularism Schisms Literature Sifrei Kodesh Tanakh /Hebrew Bible Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Rabbinic Mishnah Talmud Tosefta Midrash Kabbalah texts Hekhalot literature Pardes Rimonim Sefer HaBahir Sefer HaEtz Chaim Sefer Raziel HaMalakh Sefer Yetzirah Zohar Shulchan Aruch Siddur Hebrew literature Culture Astrology perspectives Monen Astronomy Calendar Holidays Cuisine Kashrut Education Leadership Rabbi Rebbe Marriage Divorce Music Mythology Names Politics Prayer Synagogue Hazzan Symbolism Studies Center for Jewish History American Jewish Historical Society American Sephardi Federation Leo Baeck Institute New York Yeshiva University Museum YIVO Institute for Jewish Research Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation Encyclopaedia Judaica Genetics Jew (word) Jewish Encyclopedia Jewish Virtual Library National Library of Israel YIVO Encyclopedia United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Encyclopedia of the Holocaust Holocaust Encyclopedia Relations with other religions Christian Anabaptism Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Jews and Christmas Jews and Halloween non-Christian Buddhism Islam Hinduism Italics indicate extinct languages Category Judaism portal v t e Exceptionalism National American exceptionalism (USA) Cultural Exception (France) Sonderweg (Germany) Sinocentrism / Han chauvinism / Chinese exceptionalism (China) Third Rome (Europe & Russia ) European exceptionalism Indian exceptionalism Pinoy pride (Philippines) Thai exceptionalism Nicaraguan exceptionalism Fifth Empire Nihonjinron Religious Religiocentrism Religious exclusivism Feeneyism Hindutva Jews as the chosen people Unification Church (Korea) Debate on Exclusivism in the SDA Church Terms Chosen people God's Own Country Middle Kingdom Sui generis Other Allocentrism Anthropocentrism Androcentrism Biocentrism Ecocentrism Ethnocentrism Template:Ethnocentrism Gynocentrism HIV exceptionalism Carbon chauvinism Particle chauvinism Planetary chauvinism Sentiocentrism Logocentrism Phallocentrism Phallogocentrism Phonocentrism Xenocentrism Related Jingoism Chauvinism Supremacist Particularism Theocentrism Technocentrism Authority control databases National United States Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jews_as_the_chosen_people&oldid=1306526256 " Categories : Jewish theology Judaism-related controversies Exceptionalism Racism Hidden categories: Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from March 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing more viewpoints from March 2024 Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from May 2025 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles that may contain original research from May 2025 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2011 CS1 interwiki-linked names Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 06:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jews as the chosen people 20 languages Add topic

