Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Zeno of Sidon 23 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Қазақша Magyar مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek philosopher – 1st Century BCE This article is about the Epicurean philosopher. For other uses, including many other philosophers, see Zeno .

Zenon Born c. 150 BC Sidon , Coele-Syria , Seleucid Empire Died c. 75 BC prob.

Athens Philosophical work Era Hellenistic philosophy Region Western philosophy School Epicureanism Main interests Ethics , mathematics Zeno of Sidon ( Ancient Greek : Ζήνων ὁ Σιδώνιος ; c. 150 – c. 75 BC [ 1 ] ) was a Greek Epicurean philosopher [ 2 ] from the Seleucid city of Sidon . His writings have not survived, but there are some epitomes of his lectures preserved among the writings of his pupil Philodemus .

Life [ edit ] Zeno was born in the city of Sidon . He was a contemporary of Cicero , who heard him when at Athens .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] He was sometimes termed the "leading Epicurean." ( Latin : Coryphaeus Epicureorum ) [ 3 ] Cicero states that Zeno was contemptuous of other philosophers, and even called Socrates "the Attic Buffoon ( scurram Atticum )." [ 5 ] He was a disciple of Apollodorus , [ 6 ] and Cicero and Diogenes Laërtius both  describe him as an accurate and polished thinker.

[ 7 ] [ 3 ] [ 8 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Zeno held that happiness is not merely dependent upon present enjoyment and prosperity, but also on a reasonable expectation of their continuance and appreciation.

[ 7 ] [ 4 ] Zeno's writings have not survived, but among the charred papyrus remains at the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum , there is an Epitome of Conduct and Character from the Lectures of Zeno written by his pupil Philodemus . It contains the essays On Frank Criticism [ 9 ] and On Anger .

[ 10 ] Zeno also studied the philosophy of mathematics based on the derivation of all knowledge from experience.  He criticized Euclid , seeking to show that deductions from the fundamental principles ( Koine Greek : ἀρχαί ) of geometry cannot, on their own, be proved: [Some] admit the principles but deny that the propositions coming after the principles can be demonstrated unless they grant something that is not contained in the principles.  This method of controversy was followed by Zeno of Sidon, who belonged to the school of Epicurus , and against whom Posidonius has written a whole book.

[ 11 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Dorandi 1999 , p. 52.

^ "Zeno of Sidon | Greek philosopher" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ a b c Cicero, de Natura Deorum , i. 59 .

^ a b Cicero, Tusculan Disputations , iii. 17.

^ Cicero, de Natura Deorum , i. 93.

^ Laërtius 1925b , § 26 ^ a b One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Zeno of Sidon ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 972.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 35 ^ PHerc. 1471 ^ PHerc. 182 ^ Proclus , ad I. Euclid.

iii.

References [ edit ] Dorandi, Tiziano (1999). "Chapter 2: Chronology". In Algra, Keimpe; et al. (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.

52 .

ISBN 9780521250283 .

Laërtius, Diogenes .

"The Stoics: Zeno" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 2:7. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 35.

Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Epicurus" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 2:10. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 26.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Zeno of Sidon at Wikimedia Commons v t e Epicureanism Philosophers Greek Founders Epicurus Metrodorus Polyaenus Hermarchus Students of Epicurus Idomeneus of Lampsacus Colotes Carneiscus Leontion Themista Leonteus Batis Nikidion Scholarchs of The Garden Epicurus Hermarchus Polystratus Dionysius Basilides Apollodorus Zeno of Sidon Phaedrus Patro Philonides of Laodicea Diogenes of Seleucia Diogenes of Tarsus Demetrius Lacon Roman Alcaeus and Philiscus Amafinius Rabirus Titus Albucius Catius Calpurnius Piso Philodemus Atticus Lucretius Siro Diogenes of Oenoanda Works On Nature Canon Principal Doctrines Letters of Epicurus To Herodotus To Pythocles To Menoeceus To Mother De rerum natura English Herculaneum papyri Paris 4 Vatican Sayings Concepts Atomism Ataraxia Clinamen Epilogism Eudaimonia Free will Hedone Javelin argument Otium Parrhesia Phantasiai Epicurean paradox Principle of Multiple Explanations Problem of the criterion Related articles Villa of the Papyri Epicuri de grege porcum Epikoros Epicurea Pierre Gassendi v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zeno_of_Sidon&oldid=1260059861 " Categories : 2nd-century BC births 70s BC deaths 1st-century BC Greek philosophers Epicurean philosophers Roman-era philosophers in Athens Phoenician philosophers Pantheists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Koine Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 November 2024, at 16:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zeno of Sidon 23 languages Add topic

