Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and service to the Ghaznavids 2 Service to the Seljuks Toggle Service to the Seljuks subsection 2.1 Reign of Tughril and Alp Arslan 2.2 Reign of Malik Shah I 3 Works 4 Death 5 Legacy 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Nizam al-Mulk 46 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский سنڌي Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Winaray Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Seljuk Abbasid Persian scholar, warrior, politician, and vizier (1018–1092) This article is about the Persian scholar. For the founder of the Asaf Jahi dynasty, see Nizam-ul-Mulk, Asaf Jah I . For other uses, see Nizam-ul-Mulk .

Nizam al-Mulk نظام‌الملک Vizier of the Seljuk Empire In office 29 November 1064 – 14 October 1092 Monarch Alp Arslan (1063–1072) Malik Shah I (1072–1092) Preceded by Al-Kunduri Succeeded by Taj al-Mulk Abu'l Ghana'im Born 10 April 1018 Tus , Ghaznavid Empire Died 14 October 1092 (aged 74) Nahavand , Seljuk Empire Burial place Tomb of Nizam al-Mulk , Isfahan , Iran Spouse Unnamed Bagrationi princess [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Children Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk Shams al-Mulk Uthman Abulfath Fakhr al-Malik Mu'ayyid al-Mulk Jamal al-Mulk Fakhr al-Mulk Izz al-Mulk Imad al-Mulk Abu'l-Kasim Safiyya Father Ali ibn Ishak Abū ʿAlī Ḥasan ibn ʿAlī Ṭūsī ( Persian : ابوعلی حسن بن علی طوسی ) (1018 – 1092), better known by his honorific title of Niẓām al-Mulk ( Persian : نظام‌الملک , lit.

'Orderer of the Realm' [ 3 ] ), was a Persian [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Sunni scholar , jurist , political philosopher and vizier of the Seljuk Empire . Rising from a low position within the empire, [ 6 ] he became the de facto ruler of the empire for 20 years after the assassination of Sultan Alp Arslan in 1072, [ 7 ] serving as the archetypal "good vizier".

[ 6 ] Viewed by many historians as "the most important statesman in Islamic history ", the policies implemented by Nizam ul-Mulk remained the basic foundation for administrative state structures in the Muslim world up until the 20th century.

[ 8 ] One of his most important legacies was the founding of a system of madrasas in cities across the Seljuk Empire which were called the Nizamiyyas after him.

[ 9 ] He also wrote the Siyasatnama ( Book of Government ), a political treatise that uses historical examples to discuss justice, effective rule, and the role of government in Islamic society.

[ 10 ] Early life and service to the Ghaznavids [ edit ] Abu Ali Hasan was born on 10 April 1018, in a small village named Radkan, near Tus , in Iran, to a dehqan family.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Growing up he studied Shafi fiqh and the Ashari school of theology.

[ 8 ] His father Ali ibn Ishak served as a financial officer to the Ghaznavids .

[ 15 ] However, when the Seljuk Turks defeated the Ghaznavids at the Battle of Dandanaqan in 1040, and conquered Khorasan , Abu Ali Hasan's father fled to Ghazni . Hasan followed his father to Ghazni, and it is there that he first assumed a government office. He remained in Ghazni for three or four years, when he left the Ghaznavid court and entered service with the Seljuks.

[ 15 ] Service to the Seljuks [ edit ] Reign of Tughril and Alp Arslan [ edit ] Around the year 1043, Abu Ali Hasan stopped serving the Ghaznavids and entered the service of the Seljuk Turks. He later became the chief administrator of the entire Khorasan province by 1059.

[ 16 ] When Tughril died childless in the city of Ray , he was succeeded by his nephew Suleiman which was contested by Alp Arslan , both of them sons of Tughril's brother Chaghri . His cousin Kutalmish , who had both been a vital part of his campaigns and later a supporter of Yinal 's rebellion, also put forth a claim. Alp Arslan, with the aid of Abu Ali Hasan, defeated Kutalmish and succeeded him on 27 April 1064.

After Alp Arslan had consolidated his power in the Sejluk realm, he appointed Abu Ali Hasan as his vizier, who would remain in that position throughout the reigns of Alp Arslan (1063–1072) and Malik-Shah I (1072–1092). Abu Ali Hasan was also given the title of "Nizam al-Mulk" ("Order of the Realm").

[ 3 ] Alp Arslan's strength lies in the military realm. Domestic affairs were handled by Nizam al-Mulk, who also founded the administrative organization that characterized and strengthened the sultanate during the reigns of Alp Arslan and his son, Malik Shah I. Military iqtā' (fiefs), governed by Seljuk princes, were established to provide support for the soldiery and to accommodate the nomadic Turks to the established Anatolian agricultural scene. This type of military fiefdom enabled the nomadic Turks to draw on the resources of the sedentary Iranians and other established cultures within the Seljuk realm, and allowed Alp Arslan to field a huge standing army without depending on tribute from conquest to pay his soldiers. He not only had enough food from his subjects to maintain his military, but the taxes collected from traders and merchants added to his coffers sufficiently to fund his continuous wars.

[ citation needed ] Nizam accompanied Alp Arslan in all his campaigns and journeys, except for a few. In February/March 1064, Alp Arslan, along with his son Malik-Shah I and Nizam al-Mulk, campaigned in Byzantine Armenia , where they managed to capture Ani . Several minor rulers then acknowledged Seljuk authority, while Alp Arslan and Nizam continued to penetrate deeper into the Caucasus , reaching Georgia . The Georgian ruler Bagrat IV , managed to make peace with Alp Arslan by giving his niece to him in marriage.

[ 2 ] [ 1 ] Nizam also made some expeditions on his own and conquered the citadel of Estakhr from the Shabankara chieftain Fadluya in 1067, and made another expedition in Fars . These successful conquests are said to have greatly increased his reputation.

[ 16 ] On 26 August 1071, the decisive Battle of Manzikert was fought, which Nizam al-Mulk had missed because he had been sent to Persia with a convoy of materials.

Reign of Malik Shah I [ edit ] Coin minted during the reign of Malik-Shah I .

Following Alp Arslan's assassination in 1072, Malik-Shah I was challenged in battle by his uncle, Kavurt . In January 1074, their armies met near Hamadan . Kavurt's troops consisted of the traditional Turkmen elements from Alp Arslan's army, while Malik's consisted of ghulams and contingents of Kurdish and Arab troops. Due to Turkmen defections to Malik's army, Kavurt was defeated and, despite Malik's consideration for mercy, later poisoned, presumably on the orders of Nizam al-Mulk.

[ 17 ] Under Nizam's excellent guidance the Seljuk armies contained the Ghaznavids in Khorasan, rolled back the Fatimids in Syria, defeated other Seljuk pretenders to the throne, invaded Georgia and reduced it to a tributary state, compelled the submission of regional governors, and kept the Abbasid Caliphs in a position of impotence.

[ 18 ] Nizam al-Mulk left a great mark on the organization of the Seljuk governmental bodies and hence the title Nizam al-Mulk which translates as "Order of the Realm." He bridged political gaps among the Abbasids , the Seljuks , and their various rivals such as the Fatimids . The Seljuk military was heavily mixed of different ethnicity, including Turks, Armenians, Greeks, Arabs, and Slavs. Nizam, however, favored Iranian soldiers, such as the Dailamites , Khorasanis , and the Shabankara . He also favored non-Iranian soldiers such as the Georgians.

[ 19 ] Nizam al-Mulk's many political objectives included: [ citation needed ] Creating an employment opportunity for the Turkmens, who had immigrated to the Iranian plateau during the Seljuk successes in Persia, the nomadic way of life of the Turkmens represented a significant threat to the political and economic stability of the country.

Demonstrating the power of the Sultan (i.e. the strength and mobility of his forces, but also his grace towards docile rebels).

Maintaining local Sunni and Shiite rulers as vassals of the Sultan and the increased use of relatives of the Sultan as provincial governors.

Preventing dissents over the succession of Malik-Shah I .

Maintaining good relations with the Abbasid Caliphate .

In 1081/1082, Ibn Bahmanyar , one of the many enemies of Nizam, tried to poison him, but failed and was blinded by Nizam. After the blinding of Ibn Bahmanyar, the enemies of Nizam made false stories about him and his son. This greatly angered Nizam's son Jamal al-Mulk, who tore out the tongue of Ja'farak, one of the perpetrators of the false stories. Malik Shah had no power to intervene in the event, but instead had Jamal poisoned.

[ 19 ] In 1091, a group of Qarmatians sacked Basra , while the Isma'ilis under the leadership of Hassan-i Sabbah seized the fortress of Alamut . Moreover, the succession to the sultanate was complicated by the death of two of Malik-Shah's eldest sons: Dawud (died 1082) and Ahmad (died 1088), whom both were sons of the Kara-Khanid Princess Terken Khatun .  She also had a son named Mahmud (born 1087) whom she wanted to succeed his father, while Nizam and most of the Seljuk army was in favor of Berkyaruq , [ 19 ] the oldest of all Malik-Shah's living sons and born to a Seljuk princess. Terken Khatun then allied with Taj al-Mulk Abu'l Ghana'im to try to remove Nizam from his post. Taj even accused Nizam of corruption before the sultan. Malik Shah I, however, did not dare to dismiss Nizam.

[ 20 ] Nizam later besieged Alamut, but was forced to withdraw.

In 1092, Nizam, just before his death, knowing that his enemies were planning plots against him, made a famous speech at the court: [ 19 ] Tell the Sultan, If you have not already realized that I am your co-equal in the work of ruling, then know that you have only attained to this power through my statesmanship and judgement. Does he not remember when his father was killed, and I assumed responsibility for the conduct of affairs and crushed the rebels who reared their heads, from his own family and from elsewhere. Tell him that the stability of that regal cap is bound up with this vizierial inkstand, and that the harmony of these two interests is the means of securing all objects soughts after and the ultimate cause of all objects gained. If ever I close up this inkstand, that royal power will topple.

Works [ edit ] Aside from his extraordinary influence as vizier with full authority, he is also well known for systematically founding a number of schools of higher education in several cities like Baghdad , Isfahan , Amol , Nishapur , Mosul , Basra , and Herat , the famous Nizamiyyah schools, which were named after him.

Nizam al-Mulk is also widely known for his voluminous treatise on kingship titled Siyasatnama ( Book of Government ) which was written after Malik Shah had requested that his ministers produce books on government, administration and the troubles facing the nation. However, the treatise made by Nizam was the only one to receive approval and was consequently accepted as forming " the law of the constitution of the nation ".

[ 21 ] The treatise uses historical examples to discuss justice, effective rule, and the role of government in Islamic society, and has been compared to Machiavelli 's The Prince .

[ 10 ] The work also discusses various aspects of state surveillance and spying, advising rulers to establish an extensive espionage network.

[ 22 ] He also wrote a book titled Dastur al-Wuzarā , written for his son, Abu'l-Fath Fakhr al-Malik , which is not dissimilar to the famous book of Qabus nama .

Death [ edit ] Artwork of Nizam's assassination, miniature from the Jami' al-tawarikh of Rashid al-Din Hamadani Nizam al-Mulk was assassinated en route from Isfahan to Baghdad on 10 Ramadan 485 A.H. (14 October 1092) The mainstream literature says he was stabbed by the dagger of a member of the Assassins , sent by the notorious Hassan-i Sabbah near Nahavand , as he was being carried on his litter. The killer approached him disguised as a Sufi .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] This account is particularly interesting in light of a possibly apocryphal story that first appeared in English in the introduction to Edward Fitzgerald 's translation of the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam . In this story a pact is formed between a young Nizam al-Mulk (at that time known as Abdul Khassem) and his two friends, Omar Khayyam and Hassan-i-Sabbah. Their agreement stated that if one should rise to prominence, that they would help the other two to do likewise. Nizam al-Mulk was the first to do this when he was appointed vizier to the sultan Alp Arslan. To fulfill the pact he offered both friends positions of rank within the court. Omar refused the offer, asking instead to be given the means to continue his studies indefinitely. This Nizam did, as well as building him an observatory. Although Hassan, unlike Omar, decided to accept the appointment offered to him, he was forced to flee after plotting to depose Nizam as vizier. Subsequently, Hassan came upon and conquered the fortress of Alamut, from where he established the Assassins.  According to Bernard Lewis , this tale is unlikely to be true because Hassan-i Sabbah died in 1124, and Omar Khayyam in 1123 at the earliest. Since Nizam al-Mulk was born in 1020 at the latest, the three were not of similar ages and were probably not students together.

[ 25 ] Legacy [ edit ] Nizam al-Mulk was a skilled and effective vizier, he represented the majesty, splendor and hospitality of the Barmakids , historians and poets describe him as a great organizer and an ideal soldier and scholar.

[ 26 ] Because of his talents, it was possible for the Seljuk Turks to establish a powerful empire in their new home.

[ 27 ] Nizam was not only the leader of the Persian-dominated bureaucratic ( divan ), but was also an atabeg who served in the royal court ( dadgar ) and played an important role between the politically and culturally different Iranians and Turks. He was also responsible for establishing distinctly Persian forms of government and administration which would last for centuries.

[ 28 ] Because of his excellent tutorship and close friendship with Malik-Shah, he was usually called "father" by him.

[ 16 ] He was even greatly respected by his ghulams , who, after the death of Nizam, took revenge on several of his rivals, such as Taj al-Mulk Abu'l Ghana'im.

[ 16 ] Even after his death his family continued to play an important role in the Seljuk Empire . He was married to a niece or daughter of Bagrat IV of Georgia , who had previously been married or betrothed to Alp Arslan.

[ 1 ] All of his twelve sons held important offices in the Seljuk Empire, the most prominent of his sons were: Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk , served as the vizier of the Seljuk Sultan Muhammad I Tapar and the Abbasid caliph al-Mustarshid ; [ 1 ] Shams al-Mulk Uthman was the governor of Merv and head of the Seljuk military; Fakhr al-Mulk served as the vizier of Berkyaruq and Muhammad I Tapar; Jamal al-Mulk (who died before Nizam) served as the governor of Balkh ; Izz al-Mulk and Mu'ayyid al-Mulk served as viziers of Berkyaruq; [ 29 ] Imad al-Mulk Abu'l-Kasim served as the vizier of the Seljuk governor of Balkh .

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Bosworth 1984 , pp. 642–643.

^ a b Bosworth 1968 , p. 62-65.

^ a b Foltz, Richard (2015).

Iran in World History (New Oxford World History) .

Oxford University Press . p. 64.

ISBN 978-0199335497 .

In Iran, the Seljuks established their capital at Esfahan, where they built important monuments such as the congregational mosque which remains functional today. Their prime minister, Hasan of Tus (known as Nezam ol-Molk, or Orderer of the Realm), set up a system of seminaries, called nezamiyyas, and also reformed the army and the tax system ^ Von Grunebaum, Gustave E.; Watson, Katherine (2005).

Classical Islam: A History, 600 A.D. to 1258 A.D . Translated by Watson, Katherine. Aldine Transaction. p. 155.

^ Holt, P. M.; Lambton, Ann K. S.; Lewis, Bernard (1977).

The Cambridge History of Islam . Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. p. 150.

^ a b Yavari 2015 .

^ Bowen & Bosworth 1995 , p. 70.

^ a b Black, Anthony (14 November 2011).

"Islamic and Western political thought: does History have any Lessons?" .

Khazar Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences .

14 (3): 5– 12.

doi : 10.5782/2223-2621.2011.14.3.5 .

hdl : 20.500.12323/1366 .

ISSN 2223-2621 .

^ Nizam al-Mulk (2002). Darke, Hubert (ed.).

The Book of Government or Rules for Kings . New York: Persian Heritage Foundation. pp.

ix– x.

ISBN 9781136602962 .

^ a b Meri, Josef W. (31 October 2005).

Medieval Islamic Civilization: An Encyclopedia . Routledge. p. 856.

ISBN 978-1-135-45596-5 .

^ Tafazzoli 1994 , pp. 223–226.

^ "NIẒĀM AL-MULK" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Grousset, René, ed. (1970). "The Turks and Islam to the Thirteenth Century".

The Empire of the Steppes: A History of Central Asia . Rutgers University Press. p. 153 ff.

^ Fossier, Airlie (1997). "Marsack".

The Cambridge illustrated history of the Middle Ages . Cambridge University Press. p. 159.

^ a b Bowen & Bosworth 1995 , p. 69.

^ a b c d Bosworth 1968 , p. 57.

^ Bosworth, C. E.

(1978).

"Kawurd" . In van Donzel, E.

; Lewis, B.

; Pellat, Ch.

& Bosworth, C. E.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume IV: Iran–Kha . Leiden: E. J. Brill. p. 807.

OCLC 758278456 .

^ Gibb, H. A. R. (1993).

Bosworth, C. E.

; van Donzel, E.

; Heinrichs, W. P.

& Pellat, Ch.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition. Volume VII: Mif–Naz . Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp.

273– 275.

ISBN 978-90-04-09419-2 .

^ a b c d Bosworth 1968 , pp. 68–80.

^ Bowen & Bosworth 1995 , p. 72.

^ "Economic Thought of Nizam Al-Mulik Al-Tusi" . Archived from the original on 18 March 2008 . Retrieved 13 September 2013 .

^ Aladashvili, Besik (2017).

Fearless: A Fascinating Story of Secret Medieval Spies . Kindle Publishing.

^ Waterson, James (2008).

The Ismaili Assassins. A history of medieval murder . Yorkshire. p. 79.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ von Sebottendorff, Baron Rudolf (17 January 2013).

Secret Practices of the Sufi Freemasons: The Islamic Teachings at the Heart of Alchemy . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-62055-001-4 .

^ Lewis, Bernard (5 August 2008).

The Assassins . Basic Books. pp.

39– 40.

ISBN 978-0-7867-2455-0 .

^ Tetley, G. E. (2008).

The Ghaznavid and Seljuk Turks: Poetry as a Source for Iranian History (1st ed.). Routledge. p. 125, ff.

^ Barthold, V. V. (1928).

Turkestan down to the Mongol Invasion (in German). Translated by Minorsky, T.; Bosworth, C. E.

London: Luzac & Co. p. 308.

^ Morgan, David.

Medieval Persia 1040-1797 . p. 29.

^ Bosworth 1968 , p. 105.

Bibliography [ edit ] Bosworth, C. E.

(1968).

"The Political and Dynastic History of the Iranian World (A.D. 1000–1217)" . In Boyle, John Andrew (ed.).

The Cambridge History of Iran . Vol. 5: The Saljuq and Mongol Periods. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . pp.

1– 202.

ISBN 0-521-06936-X .

Bosworth, C. E.

(1984).

"AḤMAD B. NEẒĀM-AL-MOLK" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica . Vol. I, Fasc. 6. London. pp.

642– 643.

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Bowen, H. & Bosworth, C. E.

(1995).

"Niẓām al-Mulk" . In Bosworth, C. E.

; van Donzel, E.

; Heinrichs, W. P.

& Lecomte, G.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume VIII: Ned–Sam . Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp.

69– 73.

ISBN 978-90-04-09834-3 .

Tafazzoli, Ahmad (1994).

"DEHQĀN" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica . Vol. VII, Fasc. 2 and Vol. VII, Fasc. 3. Ahmad Tafazzoli. pp.

223– 226.

Yavari, Neguin (2015).

"NEẒĀM-AL-MOLK" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica .

Nizam al-Mulk (2002) [1960].

The Book of Government Or Rules for Kings: The Siyar al-Muluk or Siyasat-nama of Nizam al-Mulk . Translated by Darke, Hubert. Routledge.

ISBN 0700712283 – via Google Books.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nizam al-Mulk .

The story behind the assassination Gokmen Durmus – Upenn Master's Thesis on Turkish Wisdom More Photos, Tishineh Preceded by Al-Kunduri Vizier of the Great Seljuq Empire 29 November 1064 – 14 October 1092 Succeeded by Taj al-Mulk Abu'l Ghana'im v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e People of Khorasan Scientists Abu Hatam Isfizari Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Wafa Abu Ubayd Juzjani Abu Zayd Balkhi Alfraganus Ali Qushji Avicenna Birjandi Biruni Hasib Marwazi Ibn Hayyan Abu Ja'far al-Khazin Khazini Khojandi Khwarizmi Nasawi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Sijzi Philosophers Algazel Amiri Avicenna Farabi Haji Bektash Veli Nasir Khusraw Sijistani Shahrastani Islamic scholars Abu Dawud al-Sijistani Abu Barakat Nasafi Abu Hanifa Abu Hafs Nasafi Abu Layth Samarqandi Abu Mu'in Nasafi Abu Qasim Samarqandi Ansari Baghavi Bayhaqi Bazdawi Bukhari Dabusi Fatima Samarqandi Ghazali Ghaznawi Hakim Tirmidhi Hakim Nishapuri Ibn Hibban Ibn Mubarak Ishaq ibn Rahwayh Ibn Tayfour Sajawandi Juwayni Kasani Kashifi Lamishi Marghinani Maturidi Mulla al-Qari Muqatil Muslim Nasa'i Qushayri Razi Sabuni Sajawandi Sarakhsi Shaykh Tusi Taftazani Tha'labi Nishapuri Tirmidhi Yahya ibn Adam Zamakhshari Poets and artists Abu Sa'id Abu'l-Khayr Anvari Aruzi Samarqandi Asadi Tusi Attar Nishapuri Behzad Daqiqi Farrukhi Sistani Ferdowsi Jami Kashifi Nasir Khusraw Rabia Balkhi Rudaki Rumi Sanā'ī Historians and political figures Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu'l-Hasan Isfarayini Abu'l-Ma'ali Nasrallah Abu Muslim Khorasani Gardizi Ali-Shir Nava'i Ata-Malik Juvayni Aufi Abu Ali Bal'ami Gawhar Shad Ibn Khordadbeh Khalid ibn Barmak Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani Nizam al-Mulk Tahir ibn Husayn Yahya Barmaki Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk Shihab al-Nasawi Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Greece Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nizam_al-Mulk&oldid=1304459800 " Categories : 1018 births 1092 deaths 11th-century Iranian scientists 11th-century Iranian philosophers People from Tus, Iran Assassinated Iranian politicians Iranian political philosophers Viziers of the Seljuk Empire Scholars from the Seljuk Empire Dehqans Ghaznavid officials Atabegs Critics of Shia Islam Iranian ethicists People of the Nizari–Seljuk wars Victims of the Order of Assassins People assassinated in the 11th century Assassinated viziers Iranian Sunni Muslims Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2024 Articles containing Persian-language text Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 05:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nizam al-Mulk 46 languages Add topic

