Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Benefits 2 Industries 3 Processes Toggle Processes subsection 3.1 Product design 3.1.1 Universal connectors 3.2 Reusable shopping bags 4 Households 5 Healthcare facilities Toggle Healthcare facilities subsection 5.1 Practices 6 Culture of packaging reuse 7 Legal mandates 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Waste minimisation 17 languages العربية Български Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Igbo עברית 日本語 Slovenčina Suomi தமிழ் Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process that involves reducing the amount of waste produced in society "waste prevention" redirects here. For the prevention of uncontrolled waste dumping, see Pollution .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Waste minimisation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Waste hierarchy. Refusing, reducing, reusing, recycling and composting allow to reduce waste.

Waste minimisation is a set of processes and practices intended to reduce the amount of waste produced.  By reducing or eliminating the generation of harmful and persistent wastes, waste minimisation supports efforts to promote a more sustainable society.

[ 1 ] Waste minimisation involves redesigning products and processes and/or changing societal patterns of consumption and production.

[ 2 ] The most environmentally resourceful, economically efficient , and cost effective way to manage waste often is to not have to address the problem in the first place. Managers see waste minimisation as a primary focus for most waste management strategies. Proper waste treatment and disposal can require a significant amount of time and resources; therefore, the benefits of waste minimisation can be considerable if carried out in an effective, safe and sustainable manner.

Traditional waste management focuses on processing waste after it is created, concentrating on re-use , recycling ,  and waste-to-energy conversion.

[ 2 ] Waste minimisation involves efforts to avoid creating the waste during manufacturing.  To effectively implement waste minimisation the manager requires knowledge of the production process, cradle-to-grave analysis (the tracking of materials from their extraction to their return to earth) and details of the composition of the waste.

The main sources of waste vary from country to country . In the UK , most waste comes from the construction and demolition of buildings, followed by mining and quarrying, industry and commerce.

[ 3 ] Household waste constitutes a relatively small proportion of all waste.  Industrial waste is often tied to requirements in the supply chain .  For example, a company handling a product may insist that it should be shipped using particular packing because it fits downstream needs.

Proponents of waste minimisation state that manufactured products at the end of their useful life should be utilised resource for recycling and reuse rather than waste.

[ 4 ] Benefits [ edit ] Waste minimisation can protect the environment and often turns out to have positive economic benefits.  Waste minimisation can improve: [ 1 ] Efficient production practices – waste minimisation can achieve more output of product per unit of input of raw materials .

Economic returns – more efficient use of products means reduced costs of purchasing new materials, improving the financial performance of a company.

Public image – the environmental profile of a company is an important part of its overall reputation and waste minimisation reflects a proactive movement towards environmental protection .

Quality of products produced – innovations and technological practices can reduce waste generation and improve the quality of the inputs in the production phase.

Environmental responsibility – minimising or eliminating waste generation makes it easier to meet targets of environmental regulations, policies, and standards; the environmental impact of waste will be reduced.

Industries [ edit ] See also: Environmental impact assessment In industry , using more efficient manufacturing processes and better materials generally reduces the production of waste. The application of waste minimisation techniques has led to the development of innovative and commercially successful replacement products.

Waste minimisation efforts often require investment, which is usually compensated by the savings. However, waste reduction in one part of the production process may create waste production in another part.

[ 5 ] Overpackaging is excess packaging.  Eliminating it can result in source reduction , reducing waste before it is generated  by proper package design and practice.  Use of minimised packaging is key to working toward sustainable packaging .

Processes [ edit ] Reuse of scrap material Scraps can be immediately re-incorporated at the beginning of the manufacturing line so that they do not become a waste product. Many industries routinely do this; for example, paper mills return any damaged rolls to the beginning of the production line, and in the manufacture of plastic items, off-cuts and scrap are re-incorporated into new products.

Improved quality control and process monitoring Steps can be taken to ensure that the number of reject batches is kept to a minimum.  This is achieved by increasing the frequency of inspection and the number of points of inspection. For example, installing automated continuous monitoring equipment can help to identify production problems at an early stage.

Waste exchanges This is where the waste product of one process becomes the raw material for a second process. Waste exchanges represent another way of reducing waste disposal volumes for waste that cannot be eliminated.

Ship to point of use This involves making deliveries of incoming raw materials or components direct to the point where they are assembled or used in the manufacturing process to minimise handling and the use of protective wrappings or enclosures (example: Fish-booking ).

Zero waste This is a whole systems approach that aims to eliminate waste at the source and at all points down the supply chain, with the intention of producing no waste. It is a design philosophy which emphasizes waste prevention as opposed to end of pipe waste management.

[ 6 ] Since, globally speaking, waste as such, however minimal, can never be prevented (there will always be an end-of-life even for recycled products and materials), a related goal is prevention of pollution.

Minimalism Minimalism often refers to the concepts of art and music, even though a minimal lifestyle could make a huge impact for waste management and producing zero waste, can reduce which courses landfill and environment pollution. When the endless consumption is reduced to minimum of only necessary consumption, the careless production towards the demand will be reduced. A minimal lifestyle can impact the climate justice in a way by reducing the waste.

Joshua Fields Millburn and Ryan Nicodemus directed and produced a movie called Minimalism: A Documentary [ 7 ] that showcased the idea of minimal living in the modern world.

Product design [ edit ] Universal connectors [ edit ] Utilizing a charger port that can be used by any phone. The implementation of USB-C to reduce excess wires that end up in the waste that give off toxic chemicals that harm the planet.

[ 8 ] Reusable shopping bags [ edit ] Reusable bags are a visible form of re-use, and some stores offer a "bag credit" for re-usable shopping bags, although at least one chain reversed its policy, claiming "it was just a temporary bonus".

[ 9 ] In contrast, one study suggests that a bag tax is a more effective incentive than a similar discount.

[ 10 ] (Of note, the before/after study compared a circumstance in which some stores offered a discount vs. a circumstance in which all stores applying the tax.) While there is a minor inconvenience involved, this may remedy itself, as reusable bags are generally more convenient for carrying groceries.

Households [ edit ] This section details some waste minimisation techniques for householders .

Appropriate amounts and sizes can be chosen when purchasing goods; buying large containers of paint for a small decorating job or buying larger amounts of food than can be consumed create unnecessary waste. Also, if a pack or can is to be thrown away, any remaining contents must be removed before the container can be recycled.

[ 11 ] Home composting , the practice of turning kitchen and garden waste into compost can be considered waste minimisation.

The resources that households use can be reduced considerably by using electricity thoughtfully (e.g. turning off lights and equipment when it is not needed) and by reducing the number of car journeys made. Individuals can reduce the amount of waste they create by buying fewer products and by buying products which last longer. Mending broken or worn items of clothing or equipment also contributes to minimising household waste. Individuals can minimise their water usage, and walk or cycle to their destination rather than using their car to save fuel and cut down emissions.

In a domestic situation, the potential for minimisation is often dictated by lifestyle .  Some people may view it as wasteful to purchase new products solely to follow fashion trends when the older products are still usable.  Adults working full-time have little free time, and so may have to purchase more convenient foods that require little preparation, or prefer disposable nappies if there is a baby in the family.

The amount of waste an individual produces is a small portion of all waste produced by society, and personal waste reduction can only make a small impact on overall waste volumes.  Yet, influence on policy can be exerted in other areas. Increased consumer awareness of the impact and power of certain purchasing decisions allows industry and individuals to change the total resource consumption .  Consumers can influence manufacturers and distributors by avoiding buying products that do not have eco-labelling , which is currently not mandatory, or choosing products that minimise the use of packaging. In the UK , PullApart combines both environmental and consumer packaging surveys , in a curbside packaging recycling classification system to minimise waste. Where reuse schemes are available, consumers can be proactive and use them.

Healthcare facilities [ edit ] Healthcare establishments are massive producers of waste.

[ 12 ] The major sources of healthcare waste are:  hospitals, laboratories and research centres, mortuary and autopsy centres, animal research and testing laboratories, blood banks and collection services, and nursing homes for the elderly.

[ 12 ] Waste minimisation can offer many opportunities to these establishments to use fewer resources, be less wasteful and generate less hazardous waste.  Good management and control practices among health-care facilities can have a significant effect on the reduction of waste generated each day.

Practices [ edit ] There are many examples of more efficient practices that can encourage waste minimisation in healthcare establishments and research facilities.

[ 13 ] Source reduction Purchasing reductions which ensures the selection of supplies that are less wasteful or less hazardous.

The use of physical rather than chemical cleaning methods such as steam disinfection instead of chemical disinfection .

Preventing the unnecessary wastage of products in nursing and cleaning activities.

Management and control measures at hospital level Centralized purchasing of hazardous chemicals .

Monitoring the flow of chemicals within the health care facility from receipt as a raw material to disposal as a hazardous waste .

The careful separation of waste matter to help minimise the quantities of hazardous waste and disposal.

Stock management of chemical and pharmaceutical products Frequent ordering of relatively small quantities rather than large quantities at one time.

Using the oldest batch of a product first to avoid expiration dates and unnecessary waste.

Using all the contents of a container containing hazardous waste.

Checking the expiry date of all products at the time of delivery.

Culture of packaging reuse [ edit ] In some countries, such as Germany, people have established a deeper culture of packaging waste reduction than in other countries. The Mach Mehrweg Pool (“Make Reuse Pool”) is an effort initially conceived by milk producers to harmonize and share reusable milk containers, which in more recent years was expanded to include reusable packaging for additional types of food, such as coffee. People have devised ways to bring back to stores containers for yoghurt, cooking oil and marmalade and for many other types of food and to refill them there.

[ 14 ] Legal mandates [ edit ] The European Union (EU) has set packaging reduction targets that require member states to reduce packaging, especially plastic packaging. Some types of single use plastic packaging, including packaging for unprocessed fresh fruits and vegetables; for foods and beverages filled and consumed in cafés and restaurants; for individual portions (for example, sugar, condiments, sauces); and for miniature packaging for toiletries; as well as shrink-wrap for suitcases in airports, would be banned effective January 1, 2030. More generally, the EU has set mandatory reduction targets for plastic packaging have been set as follows: 5% by 2030, 10% by 2035 and 15% by 2040.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Bottle cutting Cleaner production Durable good Eco-action Ecological economics Ecological sanitation European Week for Waste Reduction Extended producer responsibility Food waste Green consumption Green economy Household hazardous waste Life-cycle assessment List of waste management acronyms Litter Miniwaste Pallet crafts Planned obsolescence Recycling Reusable launch vehicle Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Reuse of human excreta Reuse Right to repair Source reduction Sustainable sanitation Upcycling Waste hierarchy Waste management Zero waste References [ edit ] ^ a b .

"Waste-Hazardous Waste-Waste Minimisation" . United States Environmental Protection Agency (2012). Archived from the original on 28 April 2009.

^ a b Davidson, G. (2011).

"Waste Management Practices: Literature Review" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2012 . Retrieved 18 September 2017 .

^ ROYAL COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION: Urban Environment 2007 ^ "Waste Prevention | WasteWise | US EPA" .

archive.epa.gov . Retrieved 14 June 2019 .

^ Manikandan, Sivasubramanian; Vickram, Sundaram; Deena, Santhana Raj; Subbaiya, Ramasamy; Karmegam, Natchimuthu (1 May 2024).

"Critical review on fostering sustainable progress: An in-depth evaluation of cleaner production methodologies and pioneering innovations in industrial processes" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

452 : 142207.

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2024.142207 .

ISSN 0959-6526 .

^ Dickinson, J. & Snow, W.K. (2001).

"The end of waste: Zero Waste by 2020" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 October 2017 . Retrieved 1 April 2014 .

^ "Films by The Minimalists" .

The Minimalists . Retrieved 9 April 2019 .

^ "Common charger: EU ministers give final approval to one-size-fits-all charging port" (Press release). EU. 24 October 2022 . Retrieved 27 April 2023 .

^ Kroger ends reusable bag discount Archived 14 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine , WCPO TV, Cincinnati ^ Why a Bag Tax Works Better Than a Reusable Bag Bonus , Brookings Inst., 8-Jan-2014 ^ Removing food remains to reduce waste ^ a b WHO (2011).

"Waste from Health Care facilities Fact Sheet No 253" .

^ WHO (2014).

"Waste minimization, recycling and reuse" (PDF) .

^ The Guardian, 4 Jul. 2024 "‘It Needs to Stay in The Loop’: German Reuse Schemes Turn Shopping Upside Down--Food for sale at Samariter Unverpackt in Berlin, where customers can bring in their own containers to fill" ^ News release, European Parliament, 4 Mar. 2024 "Deal on new rules for more sustainable packaging in the EU" External links [ edit ] The EU Pre-waste project website, homepage.

Archived 12 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine Links to related articles v t e Biosolids , waste , and waste management Major types Agricultural wastewater Biodegradable waste Biomedical waste Brown waste Chemical waste Construction waste Demolition waste Electronic waste by country Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Heat waste Industrial waste Industrial wastewater Litter Marine debris Mining waste Municipal solid waste Open defecation Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Radioactive waste Scrap metal Sewage Sharps waste Surface runoff Toxic waste Processes Anaerobic digestion Balefill Biodegradation Composting Durable good Ecological design Garden waste dumping Illegal dumping Incineration Landfill Landfill mining Mechanical biological treatment Mechanical sorting Photodegradation Reclaimed lumber Recycling appliance recycling battery recycling bottle recycling fluorescent lamp recycling land recycling plastic recycling textile recycling timber recycling tire recycling water heat recycling water recycling shower Repurposing Resource recovery Reusable packaging Right to repair Sewage treatment Urban mining Waste collection Waste sorting Waste trade Waste treatment Waste-to-energy Countries Afghanistan Albania Armenia Australia Belgium Bangladesh Brazil Bosnia and Herzegovina Egypt Georgia Hong Kong India Israel Japan Kazakhstan New Zealand Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Switzerland Syria Tanzania Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Agreements Bamako Convention Basel Convention EU directives batteries Recycling framework incineration landfills RoHS vehicles waste water WEEE London Convention Oslo Convention OSPAR Convention Occupations Sanitation worker Street sweeper Waste collector Waste picker Other topics Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future China's waste import ban Cleaner production Downcycling Eco-industrial park Extended producer responsibility High-level radioactive waste management History of waste management Landfill fire Sewage regulation and administration Supervised injection site Toxic colonialism Upcycling Waste hierarchy Waste legislation Waste minimisation Zero waste Environment portal Category: Waste Index Journals Lists Organizations v t e Environmental technology General Appropriate technology Clean technology Climate smart agriculture Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Eco-innovation Ecotechnology Electric vehicle Energy recycling Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Environmental impact design Green building Green vehicle Environmentally healthy community design Public interest design Sustainability Sustainability science Sustainable ( agriculture architecture design development food systems industries procurement refurbishment technology transport ) Pollution Air pollution ( control dispersion modeling ) Industrial ecology Solid waste treatment Waste management Water ( agricultural wastewater treatment industrial wastewater treatment sewage treatment waste-water treatment technologies water purification ) Sustainable energy Efficient energy use Electrification Energy development Energy recovery Fuel ( alternative fuel biofuel carbon-neutral fuel hydrogen technologies ) List of energy storage projects Renewable energy commercialization transition Sustainable lighting Transportation ( electric vehicle hybrid vehicle ) Conservation Building ( green insulation natural sustainable architecture New Urbanism New Classical ) Conservation biology Ecoforestry Efficient energy use Energy conservation Energy recovery Energy recycling Environmental movement Environmental remediation Glass in green buildings Green computing Heat recovery ventilation High-performance buildings Land rehabilitation Nature conservation Permaculture Recycling Water heat recycling v t e Human impact on the environment General Anthropocene Ecological footprint Environmental impact assessment Environmental issues list of issues Human impact on marine life List of global issues Impact assessment Planetary boundaries Social ecology (ethics) Causes Causes of climate change Agriculture animal agriculture cannabis cultivation irrigation meat production cocoa production palm oil (US) Bitcoin Corporate behavior Deforestation and climate change Energy industry biofuels biodiesel coal electricity energy fashion fracking (US) nuclear power oil shale petroleum reservoirs transport Genetic pollution Environmental crime Explosives Industrialisation Land use Manufacturing cleaning agents concrete fashion plastics nanotechnology paint paper pesticides pharmaceuticals and personal care Marine life fishing fishing down the food web marine pollution overfishing Mining Overconsumption Overdrafting Overexploitation Overgrazing Particulates Pollution Quarrying Reservoirs Tourism Transport aviation rail roads shipping Urbanization urban sprawl War Effects Biodiversity threats biodiversity loss decline in amphibian populations decline in insect populations Climate change runaway climate change in the United States Deforestation Defaunation Desertification Ecocide Ecological crisis Effects of climate change Effects of climate change on agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Effects of climate change on livestock Environmental insecurity Environmental issues in the United States Coral reefs Externality Forest dieback Environmental degradation Erosion Freshwater cycle Greenhouse gas emissions Habitat destruction Holocene extinction Nitrogen cycle Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Loss and damage Loss of green belts Phosphorus cycle Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Technofossilization Tropical cyclones and climate change Water degradation Water pollution Water scarcity Mitigation Alternative fuel vehicle propulsion Birth control Cleaner production Climate change mitigation Community resilience Cultured meat Decoupling Ecological engineering Environmental engineering Environmental mitigation Industrial ecology Mitigation banking Organic farming Recycling Reforestation urban Restoration ecology Sustainability Sustainable consumption Waste minimization Commons Category by country assessment mitigation v t e Industrial ecology Tools Agent-based model Cost–benefit analysis DPSIR Ecolabel Ecological footprint Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental impact assessment Environmental management system EIO-LCA Input–output model Integrated chain management ISO 14000 Life-cycle assessment Life-cycle cost analysis Material flow analysis MET Matrix Stakeholder analysis Concepts Circular economy Cradle-to-cradle design Dematerialization Eco-efficiency Eco-industrial development Eco-industrial park Ecological modernization Efficient energy use Exergy Extended producer responsibility Industrial metabolism Industrial symbiosis Polluter pays principle Precautionary principle Rebound effect Waste hierarchy Waste minimisation Waste valorization Related fields Cleaner production Design for environment Earth systems engineering and management Ecological economics Ecological modernization Environmental economics Green chemistry Sustainable development Urban ecology Urban metabolism v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Recycling Materials Aluminium Asphalt Concrete Copper Cotton Energy Glass Gypsum Paper Plastic Refrigerant Scrap Timber Cooking oil Water Products Appliances Automotive oil Batteries Bottles PET bottles Computers Drugs Fluorescent lamps Lumber Mobile phones Paint Ships Textiles Tires Vehicles Apparatus Bins Blue bags Blue boxes Codes Collection Materials recovery facility Waste sorting Countries Rate by country Australia Brazil Canada Ireland Israel Japan Malaysia Mongolia The Netherlands Switzerland Taiwan United Kingdom Northern Ireland United States Concepts Circular economy Dematerialization Downcycling Durable good Eco-industrial park Ecological design Extended producer responsibility Green economy Industrial ecology Industrial metabolism Interchangeable parts Land recycling Material flow analysis Precycling Product stewardship Recycling (ecological) Refill (campaign) Repairability Resource recovery Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Reuse of human excreta Repurposing Reuse Right to repair Symbol ( Green Dot ) Upcycling Urban lumberjacking Waste hierarchy Waste minimisation Waste picking Wishcycling Zero waste See also Bottle cutting Cogeneration Composting Container-deposit legislation Dumpster diving Ethical consumerism Freeganism Pallet crafts Reverse vending machine Simple living Waste Waste-to-energy Waste collection Waste management law Waste management Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Environment portal Category by country by material by product organizations Index Commons Portal : Environment Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wdm6m
Cached time: 20250817141903
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.505 seconds
Real time usage: 0.672 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1879/1000000
Revision size: 19326/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 245006/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 81946/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 99292/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.261/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6763263/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  465.188      1 -total
 28.89%  134.389      1 Template:Reflist
 28.62%  133.137      1 Template:Navboxes
 24.12%  112.222      6 Template:Navbox
 20.75%   96.536      7 Template:Cite_web
 19.07%   88.724      1 Template:Waste
 12.07%   56.161      1 Template:Short_description
 10.75%   50.023      2 Template:Ambox
 10.67%   49.644      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  6.85%   31.856      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5149747:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817141903 and revision id 1304507659. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Waste_minimisation&oldid=1304507659 " Categories : Waste minimisation Waste management concepts Industrial ecology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2016 Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from October 2024 All articles that may contain original research This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 12:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Waste minimisation 17 languages Add topic

