Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Capabilities Toggle Capabilities subsection 2.1 Overview 2.2 Ratings 2.2.1 In the United States 2.2.2 In Europe 2.2.3 GOST System 2.2.4 In Brazil 3 Types Toggle Types subsection 3.1 Gas/vapor protection 3.2 Splash protection 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hazmat suit 15 languages Dansk Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Simple English Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Protective suit against chemical, bacteriological, and nuclear risks Decontamination personnel wearing hazmat suits during a mock nuclear attack in 2009.

A hazmat suit is a piece of personal protective equipment that consists of an impermeable whole-body or one piece garment worn as protection against hazardous materials.

Such suits are often combined with self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) to ensure a supply of breathable air. Hazmat suits are used by firefighters , emergency medical technicians , paramedics , researchers, personnel responding to toxic spills, specialists cleaning up contaminated facilities, and workers in toxic environments.

History [ edit ] Plague doctor wearing a plague doctor costume A radiographer wearing an early hazmat suit in 1918 during World War I .

An early primitive form of the hazmat suit arose during bubonic plague epidemics, when European plague doctors of the 16th and 17th centuries wore distinctive costumes consisting of bird-like beak masks and large overcoats while treating victims of the bubonic plague.

[ 1 ] At the time, it was thought that the inhalation of "bad air" was the cause of disease (a theory known as the miasma theory ), so the bird-like beak masks functioned as respirators that contained aromatic items such as herbs and dried flowers. The modern hazmat suit is believed to originate from the Manchurian plague of 1910–1911, wherein Malayan physician Wu Lien-teh promoted the use of various forms of personal protective equipment to prevent the spread of the pneumonic plague .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Capabilities [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department officers wearing hazmat suits.

The United States Department of Homeland Security defines a hazmat suit as "an overall garment worn to protect people from hazardous materials or substances, including chemicals, biological agents, or radioactive materials." [ 4 ] More generally, hazmat suits may provide protection from: Chemical agents through the use of appropriate barrier materials like teflon , heavy PVC or rubber and Tyvek [ 5 ] Nuclear agents possibly through radiation shielding in the lining, but more importantly by preventing direct contact with or inhalation of radioactive particles or gas Biological agents through fully sealed systems—often at overpressure to prevent contamination even if the suit is damaged or using powered air purifying respirators with full hoods and protective suits to prevent exposure (level C protection level) Fire/high temperatures usually by a combination of insulating and reflective materials which reduce the effects (see also fire proximity suit ) The hazmat suit generally includes breathing air supplies to provide clean, uncontaminated air for the wearer. In laboratory use, clean air may be supplied through attached hoses. This air is usually pumped into the suit at positive pressure with respect to the surroundings as an additional protective measure against the introduction of dangerous agents into a potentially ruptured or leaking suit.

Working in a hazmat suit is very strenuous, as the suits tend to be less flexible than conventional work garments.  With the exception of laboratory versions, hazmat suits can be hot and poorly ventilated (if at all). Therefore, use is usually limited to short durations of up to 2 hours, depending on the difficulty of the work. Level A (United States) suits, for example, are limited by their air supply to around 15–20 minutes of very strenuous work (such as a firefighting rescue in a building).

[ 6 ] However, OSHA/EPA protective level A suits/ensembles are not typically used in firefighting rescue, especially during a building/structure fire. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) compliant "turnout gear", and NIOSH-certified or CBRN self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) are the primary protection technologies for structure firefighting in the US.

Ratings [ edit ] In the United States [ edit ] United States Air Force firefighters wearing hazmat suits with an outer aluminized shell during an emergency management exercise.

Hazmat protective clothing is classified as any of Level A, B, C, or D, based upon the degree of protection they provide.

[ 7 ] Level A The highest level of protection against vapors, gases, mists, and particles is Level A, which consists of a fully encapsulating chemical entry suit with a full-facepiece self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). A person must also wear boots with steel toes and shanks on the outside of the suit and specially selected chemical-resistant gloves for this level of protection. The breathing apparatus is worn inside (encapsulated within) the suit. To qualify as Level A protection, an intrinsically safe two-way radio is also worn inside the suit, often incorporating voice-operated microphones and an earpiece speaker for monitoring the operations channel.

Level B Level B protection requires a garment (including SCBA) that provides protection against splashes from a hazardous chemical. Since the breathing apparatus is sometimes worn on the outside of the garment, Level B protection is not vapor-protective. Level B suits can also be fully encapsulating, which helps prevent the SCBA from becoming contaminated. It is worn when vapor-protective clothing (Level A) is not required. Wrists, ankles, facepiece and hood, and waist are secured to prevent any entry of splashed liquid. Depending on the chemical being handled, specific types of gloves and boots are donned. These may or may not be attached to the garment. The garment itself may be one piece or a two-piece hooded suit. Level B protection also requires the wearing of chemical-resistant boots with steel toes and shanks on the outside of the garment. As with Level A, chemical-resistant gloves and two-way radio communications are also required.

Level C Level C protection differs from Level B in the area of equipment needed for respiratory protection. The same type of garment used for Level B protection is worn for Level C. Level C protection allows for the use of respiratory protection equipment other than SCBA. This protection includes any of the various types of air-purifying respirators. People should not use this level of protection unless the specific hazardous material is known and its concentration can be measured. Level C equipment does not offer the protection needed in an oxygen deficient atmosphere.

Level D Level D protection does not protect the person from chemical exposure. Therefore, this level of protection can only be used in situations where a person has no possibility of contact with chemicals. A pair of coveralls or other work-type garment along with chemical-resistant footwear with steel toes and shanks are all that is required to qualify as Level D protection. Most firefighter turnout gear is considered to be Level D.

In Europe [ edit ] Most suits used in Europe are covered by a set EU Norms , and divided into a total of six types (levels) of protection: Type 1: Protects against liquid and gaseous chemicals. Gas tight. ( EN 943 part 1). More or less equivalent to US level A.

Type 2: Protects against liquid and gaseous chemicals. Non gas tight. (EN 943 part 1). More or less equivalent to US level B.

1 Type 3: Protects against liquid chemicals for a limited period. Liquid jet tight. ( EN 14605 ) Type 4: Protects against liquid chemicals for a limited period. Liquid saturation tight. (EN 14605). More or less equivalent to US level C.

Type 5: Protects against airborne dry particulates for a limited period. ( EN ISO 13982 -1).

Type 6: Protects against a light spray of liquid chemicals ( EN 13034 ). More or less equivalent to US level D.

1 : Can be used in places where the chemical in gaseous form isn't harmful to the body exterior.

Level A/type 1 suit.

SCBA is inside suit.

Level B/type 2 suit. SCBA is outside Level C/type 4 suit.

Type 6 glove made of nitrile rubber .

GOST System [ edit ] In the GOST system of norms, EN 943 is equivalent to GOST 12.4.284.2-2014.

In Brazil [ edit ] Different levels of hazmat suits used by the Brazilian Armed Forces .

Following the American standards, there are 4 different types of suits, from A to D. The suits are known to the Brazilian military as Roupa Protetora Permeável de Combate (Protective Permeable Combat Clothing). There are within the Brazilian military several specialized hazmat regiments. The regiments were deployed during the FIFA 2014 World Cup, 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, and the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 8 ] Types [ edit ] NASA technicians in SCAPE suits prepare to fuel a spacecraft.

Hazmat suits come in two variations: splash protection and gastight suits. The splash protection suits are designed to prevent the wearer from coming into contact with a liquid. These suits do not protect against gases or dust. Gastight suits additionally protect against gases and dust.

Gas/vapor protection [ edit ] Such suits (level A in the US) are gas or vapor -tight, providing total encapsulation and the highest level of protection against direct and airborne chemical contact. They are typically worn with a self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) enclosed within the suit.

These suits are typically constructed of several layers and, being airtight, include a release valve so the suit does not overinflate from air exhaled by the SCBA. The release valve does retain some air to keep some positive pressure ("overpressure") inside the suit. As noted, such suits are usually limited to just 15–20 minutes of use by their mobile air supply.

[ 6 ] With each suit described here, there is a manufactured device designed to protect the respiratory system of the wearer (called a respirator ) while the suit/ensemble is used to protect skin exposed to potential hazardous dermal agents.  A respirator may be something as simple as a headband strap filtering facepiece respirator (FFR); to a head harness negative pressure full face respirator (air-purifying respirator/APR); to a full face, tight fitting, closed breathing air; or open circuit, self-contained breathing apparatus (CC-SCBA or SCBA).

Splash protection [ edit ] Tyvek coveralls.

Such suits (level B in the US) are not vapor-tight and thus provide a lesser level of protection. They are, however, worn with an SCBA, which may be located inside or outside of the suit, depending on the type of suit (encapsulating or non-encapsulating). They more closely resemble the one-piece Tyvek coveralls often seen used in construction and demolition work. Yet, Level B splash suits may also be fully encapsulating suits which are simply not airtight.

Lesser protection (level C in the US) suits may be coveralls of treated material, or multi-piece combinations, sealed with tape. This kind of protection is still "proof" against many non-invasive substances, such as anthrax .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Bunker gear – Personal protective equipment used by firefighters CBRN defense – Protective measures against hazardous materials warfare, new military equivalent of NBC (now with radiological) Demron – Non-toxic and flexible polymer radiation-shielding fabric Fire proximity suit – Suit designed to protect from high temperatures MOPP – Protective gear used by U.S. military personnel in a toxic environment, military equivalent NBC suit – Type of military personal protective equipment, military equivalent Plague doctor's outfit – Clothing worn by plague doctors that was intended to protect them from infection, historical equivalent Positive pressure personnel suit – Air-tight industrial protection garment Suitport – Alternative technology to enable extravehicular activity Chemical Biological Incident Response Force – CBRE Response unit in the United States Marine Corps References [ edit ] ^ Glatter, Kathryn A.; Finkelman, Paul (February 2021).

"History of the Plague: An Ancient Pandemic for the Age of COVID-19" .

The American Journal of Medicine .

134 (2): 176– 181.

doi : 10.1016/j.amjmed.2020.08.019 .

PMC 7513766 .

PMID 32979306 .

^ Kale, Sirin (26 March 2020).

" 'They can cost £63k': how the hazmat suit came to represent disease, danger – and hope" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ Lynteris, Christos (18 August 2018).

"Plague Masks: The Visual Emergence of Anti-Epidemic Personal Protection Equipment" .

Medical Anthropology .

37 (6): 442– 457.

doi : 10.1080/01459740.2017.1423072 .

hdl : 10023/16472 .

ISSN 0145-9740 .

PMID 30427733 .

^ O'Leary, Margaret R. (2006).

The Dictionary of Homeland Security and Defense . iUniverse. p. 215.

ISBN 978-0-595-37819-7 .

^ "Exploring the Many Uses of Tyvek: A Versatile Material" . 27 February 2024 . Retrieved 27 February 2024 .

^ a b c Hazmat training reveals dangers – The Cincinnati Enquirer , Monday 19 November 2001 ^ Protective Clothing – Hazmat Gear Archived 9 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine (from the Naval Sea Systems Command website) ^ "Forças Armadas combatem coronavírus com equipes especializadas em defesa biológica" . Ministério da Defesa do Brasil. 28 March 2020.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hazmat suits .

v t e Breathing apparatus High altitude breathing apparatus Aviation breathing apparatus Emergency oxygen system Mountaineering breathing apparatus Occupational breathing apparatus Respirator Regulated by NIOSH and others Gas mask Canister Supplied-air respirator Self-contained breathing apparatus Self-contained self-rescue device Particulate respirator N95 respirator Dust mask Powered air-purifying respirator Chemical cartridge Facepieces Smoke hood Elastomeric respirator Regulations 42 CFR 84 (United States) ANSI K13.1-1973 EN 149/14683/143 (Europe) GB2626 (China), and others Medical breathing apparatus Anaesthetic machine Bubble CPAP Continuous positive airway pressure Resuscitator Bag valve mask Pocket mask Ventilator Iron lung Non-invasive ventilation Oxygen therapy Hyperbaric medicine Built-in breathing system Positive airway pressure Respiratory gas humidification Supplemental oxygen Nasal cannula Reservoir cannula Non-rebreather mask Oxygen hood Oxygen mask Oxygen tent Partial rebreather mask Simple face mask Venturi mask Underwater breathing apparatus Open-circuit scuba Diving helmet Diving rebreather Full-face diving mask Surface-supplied diving equipment Snorkel Helicopter escape set Submarine escape set Atmospheric diving suit Gas extender Helium reclaim system User respiratory interface Breathing mask Full facepiece Half mask orinasal mask General Breathing gas Breathing performance of regulators Dead space Emergency gas supply Escape breathing apparatus Facepiece Hazmat suit Negative pressure breathing Open circuit breathing apparatus Oxygen concentrator Positive pressure breathing Respiratory protective equipment Pressure regulator Constant flow regulator Demand valve Rebreather Closed circuit rebreather Counterlung Oxygen rebreather Carbon dioxide scrubber Semi-closed circuit Work of breathing Escape respirator Category Commons Glossary v t e Clothing History Industry Technology Terminology Timeline Headwear List of hat styles List of headgear List of fur headgear Beret Cap baseball flat knit Crown Hat boater bowler fedora homburg top Helmet Hood Kerchief Mask Turban Veil Neckwear Bands Choker Collar Clerical Lavallière Neckerchief Neck gaiter Necktie ascot bolo bow kipper school stock Scarf Tippet Underwear and lingerie Top Bra List of bra designs Camisole Undershirt Bottom Diaper Training pants Leggings Panties Plastic pants Slip Thong Underpants boxer briefs boxer shorts briefs Full Bodysuit, adult Bodysuit, infant Long underwear See-through Teddy Tops Blouse cache-cœur crop top halterneck tube top Cycling Kurta Mantle Shirt dress Henley polo sleeveless T crew neck Sweater cardigan guernsey hoodie jersey polo neck shrug sweater vest twinset Waistcoat Bottoms Trousers Bell-bottoms Bondage Capri Cargo Chaps Formal Go-to-hell High water Lowrise Jeans Jodhpurs Overalls Palazzo Parachute Pedal pushers Phat Shorts Bermuda cycling dolphin gym hotpants running Slim-fit Sweatpants Windpants Yoga pants Skirts A-line Ballerina Denim Men's Miniskirt Pencil Prairie Rah-rah Sarong Skort Tutu Wrap Full-Body Wear Suits and uniforms Ceremonial dress academic court diplomatic Folk Jodhpuri Jumpsuit Military full mess service sailor combat Miner Pantsuit Political Religious cassock clerical vestment School Prison Workwear boilersuit cleanroom hazmat space scrubs Dresses and gowns Formal, semi- formal, informal Backless Bouffant gown Coatdress Cocktail little black Evening ball gown debutante Plain Prairie Princess line Strapless Wedding Wrap Casual House Jumper Romper suit Sheath Shirtdress Slip Sundress Coats and outerwear Overcoats Car Chesterfield Covert Duffel Duster Greatcoat British Warm Guards Coat Greca Over-frock Riding shadbelly Trench Ulster Cloak opera Paletot Pea Polo Raincoat Mackintosh Suit coats Frock coat bekishe rekel Mess jacket Suit jacket Blazer smoking sports Teba Tailcoat dress morning Other Apron pinafore Blouson Cagoule Cape ferraiolo Inverness Mantle monastic royal mozzetta pellegrina Coatee Cut-off Gilet Jacket down flight goggle Harrington leather mackinaw Norfolk safari Jerkin Lab coat Parka Poncho Robe bathrobe dressing gown Shawl Ski suit Sleeved blanket Windbreaker Nightwear Babydoll Babygrow Blanket sleeper Negligee Nightgown Nightshirt Pajamas Swimwear Bikini Burkini Boardshorts Dry suit Monokini One-piece Rash guard Sling Square leg suit Swim briefs Swim diaper Trunks Wetsuit Legwear Sock Hold-ups Garter Pantyhose Stocking Tights Footwear List of shoe styles List of boots Boot Dress boot Flip-flops Sandal Shoe Dress shoe Court shoe Sneaker Slipper Accessories Adornments Armband Belt Boutonnière Coin purse Cufflink Cummerbund Gaiters Glasses Sunglasses Gloves Headband Handbag Inro Jewellery Livery Muff Pocket protector Pocket watch Sash Spats Suspenders Wallet Watch Non-worn items Hand fan Umbrella Walking stick Dress codes Western Formal morning dress white tie Semi-formal black lounge suit black tie Informal Business casual Smart casual Casual Related Clothing fetish Clothing swap Costume creature suit Halloween costume Cross-dressing Environmental impact Fashion haute couture made-to-measure ready-to-wear Fur clothing types Fursuit Global trade of secondhand clothing Laundry Laws List of individual dresses Reconstructed clothing Right to clothing Vintage clothing Clothing portal v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hazmat_suit&oldid=1275115708 " Categories : Environmental suits Personal protective equipment Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 03:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hazmat suit 15 languages Add topic

