Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 District court case Toggle District court case subsection 2.1 Filing and arguments 2.2 District court opinion 3 Supreme Court arguments Toggle Supreme Court arguments subsection 3.1 Consensus building 4 Supreme Court decision 5 Reaction and aftermath Toggle Reaction and aftermath subsection 5.1 Deep South 5.2 Upper South 5.3 North 5.4 Topeka 6 Legal criticism and praise 7 Brown II 8 Brown III 9 Other comments 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Citations 12.2 Works cited 13 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 13.1 Primary sources 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Brown v. Board of Education 29 languages العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1954 U.S. Supreme Court case on racial segregation 1954 United States Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court of the United States Argued December 9, 1952 Reargued December 8, 1953 Decided May 17, 1954 Full case name Oliver Brown , et al. v. Board of Education of Topeka, et al.

Citations 347 U.S.

483 ( more ) 74 S. Ct. 686; 98 L. Ed.

873; 1954 U.S. LEXIS 2094; 53 Ohio Op. 326; 38 A.L.R.2d 1180 Decision Opinion Case history Prior Judgment for defendants, 98 F. Supp.

797 ( D. Kan.

1951); probable jurisdiction noted, 344 U.S.

1 (1952).

Subsequent Judgment on relief, 349 U.S.

294 (1955) ( Brown II ); on remand, 139 F. Supp.

468 (D. Kan. 1955); motion to intervene granted, 84 F.R.D.

383 (D. Kan. 1979); judgment for defendants, 671 F. Supp.

1290 (D. Kan. 1987); reversed, 892 F.2d 851 ( 10th Cir.

1989); vacated, 503 U.S.

978 (1992) ( Brown III ); judgment reinstated, 978 F.2d 585 (10th Cir. 1992); judgment for defendants, 56 F. Supp. 2d 1212 (D. Kan. 1999) Holding Segregation of students in public schools violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment , because separate facilities are inherently unequal.

District Court of Kansas reversed.

Court membership Chief Justice Earl Warren Associate Justices Hugo Black · Stanley F. Reed Felix Frankfurter · William O. Douglas Robert H. Jackson · Harold H. Burton Tom C. Clark · Sherman Minton Case opinion Majority Warren, joined by a unanimous court Laws applied U.S. Const. amend. XIV This case overturned a previous ruling or rulings Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) (in part) Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education (1899) Berea College v. Kentucky (1908) Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka , 347 U.S. 483 (1954), [ 1 ] was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court which ruled that U.S. state laws establishing racial segregation in public schools violate the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and hence are unconstitutional, even if the segregated facilities are presumed to be equal. The decision partially overruled the Court's 1896 decision Plessy v. Ferguson , [ a ] which had held that racial segregation laws did not violate the U.S. Constitution as long as the facilities for each race were equal in quality, a doctrine that had come to be known as " separate but equal " and was rejected in Brown based on the argument that separate facilities are inherently unequal. The Court's unanimous decision in Brown and its related cases paved the way for integration and was a major victory of the civil rights movement , [ 3 ] and a model for many future impact litigation cases.

[ 4 ] The case involved the public school system in Topeka, Kansas , which in 1951 had refused to enroll the daughter of local black resident Oliver Brown at the school closest to her home, instead requiring her to ride a bus to a segregated black school farther away.  The Browns and twelve other local black families in similar situations filed a class-action lawsuit in U.S. federal court against the Topeka Board of Education, alleging its segregation policy was unconstitutional. A special three-judge court of the U.S. District Court for the District of Kansas heard the case and ruled against the Browns, relying on the precedent of Plessy and its "separate but equal" doctrine. The Browns, represented by NAACP chief counsel Thurgood Marshall , appealed the ruling directly to the Supreme Court, who issued a unanimous 9–0 decision in favor of the Browns. However, the decision's 14 pages did not spell out any sort of method for ending racial segregation in schools, and the Court's second decision in Brown II (1955) only ordered states to desegregate "with all deliberate speed".

In the Southern United States , the reaction to Brown among most white people was "noisy and stubborn", especially in the Deep South where racial segregation was deeply entrenched in society.

[ 5 ] Many Southern governmental and political leaders embraced a plan known as " massive resistance ", created by Senator Harry F. Byrd , in order to frustrate attempts to force them to de-segregate their school systems, most notably immortalised by the Little Rock crisis . The Court reaffirmed its ruling in Brown in Cooper v. Aaron , explicitly stating that state officials and legislators had no jurisdiction to nullify its ruling.

Background Educational segregation in the US prior to Brown .  Racial segregation was required throughout the states in the Southern United States (in red). Kansas where Topeka is located allowed a local option for school districts to enforce segregation (blue).

For much of the 60 years preceding the Brown case, race relations in the United States had been dominated by racial segregation . Such state policies had been endorsed by the United States Supreme Court ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), which held that as long as the separate facilities for separate races were equal, state segregation did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment 's Equal Protection Clause ("no State shall ... deny to any person ... the equal protection of the laws").

[ 6 ] Racial segregation in education varied widely from the 17 states that required racial segregation to the 16 in which it was prohibited. Beginning in the 1930s, a legal strategy was pursued, led by scholars at Howard University and activists at the NAACP , that sought to undermine states' public education segregation by first focusing on the graduate school setting.

[ 7 ] This led to success in the cases of Sweatt v. Painter , 339 U.S. 629 (1950) and McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents , 339 U.S. 637 (1950), suggesting that racial segregation was inherently unequal (at least in some settings), which paved the way for Brown .

[ 8 ] The plaintiffs in Brown asserted that the system of racial separation in all schools, while masquerading as providing separate but equal treatment of both white and black Americans, instead perpetuated inferior accommodations, services, and treatment for black Americans.

Brown was influenced by UNESCO 's 1950 Statement, signed by a wide variety of internationally renowned scholars, titled The Race Question .

[ 9 ] This declaration denounced previous attempts at scientifically justifying racism as well as morally condemning racism. Another work that the Supreme Court cited was Gunnar Myrdal 's An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy (1944).

[ 10 ] Myrdal had been a signatory of the UNESCO declaration.

The United States and the Soviet Union were both at the height of the Cold War during this time, and U.S. officials, including Supreme Court justices, were highly aware of the harm that segregation and racism were doing to America's international image. When Justice William O. Douglas traveled to India in 1950, the first question he was asked was, "Why does America tolerate the lynching of Negroes?" Douglas later wrote that he had learned from his travels that "the attitude of the United States toward its colored minorities is a powerful factor in our relations with India." Chief Justice Earl Warren , nominated to the Supreme Court by President Dwight D. Eisenhower , echoed Douglas's concerns in a 1954 speech to the American Bar Association , proclaiming that "Our American system like all others is on trial both at home and abroad, ... the extent to which we maintain the spirit of our constitution with its Bill of Rights, will in the long run do more to make it both secure and the object of adulation than the number of hydrogen bombs we stockpile." [ 11 ] [ 12 ] District court case Filing and arguments In 1951, a class-action lawsuit was filed against the Board of Education of the City of Topeka, Kansas , in the United States District Court for the District of Kansas . The plaintiffs were thirteen Topeka parents on behalf of their 20 children.

[ 13 ] The suit called for the school district to reverse its policy of racial segregation. The Topeka Board of Education operated separate elementary schools due to a 1879 Kansas law, which permitted (but did not require) districts to maintain separate elementary school facilities for black and white students in 12 communities with populations over 15,000. The plaintiffs had been recruited by the leadership of the Topeka NAACP . Notable among the Topeka NAACP leaders were the chairman McKinley Burnett ; Charles Scott, one of three serving as legal counsel for the chapter; and Lucinda Todd .

The named African-American plaintiff, Oliver Brown , was a parent, a welder in the shops of the Santa Fe Railroad , as well as an assistant pastor at his local church.

[ 14 ] He was convinced to join the lawsuit by a childhood friend, Charles Scott. Brown's daughter Linda Carol Brown , a third grader, had to walk six blocks to her school bus stop to ride to Monroe Elementary , her segregated black school 1 mi (1.6 km) away, while Sumner Elementary , a white school, was seven blocks from her house.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] As directed by the NAACP leadership, the parents each attempted to enroll their children in the closest neighborhood school in the fall of 1951. They were each refused enrollment and redirected to the segregated schools.

The case "Oliver Brown et al. v. The Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas" was named after Oliver Brown as a legal strategy to have a man at the head of the roster. The lawyers, and the National Chapter of the NAACP, also felt that having Mr. Brown at the head of the roster would be better received by the U.S. Supreme Court justices. The 13 plaintiffs were: Oliver Brown, Darlene Brown, Lena Carper, Sadie Emmanuel, Marguerite Emerson, Shirley Fleming, Zelma Henderson , Shirley Hodison, Maude Lawton, Alma Lewis, Iona Richardson, Vivian Scales, and Lucinda Todd.

[ 17 ] The last surviving plaintiff, Zelma Henderson, died in Topeka, on May 20, 2008, at age 88.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] District court opinion The District Court ruled in favor of the Board of Education, citing the U.S. Supreme Court precedent set in Plessy v. Ferguson .

[ 20 ] Judge Walter Huxman wrote the opinion for the three-judge District Court panel, including nine "findings of fact," based on the evidence presented at trial.  Although finding number eight stated that segregation in public education has a detrimental effect on negro children, the court denied relief on the ground that the negro and white schools in Topeka were substantially equal with respect to buildings, transportation, curricula, and educational qualifications of teachers.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] This finding would be specifically cited in the subsequent Supreme Court opinion of this case.

[ 23 ] Supreme Court arguments The case of Brown v. Board of Education as heard before the Supreme Court combined five cases: Brown itself, Briggs v. Elliott (filed in South Carolina ), Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County (filed in Virginia ), Gebhart v. Belton (filed in Delaware ), and Bolling v. Sharpe (filed in Washington, D.C.

).

All were NAACP-sponsored cases. The Davis case, the only case of the five originating from a student protest, began when 16-year-old Barbara Rose Johns organized and led a 450-student walkout of Moton High School .

[ 24 ] The Gebhart case was the only one where a trial court, affirmed by the Delaware Supreme Court , found that discrimination was unlawful; in all the other cases the plaintiffs had lost as the original courts had found discrimination to be lawful.

The Kansas case was unique among the group in that there was no contention of gross inferiority of the segregated schools' physical plant, curriculum, or staff. The district court found substantial equality as to all such factors. The lower court, in its opinion, noted that, in Topeka, "the physical facilities, the curricula, courses of study, qualification and quality of teachers, as well as other educational facilities in the two sets of schools [were] comparable." [ 25 ] The lower court observed that "colored children in many instances are required to travel much greater distances than they would be required to travel could they attend a white school" but also noted that the school district "transports colored children to and from school free of charge" and that "no such service [was] provided to white children." [ 25 ] In the Delaware case the district court judge in Gebhart ordered that the black students be admitted to the white high school due to the substantial harm of segregation and the differences that made the separate schools unequal.

Under the leadership of Walter Reuther , the United Auto Workers donated $75,000 to help pay for the NAACP's efforts at the Supreme Court.

[ 26 ] The NAACP's chief counsel, Thurgood Marshall —who was later appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1967—argued the case before the Supreme Court for the plaintiffs. Assistant attorney general Paul Wilson—later distinguished emeritus professor of law at the University of Kansas —conducted the state's ambivalent defense in his first appellate argument.

In December 1952, the Justice Department filed an amicus curiae ("friend of the court") brief in the case. The brief was unusual in its heavy emphasis on foreign-policy considerations of the Truman administration in a case ostensibly about domestic issues. Of the seven pages covering "the interest of the United States," five focused on the way school segregation hurt the United States in the Cold War competition for the friendship and allegiance of non-white peoples in countries then gaining independence from colonial rule. Attorney General James P. McGranery noted that "the existence of discrimination against minority groups in the United States has an adverse effect upon our relations with other countries. Racial discrimination furnishes grist for the Communist propaganda mills." [ 27 ] The brief also quoted a letter by Secretary of State Dean Acheson lamenting that "the United States is under constant attack in the foreign press, over the foreign radio, and in such international bodies as the United Nations because of various practices of discrimination in this country." [ 28 ] British barrister and parliamentarian Anthony Lester has written that "Although the Court's opinion in Brown made no reference to these considerations of foreign policy, there is no doubt that they significantly influenced the decision." [ 28 ] Consensus building The members of the U.S. Supreme Court that on May 17, 1954, ruled unanimously that racial segregation in public schools is unconstitutional.

In spring 1953, the court heard the case, but was unable to decide the issue and asked to rehear the case in fall 1953, with special attention to whether the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause prohibited the operation of separate public schools for whites and blacks.

[ 29 ] Conference notes and draft decisions illustrate the division of opinions before the decision was issued.

[ 30 ] Justices William O. Douglas , Hugo Black , Harold Hitz Burton , and Sherman Minton were predisposed to overturn Plessy .

[ 30 ] Fred M. Vinson noted that Congress had not adopted desegregation legislation; Stanley F. Reed discussed incomplete cultural assimilation and states' rights , and was inclined to the view that segregation worked to the benefit of the African-American community; Tom C. Clark wrote that "we had led the states on to think segregation is OK and we should let them work it out." [ 30 ] Felix Frankfurter and Robert H. Jackson disapproved of segregation, but were also opposed to judicial activism and expressed concerns about the proposed decision's enforceability.

[ 30 ] Chief Justice Vinson had been a key stumbling block. After Vinson died in September 1953, President Dwight D. Eisenhower appointed Earl Warren as Chief Justice.

[ 30 ] Warren had supported the integration of Mexican-American students in California school systems following Mendez v. Westminster .

[ 31 ] : 165 However, Eisenhower invited Earl Warren to a White House dinner along with John W. Davis , who was the oral advocate against desegregation in Briggs v. Elliott , where the president told Warren privately: "These [southern whites] are not bad people. All they are concerned about is to see that their sweet little girls are not required to sit in school alongside some big overgrown Negroes." [ b ] Nevertheless, the Justice Department sided with the African-American plaintiffs.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] While all but one justice personally rejected segregation, the judicial restraint faction questioned whether the Constitution gave the court the power to order its end. The activist faction believed the Fourteenth Amendment did give the necessary authority and were pushing to go ahead. Warren, who held only a recess appointment , held his tongue until the Senate confirmed his appointment.

Warren convened a meeting of the justices, and presented to them the simple argument that the only reason to sustain segregation was an honest belief in the inferiority of Negroes. Warren further submitted that the court must overrule Plessy to maintain its legitimacy as an institution of liberty, and it must do so unanimously to avoid massive Southern resistance. He began to build a unanimous opinion. Although most justices were immediately convinced, Warren spent some time after this famous speech convincing everyone to sign onto the opinion. Justice Jackson dropped his concurrence and Reed finally decided to drop his dissent. The final decision was unanimous. Warren drafted the basic opinion and kept circulating and revising it until he had an opinion endorsed by all the members of the court.

[ 37 ] Reed was the last holdout and reportedly cried during the reading of the opinion.

[ 38 ] Supreme Court decision Chief justice Earl Warren, the author of the Supreme Court's unanimous opinion in Brown On May 17, 1954, the Supreme Court issued a unanimous 9–0 decision in favor of the Brown family and the other plaintiffs. The decision consists of a single opinion written by chief justice Earl Warren , which all the justices joined.

[ 39 ] The Court's opinion began by discussing whether the Fourteenth Amendment, adopted in 1868, was meant to abolish segregation in public education. The Court said that it had been unable to reach a conclusion on the question, even after hearing a second round of oral arguments from the parties' lawyers specifically on the historical sources.

[ 39 ] Reargument was largely devoted to the circumstances surrounding the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment in 1868. It covered exhaustively consideration of the Amendment in Congress, ratification by the states, then-existing practices in racial segregation, and the views of proponents and opponents of the Amendment. This discussion and our own investigation convince us that, although these sources cast some light, it is not enough to resolve the problem with which we are faced. At best, they are inconclusive.

— Brown , 347 U.S. at 489.

[ 40 ] The Court said the question was complicated by the major social and governmental changes that had taken place in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. It observed that public schools had been uncommon in the American South in the late 1860s. At that time, Southern white children whose families could afford schooling usually attended private schools, while the education of Southern black children was "almost nonexistent", to the point that in some Southern states the education of black people was forbidden by law.

[ 41 ] The Court contrasted this with the situation in 1954: "Today, education is perhaps the most important function of our local and state governments." [ 42 ] The Court concluded that, in making its ruling, it would have to "consider public education in light of its full development and its present place in American life throughout the Nation." [ 43 ] During the segregation era, it was common for black schools to have fewer resources and poorer facilities than white schools despite the equality required by the "separate but equal" doctrine. The Brown Court did not address this issue, however, probably because some of the school districts involved in the case had improved their black schools in order to "equalize" them with the quality of the white schools.

[ 39 ] This prevented the Court from finding a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause in "measurable inequalities" between all white and black schools and forced the Court to look to the effects of segregation itself.

[ 44 ] The Court therefore framed the case around the more general question of whether the principle of "separate but equal" was constitutional when applied to public education.

[ 45 ] We come then to the question presented: Does segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race, even though the physical facilities and other "tangible" factors may be equal, deprive the children of the minority group of equal educational opportunities?

— Brown , 397 U.S. at 493.

[ 46 ] In answer, the Court held that it did.

[ 47 ] The Court ruled that state-mandated segregation, even if implemented in schools of otherwise equal quality, is inherently unequal because of its psychological effect upon the segregated black children.

[ 47 ] To separate them [black children] from others of similar age and qualifications solely because of their race generates a feeling of inferiority as to their status in the community that may affect their hearts and minds in a way unlikely to ever be undone. The effect of this separation on their educational opportunities was well stated by a finding in the Kansas case ... : "Segregation of white and colored children in public schools has a detrimental effect upon the colored children. The impact is greater when it has the sanction of the law, for the policy of separating the races is usually interpreted as denoting the inferiority of the negro group. A sense of inferiority affects the motivation of a child to learn. Segregation with the sanction of law, therefore, has a tendency to retard the educational and mental development of negro children and to deprive them of some of the benefits they would receive in a racially integrated school system." Whatever may have been the extent of psychological knowledge at the time of Plessy v. Ferguson , this finding is amply supported by modern authority. Any language in Plessy v. Ferguson contrary to this finding is rejected.

— Brown , 347 U.S. at 494 (alterations and footnotes omitted).

[ 48 ] The Court supported its conclusion with citations—in a footnote, not the main text of the opinion—to several psychological studies concluding that segregating black children made them feel inferior and interfered with their learning.

[ 47 ] These studies included those of Kenneth and Mamie Clark , whose experiments in the 1940s had suggested that black American children from segregated environments preferred white dolls over black dolls .

The Court then concluded its relatively short opinion by declaring that segregated public education was inherently unequal, violated the Equal Protection Clause, and therefore was unconstitutional: We conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of "separate but equal" has no place. Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal. Therefore, we hold that the plaintiffs and others similarly situated for whom the actions have been brought are, by reason of the segregation complained of, deprived of the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment.

— Brown , 397 U.S. at 495.

[ 48 ] The Court did not close with an order to implement the integration of the schools of the various jurisdictions. Instead, it requested the parties re-appear before the Court the following Term to hold arguments on what the appropriate remedy should be.

[ 47 ] This became the case known as Brown II , described below.

Reaction and aftermath Americans mostly cheered the Court's decision in Brown , but most white Southerners decried it. Many white Southerners viewed Brown as "a day of catastrophe—a Black Monday —a day something like Pearl Harbor ." [ 49 ] In the face of entrenched Southern opposition, progress on integrating American schools was slow. The American political historian Robert G. McCloskey described: The reaction of the white South to this judicial onslaught on its institutions was noisy and stubborn. Certain "border states," which had formerly maintained segregated school systems, did integrate, and others permitted the token admission of a few Negro students to schools that had once been racially unmixed. However, the Deep South made no moves to obey the judicial command, and in some districts there can be no doubt that the Desegregation decision hardened resistance to integration proposals.

[ 5 ] In Virginia, Senator Harry F. Byrd organized the Massive Resistance movement that included the closing of schools rather than desegregating them.

[ 50 ] For several decades after the Brown decision, African-American teachers, principals, and other school staff who worked in segregated Black schools were fired or laid off as Southerners sought to create a system of integrated schools with White leadership. According to historian Michael Fultz, "In many ways the South moved faster, with more 'deliberate speed' in displacing Black educators than it did in desegregating schools." [ 51 ] Deep South Texas Attorney General John Ben Shepperd organized a campaign to generate legal obstacles to the implementation of desegregation.

[ 52 ] In September 1957, Arkansas governor Orval Faubus called out the Arkansas Army National Guard to block the entry of nine black students, later known as the " Little Rock Nine " after the desegregation of Little Rock Central High School . President Dwight D. Eisenhower responded by asserting federal control over the Arkansas National Guard and deploying troops from the U.S. Army 's 101st Airborne Division stationed at Fort Campbell to ensure the black students could safely register for and attend classes.

[ 53 ] Also in 1957, Florida's response was mixed. Its legislature passed an Interposition Resolution denouncing the decision and declaring it null and void. But Florida Governor LeRoy Collins , though joining in the protest against the court decision, refused to sign it, arguing that the attempt to overturn the ruling must be done by legal methods.

In Mississippi , fear of violence prevented any plaintiff from bringing a school desegregation suit for the next nine years.

[ 54 ] When Medgar Evers sued in 1963 to desegregate schools in Jackson, Mississippi , White Citizens Council member Byron De La Beckwith murdered him.

[ 55 ] Two subsequent trials resulted in hung juries. Beckwith was not convicted of the murder until 1994.

[ 56 ] In June 1963, Alabama governor George Wallace personally blocked the door to the University of Alabama 's Foster Auditorium to prevent the enrollment of two black students in what became known as the " Stand in the Schoolhouse Door " incident.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Wallace sought to  uphold his " segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever " promise he had given in his 1963 inaugural address. Wallace moved aside only when confronted by General Henry V. Graham of the Alabama National Guard , whom President John F. Kennedy had ordered to intervene.

Native American communities were also heavily impacted by segregation laws with native children also being prohibited from attending white institutions.

[ 59 ] Native American children considered light-complexioned were allowed to ride school buses to previously all white schools, while dark-skinned Native children from the same band were still barred from riding the same buses.

[ 59 ] Tribal leaders, having learned about Martin Luther King Jr.

's desegregation campaign in Birmingham, Alabama, contacted him for assistance. King promptly responded to the tribal leaders and through his intervention the problem was quickly resolved.

[ 59 ] Upper South In North Carolina, there was often a strategy of nominally accepting Brown , but tacitly resisting it. On May 18, 1954, the Greensboro, North Carolina school board declared that it would abide by the Brown ruling. This was the result of the initiative of D. E. Hudgins Jr., a former Rhodes Scholar and prominent attorney, who chaired the school board. This made Greensboro the first, and for years the only, city in the South, to announce its intent to comply. However, others in the city resisted integration, putting up legal obstacles [ how?

] to the actual implementation of school desegregation for years afterward, and in 1969, the federal government found the city was not in compliance with the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Transition to a fully integrated school system did not begin until 1971, after numerous local lawsuits and both nonviolent and violent demonstrations. Historians have noted the irony that Greensboro, which had heralded itself as such a progressive city, was one of the last holdouts for school desegregation.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] In Moberly, Missouri , the schools were desegregated, as ordered. However, after 1955, the African-American teachers from the local "negro school" were not retained; this was ascribed to poor performance. They appealed their dismissal in Naomi Brooks et al., Appellants, v. School District of City of Moberly, Missouri, Etc., et al.

; but it was upheld, and SCOTUS declined to hear a further appeal.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Virginia had one of the companion cases in Brown , involving the Prince Edward County schools. Significant opposition to the Brown verdict included U.S. Senator Harry F. Byrd , who led the Byrd Organization and promised a strategy of Massive Resistance . Governor Thomas Stanley , a member of the Byrd Organization, appointed the Gray Commission , 32 Democrats led by state senator Garland Gray , to study the issue and make recommendations. The commission recommended giving localities "broad discretion" in meeting the new judicial requirements. However, in 1956, a special session of the Virginia legislature adopted a legislative package which allowed the governor to simply close all schools under desegregation orders from federal courts. In early 1958, newly elected Governor J. Lindsay Almond closed public schools in Charlottesville, Norfolk, and Warren County rather than comply with desegregation orders, leaving 10,000 children without schools despite efforts of various parent groups. However, he reconsidered when on the Lee-Jackson state holiday, the Virginia Supreme Court ruled the closures violated the state constitution, and a panel of federal judges ruled they violated the U.S. Constitution. In early February 1959, both the Arlington County (also subject to an NAACP lawsuit, and which had lost its elected school board pursuant to other parts of the Stanley Plan) and Norfolk schools desegregated peacefully. Soon, all counties reopened and integrated with the exception of Prince Edward County that took the extreme step of choosing not to appropriate any funding for its school system, thus forcing all its public schools to close, although Prince Edward County provided tuition grants for all students, regardless of their race, to use for private, nonsectarian education. Since no private schools existed for blacks within the county, black children in the county either had to leave the county to receive any education between 1959 and 1963, or received no education. All private schools in the region remained racially segregated. This lasted until 1964, when the U.S. Supreme Court ruled Prince Edward County's decision to provide tuition grants for private schools that only admitted whites violated the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment, in the case of Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County .

[ 64 ] North Many Northern cities also had de facto segregation policies, which resulted in a vast gulf in educational resources between black and white communities. In Harlem , New York, for example, not a single new school had been built since the turn of the century, nor did a single nursery school exist, even as the Second Great Migration caused overcrowding of existing schools. Existing schools tended to be dilapidated and staffed with inexperienced teachers. Northern officials were in denial of the segregation, but Brown helped stimulate activism among African-American parents like Mae Mallory who, with support of the NAACP, initiated a successful lawsuit against the city and State of New York on Brown 's principles. Mallory and thousands of other parents bolstered the pressure of the lawsuit with a school boycott in 1959. During the boycott, some of the first Freedom Schools of the period were established. The city responded to the campaign by permitting more open transfers to high-quality, historically white schools. (New York's African-American community, and Northern desegregation activists generally, now found themselves contending with the problem of white flight , however.) [ 65 ] [ 66 ] Topeka Judgment and order of the Supreme Court for the case The Topeka junior high schools had been integrated since 1941. Topeka High School was integrated from its inception in 1871 and its sports teams from 1949 onwards.

[ 67 ] The Kansas law permitting segregated schools allowed them only "below the high school level".

[ 68 ] Soon after the district court decision, election outcomes and the political climate in Topeka changed. The Board of Education of Topeka began to end segregation in the Topeka elementary schools in August 1953, integrating two attendance districts. All the Topeka elementary schools were changed to neighborhood attendance centers in January 1956, although existing students were allowed to continue attending their prior assigned schools at their option.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] Plaintiff Zelma Henderson, in a 2004 interview, recalled that no demonstrations or tumult accompanied desegregation in Topeka's schools: "They accepted it ... It wasn't too long until they integrated the teachers and principals." [ 72 ] The Topeka Public Schools administration building is named in honor of McKinley Burnett , NAACP chapter president who organized the case.

[ 73 ] Monroe Elementary was designated a National Historic Site under the National Park Service on October 26, 1992, and redesignated a National Historical Park on May 12, 2022.

The intellectual roots of Plessy v. Ferguson , the landmark United States Supreme Court decision upholding the constitutionality of racial segregation in 1896 under the doctrine of " separate but equal " were, in part, tied to the scientific racism of the era.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] However, the popular support for the decision was more likely a result of the racist beliefs held by many whites at the time.

[ 76 ] In deciding Brown v. Board of Education , the Supreme Court rejected the ideas of scientific racists about the need for segregation, especially in schools. The court buttressed its holding by citing (in footnote 11 ) social science research about the harms to black children caused by segregated schools.

Both scholarly and popular ideas of hereditarianism played an important role in the attack and backlash that followed the Brown decision.

[ 76 ] Mankind Quarterly was founded in 1960, in part in response to the Brown decision.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Legal criticism and praise U.S. circuit judges (from left to right) Robert A. Katzmann , Damon J. Keith , and Sonia Sotomayor at a 2004 exhibit on the Fourteenth Amendment , Thurgood Marshall , and Brown v. Board of Education William Rehnquist wrote a memo titled "A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases" when he was a law clerk for Justice Robert H. Jackson in 1952, during early deliberations that led to the Brown v. Board of Education decision. In his memo, Rehnquist argued: "I realize that it is an unpopular and unhumanitarian position, for which I have been excoriated by 'liberal' colleagues but I think Plessy v. Ferguson was right and should be reaffirmed." Rehnquist continued, "To the argument ... that a majority may not deprive a minority of its constitutional right, the answer must be made that while this is sound in theory, in the long run it is the majority who will determine what the constitutional rights of the minorities are." [ 79 ] Rehnquist also argued for Plessy with other law clerks.

[ 80 ] However, during his 1971 confirmation hearings, Rehnquist said, "I believe that the memorandum was prepared by me as a statement of Justice Jackson's tentative views for his own use." Jackson had initially planned to join a dissent in Brown .

[ 81 ] Later, at his 1986 hearings for the slot of Chief Justice, Rehnquist put further distance between himself and the 1952 memo: "The bald statement that Plessy was right and should be reaffirmed, was not an accurate reflection of my own views at the time." [ 82 ] In any event, while serving on the Supreme Court, Rehnquist made no effort to reverse or undermine the Brown decision, and frequently relied upon it as precedent.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Chief Justice Warren's reasoning was broadly criticized by contemporary legal academics with Judge Learned Hand decrying that the Supreme Court had "assumed the role of a third legislative chamber" [ 85 ] and Herbert Wechsler finding Brown impossible to justify based on neutral principles.

[ 86 ] Some aspects of the Brown decision are still debated. Notably, Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas , himself an African American, wrote in Missouri v. Jenkins (1995) that at the very least, Brown I has been misunderstood by the courts.

Brown I did not say that "racially isolated" schools were inherently inferior; the harm that it identified was tied purely to de jure segregation, not de facto segregation. Indeed, Brown I itself did not need to rely upon any psychological or social-science research in order to announce the simple, yet fundamental truth that the Government cannot discriminate among its citizens on the basis of race. ...

Segregation was not unconstitutional because it might have caused psychological feelings of inferiority. Public school systems that separated blacks and provided them with superior educational resources making blacks "feel" superior to whites sent to lesser schools—would violate the Fourteenth Amendment, whether or not the white students felt stigmatized, just as do school systems in which the positions of the races are reversed. Psychological injury or benefit is irrelevant ...

Given that desegregation has not produced the predicted leaps forward in black educational achievement, there is no reason to think that black students cannot learn as well when surrounded by members of their own race as when they are in an integrated environment. (...) Because of their "distinctive histories and traditions," black schools can function as the center and symbol of black communities, and provide examples of independent black leadership, success, and achievement.

[ 87 ] Some Constitutional originalists , notably Raoul Berger in his influential 1977 book "Government by Judiciary," make the case that Brown cannot be defended by reference to the original understanding of the 14th Amendment . They support this reading of the 14th Amendment by noting that the Civil Rights Act of 1875 did not ban segregated schools and that the same Congress that passed the 14th Amendment also voted to segregate schools in the District of Columbia. Other originalists, including Michael W. McConnell , a federal judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit , in his article "Originalism and the Desegregation Decisions," argue that the Radical Reconstructionists who spearheaded the 14th Amendment were in favor of desegregated southern schools.

[ 88 ] Evidence supporting this interpretation of the 14th Amendment has come from archived Congressional records showing that proposals for federal legislation which would enforce school integration were debated in Congress a few years following the amendment's ratification.

[ 89 ] In response to Michael McConnell's research, Raoul Berger argued that the Congressmen and Senators who were advocating in favor of school desegregation in the 1870s were trying to rewrite the 14th Amendment in order to make the 14th Amendment fit their political agenda and that the actual understanding of the 14th Amendment from 1866 to 1868 (which is when the 14th Amendment was actually passed and ratified) does, in fact, permit US states to have segregated schools.

[ 90 ] Berger criticized McConnell for being unable to find any reference to school segregation—let alone any reference to a desire to prohibit it—among supporters of the 14th Amendment in the congressional history of this amendment (specifically in the recordings of the 39th United States Congress , since that was the US Congress that actually passed the 14th Amendment) and also criticized McConnell's view that the 1954 view of "civil rights" should be decisive in interpreting the 14th Amendment as opposed to the 1866 view of "civil rights." [ 90 ] Berger also argues that McConnell failed to provide any evidence that the state legislatures who ratified the 14th Amendment understood it at the time as prohibiting school segregation and that whenever the question of school segregation's compatibility with the US Constitution (as opposed to the separate question of school segregation's compatibility with US state law and/or US state constitutions , where courts have often ruled against school segregation) reached the judiciary in the couple of decades after the passage and ratification of the 14th Amendment (whether in Ohio , Nevada , California , Indiana , or New York ), courts have always affirmed the constitutionality of school segregation—as did Michigan Supreme Court Chief Justice Thomas M. Cooley in his 1880 treatise The General Principles of Constitutional Law in the United States of America .

[ 90 ] In addition, Berger argues that the views of the draftsmen of the 14th Amendment in 1866 are decisive—as opposed to the views of later readers of the 14th Amendment (including the views of supporters of the 14th Amendment after this amendment's passage and ratification due to the fact that even their views and beliefs about the meaning and scope of this Amendment could and sometimes did change over time—like with Nevada U.S. Senator William Morris Stewart , who initially opposed school desegregation but later changed his mind and supported it).

[ 90 ] To back up his view about original intent being decisive, Berger cites—among other things—an 1871 quote by James A. Garfield to John Bingham where Garfield challenged Bingham's recollection of a statement that Bingham had previously made in 1866—with Garfield telling Bingham that he can make but not unmake history.

[ 90 ] The case also has attracted some criticism from more liberal authors, including some who say that Chief Justice Warren's reliance on psychological criteria to find a harm against segregated blacks was unnecessary. For example, Drew S. Days III has written: [ 91 ] "we have developed criteria for evaluating the constitutionality of racial classifications that do not depend upon findings of psychic harm or social science evidence. They are based rather on the principle that 'distinctions between citizens solely because of their ancestry are by their very nature odious to a free people whose institutions are founded upon the doctrine of equality,' Hirabayashi v. United States , 320 U.S. 81 (1943). . . ." In his book The Tempting of America (page 82), Robert Bork endorsed the Brown decision as follows: By 1954, when Brown came up for decision, it had been apparent for some time that segregation rarely if ever produced equality. Quite aside from any question of psychology, the physical facilities provided for blacks were not as good as those provided for whites. That had been demonstrated in a long series of cases ... The Court's realistic choice, therefore, was either to abandon the quest for equality by allowing segregation or to forbid segregation in order to achieve equality. There was no third choice. Either choice would violate one aspect of the original understanding, but there was no possibility of avoiding that. Since equality and segregation were mutually inconsistent, though the ratifiers did not understand that, both could not be honored. When that is seen, it is obvious the Court must choose equality and prohibit state-imposed segregation. The purpose that brought the fourteenth amendment into being was equality before the law, and equality, not separation, was written into the law.

In June 1987, Philip Elman , a civil rights attorney who served as an associate in the Solicitor General's office during Harry Truman's term, claimed he and Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter were mostly responsible for the Supreme Court's decision, and stated that the NAACP's arguments did not present strong evidence.

[ 92 ] Elman has been criticized for offering a self-aggrandizing history of the case, omitting important facts, and denigrating the work of civil rights attorneys who had laid the groundwork for the decision over many decades.

[ 93 ] However, Frankfurter was also known for being one of court's most outspoken advocates of the judicial restraint philosophy of basing court rulings on existing law rather than personal or political considerations.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] Public officials in the United States today are nearly unanimous in lauding the ruling. In May 2004, the fiftieth anniversary of the ruling, President George W. Bush spoke at the opening of the Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site , calling Brown "a decision that changed America for the better, and forever." [ 96 ] Most Senators and Representatives issued press releases hailing the ruling.

In a 2016 article in Townhall.com , an outlet of the Salem Media Group , economist Thomas Sowell argued that when Chief Justice Earl Warren declared in the landmark 1954 case of Brown v. Board of Education that racially separate schools were "inherently unequal," Dunbar High School was a living refutation of that assumption. And it was within walking distance of the Supreme Court."  In Sowell's estimation, "Dunbar, which had been accepting outstanding black students from anywhere in the city, could now accept only students from the rough ghetto neighborhood in which it was located" as a detrimental consequence of the SCOTUS decision.

[ 97 ] Brown II In 1955, the Supreme Court considered arguments by the schools requesting relief concerning the task of desegregation. In their decision, which became known as " Brown II ", [ 98 ] the court delegated the task of carrying out school desegregation to district courts with orders that desegregation occur "with all deliberate speed", a phrase traceable to Francis Thompson 's poem " The Hound of Heaven ".

[ 99 ] Supporters of the earlier decision were displeased with this decision. The language "all deliberate speed" was seen by critics as too ambiguous to ensure reasonable haste for compliance with the court's instruction. Many Southern states and school districts interpreted Brown II as legal justification for resisting, delaying, and avoiding significant integration for years—and in some cases for a decade or more—using such tactics as closing down school systems, using state money to finance segregated "private" schools, and "token" integration where a few carefully selected black children were admitted to former white-only schools but the vast majority remained in underfunded, unequal black schools.

[ 100 ] For example, based on Brown II , the U.S. District Court ruled that Prince Edward County, Virginia did not have to desegregate immediately. When faced with a court order to finally begin desegregation in 1959 the county board of supervisors stopped appropriating money for public schools, which remained closed for five years, from 1959 to 1964.

White students in the county were given assistance to attend white-only "private academies" that were taught by teachers formerly employed by the public school system, while black students had no education at all unless they moved out of the county. But the public schools reopened after the Supreme Court overturned Brown II in Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County , declaring that "the time for mere 'deliberate speed' has run out" and that the county must provide a public school system for all children regardless of race.

[ 101 ] Brown III In 1978, Topeka attorneys Richard Jones, Joseph Johnson and Charles Scott Jr. (son of the original Brown team member), with assistance from the American Civil Liberties Union , persuaded Linda Brown Smith—who now had her own children in Topeka schools—to be a plaintiff in reopening Brown . They were concerned that the Topeka Public Schools' policy of "open enrollment" had led to and would lead to further segregation. They also believed that with a choice of open enrollment, white parents would shift their children to "preferred" schools that would create both predominantly African-American and predominantly European-American schools within the district. The district court reopened the Brown case after a 25-year hiatus, but denied the plaintiffs' request finding the schools "unitary". In 1989, a three-judge panel of the Tenth Circuit on a 2–1 vote found that the vestiges of segregation remained with respect to student and staff assignment.

[ 102 ] In 1993, the Supreme Court denied the appellant School District's request for certiorari and returned the case to District Court Judge Richard Rodgers for implementation of the Tenth Circuit's mandate.

After a 1994 plan was approved and a bond issue passed, additional elementary magnet schools were opened and district attendance plans redrawn, which resulted in the Topeka schools meeting court standards of racial balance by 1998. Unified status was eventually granted to Topeka Unified School District No. 501 on July 27, 1999.

[ 103 ] One of the new magnet schools is named after the Scott family attorneys for their role in the Brown case and civil rights.

[ 104 ] Other comments A PBS film called Simple Justice retells the story of the Brown vs. Board of Education case, beginning with the work of the NAACP's Legal Defense Fund's efforts to combat 'separate but equal' in graduate school education and culminating in the historical 1954 decision.

Linda Brown Thompson later recalled the experience of being refused enrollment: [ 105 ] ...we lived in an integrated neighborhood and I had all of these playmates of different nationalities. And so when I found out that day that I might be able to go to their school, I was just thrilled, you know. And I remember walking over to Sumner school with my dad that day and going up the steps of the school and the school looked so big to a smaller child. And I remember going inside and my dad spoke with someone and then he went into the inner office with the principal and they left me out ... to sit outside with the secretary. And while he was in the inner office, I could hear voices and hear his voice raised, you know, as the conversation went on. And then he immediately came out of the office, took me by the hand and we walked home from the school. I just couldn't understand what was happening because I was so sure that I was going to go to school with Mona and Guinevere, Wanda, and all of my playmates.

[ 106 ] Linda Brown died on March 25, 2018, at the age of 75.

[ 107 ] See also Civil rights movement (1896–1954) Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) History of African Americans in Kansas Rubey Mosley Hulen , federal judge who made a similar ruling in an earlier case List of United States court cases involving the Fourteenth Amendment New Orleans school desegregation (1960) - U.S. Marshals enforced a federal order to integrate the New Orleans Parish School District Loving v. Virginia (1967) Lum v. Rice (1927) Ole Miss riot of 1962 Runyon v. McCrary (1976), bars segregation in private schools whereas Brown only applies to public schools Timeline of the civil rights movement Notes ^ The Supreme Court has never explicitly overruled Plessy v. Ferguson in its entirety, although Brown and a series of later Supreme Court decisions have severely weakened Plessy to the point that it is usually considered to be de facto overruled.

[ 2 ] ^ One source gives Eisenhower's quote as saying "big black bucks" instead of "big overgrown Negroes".

[ 32 ] References Citations ^ Brown v. Board of Education , 347 U.S.

483 (1954) ^ Schauer (1997) , p. 280.

^ Hartford, Bruce.

"Brown v. Board of Education Decision (May)" .

Civil Rights Movement Archive . Civil Rights Movement History & Timeline, 1954.

Archived from the original on June 8, 2023 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Schuck, P.H. (2006).

Meditations of a Militant Moderate: Cool Views on Hot Topics . G – Reference, Information and Interdisciplinary Subjects Series.

Rowman & Littlefield . p. 104.

ISBN 978-0-7425-3961-7 .

^ a b McCloskey (2010) , p. 144.

^ Cottrol, Robert J. (2006).

"Brown v. Board of Education (1954)" .

American Federalism: An Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2023 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ "An Organized Legal Campaign – Separate Is Not Equal" .

Smithsonian National Museum of American History .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2020 . Retrieved March 23, 2020 .

^ "The Power of Precedent – Separate Is Not Equal" .

Smithsonian National Museum of American History .

Archived from the original on June 13, 2020 . Retrieved March 23, 2020 .

^ Harald E.L. Prins .

"Toward a World without Evil: Alfred Métraux as UNESCO Anthropologist (1946–1962)" . UNESCO. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007.

As a direct offshoot of the 1948 "Universal Declaration of Human Rights," it sought to dismantle any scientific justification or basis for racism and proclaimed that race was not a biological fact of nature but a dangerous social myth. As a milestone, this critically important declaration contributed to the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court desegregation decision in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka.' (in English) ^ Myrdal, Gunnar (1944).

An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy . New York: Harper & Row.

^ Dudziak, Mary L.

(February 18, 2010).

"The Global Impact of Brown v. Board of Education" .

SCOTUSblog .

Archived from the original on February 23, 2023 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Dudziak, Mary L. (June 2004).

"Brown as a Cold War Case" .

Journal of American History . Archived from the original on December 7, 2014.

^ Anderson, Ric (May 9, 2004).

"Legacy of Brown: Many people part of local case, Thirteen parents representing 20 children signed up as Topeka plaintiffs" .

CJOnline . Archived from the original on August 28, 2008 . Retrieved October 7, 2018 .

^ "Black, White, and Brown" .

PBS NewsHour' . May 12, 2004. Archived from the original on June 10, 2004 . Retrieved August 25, 2017 .

^ Finkelman, Paul (2009).

"Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka" .

MSN Encarta . Archived from the original on October 28, 2009 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ "A Legacy Tour of the Brown Case" .

CJOnline . October 26, 1992. Archived from the original on June 15, 2010 . Retrieved October 15, 2010 .

^ "Plaintiffs & Attorneys in Brown v. Board of Education" .

brownvboard.org . Brown Foundation. Archived from the original on March 7, 2021 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Fox, Margalit (May 22, 2008).

"Zelma Henderson, Who Aided Desegregation, Dies at 88" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 25, 2009 . Retrieved October 6, 2022 .

^ "Last surviving Brown v. Board plaintiff dies at 88 - TwinCities.com" . May 24, 2008. Archived from the original on May 24, 2008.

^ "School facilities for Negroes here held comparable" .

The Topeka State Journal . August 3, 1951. Archived from the original on November 1, 2006 – via CJOnline.

^ Brown v. Board of Education , 98 F. Supp. 797 (D. Kan. 1951), archived from the original.

^ Walter A. Huxman (August 3, 1951).

"District Court Opinion: Brown et al. v Board of Education of Topeka, Shawnee County, kansas et al" .

Famous Trials .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 9, 2022 .

^ "Separate Is Not Equal: Brown v. Board of Education" .

National Museum of American History .

Archived from the original on August 20, 2019 . Retrieved January 9, 2022 .

^ Hartford, Bruce.

"Student Strike at Moton High (VA) (April, 1951)" .

Civil Rights Movement Archive . Civil Rights Movement History & Timeline, 1951–1953.

Archived from the original on June 8, 2023 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ a b Brown , 98 F. Supp. at 798.

^ Boyle, Kevin (November 21, 1995).

The UAW and the Heyday of American Liberalism, 1945–1968 . Cornell University Press. p. 121.

ISBN 978-1-5017-1327-9 .

^ Neier, Aryeh (May 14, 2014).

"Brown v. Board of Ed: Key Cold War weapon" . Archived from the original on July 16, 2014.

^ a b "Anthony Lester, "Brown v. Board of Education Overseas" Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society Vol. 148, No. 4, December 2004" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 1, 2015.

^ See Smithsonian, Separate is Not Equal: Brown v. Board of Education Archived June 30, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e Sunstein, Cass R.

(May 3, 2004).

"Did Brown Matter?" .

The New Yorker . Archived from the original on July 13, 2015 . Retrieved January 22, 2010 .

^ Gill Robinson Hickman; Richard A. Couto (2006).

"Causality, change and leadership" . In George R. Goethals; Georgia Jones Sorenson (eds.).

The quest for a general theory of leadership .

Edward Elgar Publishing . pp.

152– 187.

ISBN 978-1-84542-541-8 .

^ O'Donnell, Michael (March 9, 2018).

"When Eisenhower and Warren Squared Off Over Civil Rights" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved October 30, 2020 .

^ "Digital History" .

www.digitalhistory.uh.edu .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2015 . Retrieved January 9, 2015 .

^ Beschloss, Michael (November 15, 2014).

"The Gang That Always Liked Ike" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on November 17, 2014.

^ Warren, Earl (1977).

The Memoirs of Earl Warren . New York: Doubleday & Company. p.

291 .

ISBN 0385128355 .

^ Newton, Jim (2006).

Justice For All: Earl Warren and the Nation He Made . New York: Penguin Group. pp.

312– 313.

^ Patterson, James T.

(2001).

Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled Legacy . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-515632-3 .

^ Caro, Robert A.

(2002).

Master of the Senate .

Vintage Books . p. 696.

ISBN 9780394720951 .

^ a b c Chemerinsky (2019) , § 9.3.3.1, p. 764.

^ Quoted in Chemerinsky (2019) , § 9.3.3.1, p. 764.

^ Brown , 347 U.S. at 490.

^ Brown , 347 U.S. at 493.

^ Chemerinsky (2019) , § 9.3.3.1, p. 764 (quoting Brown , 347 U.S. at 492–93).

^ Nowak & Rotunda (2012) , § 18.8(d)(ii)(2).

^ Chemerinsky (2019) , § 9.3.3.1, pp. 764–65.

^ Quoted in Chemerinsky (2019) , § 9.3.3.1, pp. 764–65.

^ a b c d Chemerinsky (2019) , § 9.3.3.1, p. 765.

^ a b Quoted in part in Chemerinsky (2019) , § 9.3.3.1, p. 765.

^ Rabby, Glenda Alice (1999).

The Pain and the Promise: The Struggle for Civil Rights in Tallahassee, Florida .

University of Georgia Press . p. 201.

ISBN 082032051X .

^ Hartford, Bruce.

" "Massive Resistance" to Integration" .

Civil Rights Movement Archive . Civil Rights Movement History & Timeline, 1954.

Archived from the original on June 8, 2023 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Fultz, Michael (Spring 2004). "The Displacement of Black Educators Post-Brown: An Overview and Analysis".

History of Education Quarterly .

44 (1): 14.

doi : 10.1111/j.1748-5959.2004.tb00144.x .

S2CID 143127021 .

^ Howell, Mark C., John Ben Shepperd, Attorney General of the State of Texas: His Role in the Continuation of Segregation in Texas, 1953–1957, Master's Thesis, The University of Texas of the Permian Basin, Odessa, Texas, July 2003.

^ Hartford, Bruce.

"The Little Rock Nine" .

Civil Rights Movement Archive . Civil Rights Movement History & Timeline, 1957.

Archived from the original on June 8, 2023 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Michael Klarman , The Supreme Court, 2012 Term – Comment: Windsor and Brown: Marriage Equality and Racial Equality 127 Harv. L. Rev. 127, 153 (2013).

Archived March 25, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ Id.

citing Klarman, From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle for Racial Equality at 352–354 (2004).

^ "De La Beckwith v. State, 707 So. 2d 547 – Miss: Supreme Court 1997 – Google Scholar" .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2023 . Retrieved April 30, 2015 .

^ Hartford, Bruce.

"Standing In the Schoolhouse Door (June)" .

Veterans of the Civil Rights Movement . Civil Rights Movement History 1963 (January–June).

Archived from the original on June 10, 2023 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ "Wallace Quotes" .

www.pbs.org . American Experience. 2000.

Archived from the original on February 23, 2023 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ a b c Bender, Albert (February 13, 2014).

"Dr. King spoke out against the genocide of Native Americans" .

People's World .

Archived from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved November 25, 2018 .

^ "Civil Rights Greensboro" .

library.uncg.edu . Archived from the original on May 15, 2014 . Retrieved December 4, 2014 .

^ " "Summary of 'Civilities and Civil Rights': by William H. Chafe" George Mason University website" . Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved December 4, 2014 .

^ "Naomi Brooks et al., Appellants, v. School District of City of Moberly, Missouri, Etc., et al., Appellees, 267 F.2d 733 (8th Cir. 1959)" .

Justia Law .

Archived from the original on August 29, 2022 . Retrieved August 29, 2022 .

^ "Revisionist History Season 2 Episode 3" .

Revisionist History . August 26, 2020.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2017 . Retrieved July 5, 2017 .

^ "SOL Guide" .

www2.vcdh.virginia.edu .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2019 . Retrieved September 26, 2019 .

^ Weiner, Melissa F. (2010).

Power, Protest, and the Public Schools: Jewish and African American Struggles in New York City . Rutgers University Press. pp.

51– 66.

ISBN 9780813547725 .

^ Back, Adina (2003).

"Exposing the Whole Segregation Myth: The Harlem Nine and New York City Schools" in Freedom north: Black freedom struggles outside the South, 1940–1980" (PDF) .

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

65– 91. Archived from the original on February 27, 2017 . Retrieved September 5, 2022 .

^ "The Class of '51" .

CJOnline . July 10, 2001. Archived from the original on July 30, 2012 . Retrieved October 15, 2010 .

^ "Brown vs. The Board of Education of Topeka information release" .

CJOnline . February 28, 2002. Archived from the original on July 22, 2012 . Retrieved October 15, 2010 .

^ "Racial bar down for teachers here" .

Topeka Daily Capital . January 19, 1956. Archived from the original on September 26, 2007 – via CJOnline.

^ "First step taken to end segregation" .

Topeka Daily Capital . September 9, 1953. Archived from the original on April 5, 2008 – via CJOnline.

^ "Little Effect On Topeka" .

The Capital-Journal . May 18, 1954. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007 – via CJOnline.

^ Erin Adamson, " Breaking barriers: Topekans reflect on role in desegregating nation's schools " Archived April 27, 2004, at the Wayback Machine , The Topeka Capital-Journal (May 11, 2003) ^ "Topeka Public Schools – About McKinley Burnett" . September 24, 2006. Archived from the original on September 24, 2006 . Retrieved November 5, 2020 .

^ Sarat, Austin (1997).

Race, Law, and Culture: Reflections on Brown v. Board of Education . Oxford University Press. p. 55.

ISBN 978-0-19-510622-0 .

What lay behind Plessy v. Ferguson ? There were, perhaps, some important intellectual roots; this was the era of scientific racism.

^ Lofgren, Charles A. (1988).

The Plessy Case . Oxford University Press. p. 184.

ISBN 978-0-19-505684-6 .

But he [ Henry Billings Brown ] at minimum established popular sentiment and practice, along with legal and scientific testimony on race, as a link in his train of reasoning.

^ a b Race, Law, and Culture: Reflections on Brown v. Board of Education By Austin Sarat. Page 55 and 59. 1997.

ISBN 0-19-510622-9 ^ Schaffer, Gavin (2007). ""'Scientific' Racism Again?": Reginald Gates, the Mankind Quarterly and the Question of "Race" in Science after the Second World War".

Journal of American Studies .

41 (2): 253– 278.

doi : 10.1017/S0021875807003477 .

S2CID 145322934 .

^ Science for Segregation: Race, Law, and the Case Against Brown v. Board of Education . By John P. Jackson.

ISBN 0-8147-4271-8 Page 148 ^ William Rehnquist, "A Random Thought on the Segregation Cases" Archived June 15, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , S. Hrg. 99-1067, Hearings Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary on the Nomination of Justice William Hubbs Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States (July 29, 30, 31, and August 1, 1986).

^ Peter S. Canellos, "Memos may not hold Roberts's opinions" .

The Boston Globe . August 23, 2005. Archived from the original on August 29, 2008.

Rehnquist: I thought Plessy had been wrongly decided at the time, that it was not a good interpretation of the equal protection clause to say that when you segregate people by race, there is no denial of equal protection. But Plessy had been on the books for 60 years; Congress had never acted, and the same Congress that had promulgated the 14th Amendment had required segregation in the District schools. . . . I saw factors on both sides. . . . I did not agree then, and I certainly do not agree now, with the statement that Plessy against Ferguson is right and should be reaffirmed. I had ideas on both sides, and I do not think I ever really finally settled in my own mind on that. . . . [A]round the lunch table I am sure I defended it. . . . I thought there were good arguments to be made in support of it. (S. Hrg. 99-1067, Hearings Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary on the Nomination of Justice William Hubbs Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States, July 29, 30, 31, and August 1, 1986) ^ Schwartz, Bernard (1997).

Decision: How the Supreme Court Decides Cases . Oxford University Press USA. p. 96.

ISBN 978-0-19-511800-1 .

Justice William O. Douglas wrote: "In the original conference there were only four who voted that segregation in the public schools was unconstitutional. Those four were Black, Burton, Minton, and myself." Likewise, Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote: "I have no doubt that if the segregation cases had reached decision last term, there would have been four dissenters—Vinson, Reed, Jackson, and Clark." Id. Justice Jackson's longtime legal secretary had a different view, calling Rehnquist's Senate testimony an attempt to "smear the reputation of a great justice." Dershowitz, Alan (September 4, 2005).

"Telling the Truth About Chief Justice Rehnquist" . Archived from the original on April 2, 2019.

^ Liptak, Adam (September 11, 2005).

"The Memo That Rehnquist Wrote and Had to Disown" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 12, 2016 . Retrieved October 6, 2022 .

^ Cases where Justice Rehnquist has cited Brown v. Board of Education in support of a proposition Archived June 15, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , S. Hrg. 99-1067, Hearings Before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary on the Nomination of Justice William Hubbs Rehnquist to be Chief Justice of the United States (July 29, 30, 31, and August 1, 1986).

^ Rosen, Jeffery (April 2005).

"Rehnquist the Great?" .

Atlantic Monthly .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2010 . Retrieved March 5, 2017 .

Rehnquist ultimately embraced the Warren Court's Brown decision, and after he joined the Court he made no attempt to dismantle the civil-rights revolution, as political opponents feared he would.

^ Michael Klarman , The Supreme Court, 2012 Term – Comment: Windsor and Brown: Marriage Equality and Racial Equality , 127 Harv. L. Rev. 127, 142 (2013) Archived March 25, 2015, at the Wayback Machine citing Learned Hand, The Bill of Rights at 55 (Oliver Wendell Holmes Lecture, 1958).

^ Id.

, Pamela Karlan , What Can Brown Do For You: Neutral Principles and the Struggle Over the Equal Protection Clause , 58 DUKE L.J. 1049 (2008) Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine citing Herbert Wechsler, Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law, 73 HARV. L. REV. 1 (Oliver Wendell Holmes Lecture, 1959).

^ Missouri v. Jenkins , 515 U.S.

70, 120-22 (1995) (Thomas, J., concurring).

^ McConnell, Michael W.

(May 1995).

"Originalism and the desegregation decisions" .

Virginia Law Review .

81 (4): 947– 1140.

doi : 10.2307/1073539 .

JSTOR 1073539 .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2020 . Retrieved December 10, 2019 .

Response to McConnell: Klarman, Michael J.

(October 1995). " Response : Brown , originalism, and constitutional theory: a response to Professor Mcconnell".

Virginia Law Review .

81 (7): 1881– 1936.

doi : 10.2307/1073643 .

JSTOR 1073643 .

Response to Klarman: McConnell, Michael W.

(October 1995). " Reply : The originalist justification for Brown: a reply to Professor Klarman".

Virginia Law Review .

81 (7): 1937– 1955.

doi : 10.2307/1073644 .

JSTOR 1073644 .

^ Liptak, Adam (November 9, 2009).

"From 19th-Century View, Desegregation Is a Test" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 30, 2015 . Retrieved October 6, 2022 .

^ a b c d e Berger, Raoul .

"Original Intent-As Perceived by Michael McConnell 91 Northwestern University Law Review 1996–1997" .

Northwestern University Law Review .

91 . Heinonline.org: 242.

Archived from the original on May 2, 2019 . Retrieved April 6, 2019 .

^ Days, III, Drew S.

(2001), "Days, J., concurring", in Balkan, Jack; Ackerman, Bruce A.

(eds.), What 'Brown v. Board of Education' should have said , New York: New York University Press, p. 97, ISBN 9780814798904 ^ Harvard Law Review , Vol. 100, No. 8 (June 1987), pp. 1938–1948 ^ See, e.g., Randall Kennedy. "A Reply to Philip Elman." Harvard Law Review 100 (1987):1938–1948.

^ A Justice for All , by Kim Isaac Eisler , page 11; ISBN 0-671-76787-9 ^ "Supreme Court History: Expanding civil rights, biographies of the robes: Felix Frankfurter" .

pbs.org/wnet . Educational Broadcasting Corp., PBS.

Archived from the original on August 30, 2017 . Retrieved August 25, 2017 .

^ Bush, George W. (May 17, 2004).

"President Speaks at Brown v Board of Education National Historic Site" .

georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov .

Archived from the original on October 5, 2017 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Sowell, Thomas (October 4, 2016).

"Dunbar High School After 100 Years" .

townhall.com . Archived from the original on May 24, 2019.

^ Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka , 349 U.S.

294 (1955) ^ Chen, James Ming (May 3, 2012) [2007].

"Poetic Justice" .

Cardozo Law Review . University of Louisville School of Law Legal Studies Research Paper Series No. 2007-01.

29 .

Archived from the original on May 11, 2024 . Retrieved July 23, 2020 .

^ Hartford, Bruce.

"The Brown II 'All Deliberate Speed' Decision" . Civil Rights Movement History & Timeline, 1955. Civil Rights Movement Archive.

Archived from the original on June 8, 2023 . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ Smith, Bob (1965).

They Closed Their Schools . University of North Carolina Press.

^ Brown v. Board of Education , 892 F.2d 851 (10th Cir. 1989).

^ Brown v. Unified School Dist. No. 501 , 56 F. Supp. 2d 1212 (D. Kan. 1999), archived from the original.

^ Topeka Public Schools Desegregation History: "The Naming of Scott Computer Technology Magnet" Archived October 1, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Brown v. Board of Education" . PBS NewsHour. May 9, 2014.

Archived from the original on May 9, 2014 . Retrieved April 15, 2018 .

^ "Black/White and Brown: Brown versus the Board of Education of Topeka" .

KTWU Channel 11 . transcript of program produced by KTWU Channel 11 in Topeka, Kansas. Originally aired May 3, 2004.: KTWU Video. September 10, 2005. Archived from the original on September 10, 2005 . Retrieved April 15, 2018 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ Romo, Vanessa (March 26, 2018).

"Linda Brown, Who Was At Center Of Brown v. Board Of Education, Dies" . NPR.

Archived from the original on March 26, 2018 . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

Works cited Chemerinsky, Erwin (2019).

Constitutional Law: Principles and Policies (6th ed.). New York: Wolters Kluwer.

ISBN 978-1-4548-9574-9 .

Lofgren, Charles A. (1987).

The Plessy Case: A Legal-Historical Interpretation . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-505684-6 .

McCloskey, Robert G.

(2010).

The American Supreme Court . Revised by Sanford Levinson (5th ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-55686-4 .

Nowak, John E.; Rotunda, Ronald D. (2012).

Treatise on Constitutional Law: Substance and Procedure (5th ed.). Eagan, MN: West Thomson/Reuters.

OCLC 798148265 .

Schauer, Frederick (1997).

"Generality and Equality" .

Law and Philosophy .

16 (3): 279– 297.

doi : 10.2307/3504874 .

JSTOR 3504874 .

Further reading External videos Booknotes interview with Charles Ogletree on All Deliberate Speed , May 9, 2004 , C-SPAN Keppel, Ben.

Brown v. Board and the Transformation of American Culture ( LSU Press , 2016). xiv, 225 pp.

Kluger, Richard (1975).

Simple Justice: The History of Brown v. Board of Education and Black America's Struggle for Equality . New York: Knopf.

ISBN 9780394472898 .

Ogletree, Charles J. Jr.

(2004).

All Deliberate Speed: Reflections on the First Half Century of Brown v. Board of Education . New York: W. W. Norton.

ISBN 9780393058970 .

Patterson, James T.

, and William W. Freehling .

Brown v. Board of Education: A civil rights milestone and its troubled legacy ( Oxford University Press , 2001).

Raffel, Jeffrey.

Historical dictionary of school segregation and desegregation: The American experience (Bloomsbury, 1998) online Tushnet, Mark V.

, ed. (2008).

"Chapter 11: 'Our decision does not end but begins the struggle over segregation': Brown v. Board of Education , 1954: Justice Robert H. Jackson" .

I Dissent: Great Opposing Opinions in Landmark Supreme Court Cases . Boston: Beacon Press. pp.

133– 150.

ISBN 9780807000366 .

Primary sources Whitman, Mark, ed.

Brown v. Board of Education : a documentary history (2004) online External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Brown v. Board of Education .

Wikisource has original text related to this article: Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (347 U.S. 483) Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (349 U.S. 294) Justice Jackson's Unpublished Opinion in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka Text of Brown v. Board of Education , 347 U.S.

483 (1954) is available from: Cornell CourtListener Google Scholar Justia Library of Congress Text of Brown v. Board of Education (Brown II) , 349 U.S.

294 (1955) is available from: Cornell CourtListener Google Scholar Justia Library of Congress Oyez (oral argument audio) Case Brief for Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka at Lawnix.com Case information and transcripts on The Curiae Project Brown v. Board of Education National Historical Park (US Park Service) A copy of Florida's 1957 Interposition Resolution in Response to the Brown decision, with Gov. Collin's handwritten rejection of it.

Made available for public use by the State Archives of Florida.

U.S. District Court of Kansas: Records of Brown v. Board of Education , Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library ( Archived May 2, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ) Online documents relating to Brown vs. Board of Education , Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library Documents from the district court, including the original complaint and trial transcript, at the Civil Rights Litigation Clearinghouse 60th Anniversary of Brown v. Board of Education curated by Michigan State University's Diversity of Excellence Through Artistic Expression Brown Revisited , a commemoration of the 70th Anniversary of the decision in the first set of cases created by the Oyez.org team Brown v. Board of Education , Civil Rights Digital Library "Supreme Court Landmark Case Brown v. Board of Education " from C-SPAN 's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions Galloway, Russell W. Jr. (1989).

"Basic Equal Protection Analysis" .

Santa Clara Law Review .

29 (1) . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

v t e Civil rights movement (1954–1968) Events ( timeline ) Prior to 1954 Journey of Reconciliation Executive Order 9981 Murders of Harry and Harriette Moore Sweatt v. Painter (1950) McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950) Baton Rouge bus boycott 1954–1959 Brown v. Board of Education Bolling v. Sharpe Briggs v. Elliott Davis v. Prince Edward County Gebhart v. Belton Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company Read's Drug Store sit-in Emmett Till Montgomery bus boycott Browder v. Gayle Tallahassee bus boycott Mansfield school desegregation 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom " Give Us the Ballot " Royal Ice Cream sit-in Little Rock Nine Cooper v. Aaron Civil Rights Act of 1957 Ministers' Manifesto Dockum Drug Store sit-in Katz Drug Store sit-in Kissing Case Biloxi wade-ins 1960–1963 New Year's Day March Sit-in movement Greensboro sit-ins Nashville sit-ins Sibley Commission Atlanta sit-ins Savannah Protest Movement Greenville Eight Civil Rights Act of 1960 Ax Handle Saturday New Orleans school desegregation Gomillion v. Lightfoot Boynton v. Virginia University of Georgia desegregation riot Rock Hill sit-ins Robert F. Kennedy's Law Day Address Freedom Rides Anniston and Birmingham bus attacks Garner v. Louisiana Albany Movement Cambridge movement University of Chicago sit-ins " Second Emancipation Proclamation " Meredith enrollment, Ole Miss riot Atlanta's Berlin Wall "Segregation now, segregation forever" Stand in the Schoolhouse Door 1963 Birmingham campaign Letter from Birmingham Jail Children's Crusade Birmingham riot 16th Street Baptist Church bombing John F. Kennedy's speech to the nation on Civil Rights Detroit Walk to Freedom March on Washington "I Have a Dream" Big Six St. Augustine movement 1964–1968 Twenty-fourth Amendment Chester school protests Bloody Tuesday 1964 Monson Motor Lodge protests Freedom Summer workers' murders Civil Rights Act of 1964 Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States Katzenbach v. McClung 1964–1965 Scripto strike 1965 Selma to Montgomery marches " How Long, Not Long " SCOPE Project Voting Rights Act of 1965 Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections March Against Fear White House Conference on Civil Rights Chicago Freedom Movement/Chicago open housing movement Loving v. Virginia Memphis sanitation strike King assassination funeral riots Civil Rights Act of 1968 Poor People's Campaign Green v. County School Board of New Kent County Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co.

1968 Olympics Black Power salute Activist groups Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights American Friends Service Committee Atlanta Negro Voters League Atlanta Student Movement Black Panther Party Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) Committee for Freedom Now Committee on Appeal for Human Rights An Appeal for Human Rights Council for United Civil Rights Leadership Council of Federated Organizations Dallas County Voters League Deacons for Defense and Justice Georgia Council on Human Relations Highlander Folk School Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights Lowndes County Freedom Organization Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party Montgomery Improvement Association NAACP Youth Council Nashville Student Movement Nation of Islam Northern Student Movement National Council of Negro Women National Urban League Operation Breadbasket Regional Council of Negro Leadership Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Southern Regional Council Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) The Freedom Singers United Auto Workers (UAW) Wednesdays in Mississippi Women's Political Council Activists Juanita Abernathy Ralph Abernathy Victoria Gray Adams Zev Aelony Mathew Ahmann Muhammad Ali William G. Anderson Gwendolyn Armstrong Arnold Aronson Ella Baker James Baldwin Marion Barry Daisy Bates Harry Belafonte James Bevel Claude Black Gloria Blackwell Randolph Blackwell Unita Blackwell Ezell Blair Jr.

Joanne Bland Julian Bond Joseph E. Boone William Holmes Borders Amelia Boynton Bruce Boynton Raylawni Branch Stanley Branche Ruby Bridges Aurelia Browder H. Rap Brown Ralph Bunche John H. Calhoun Guy Carawan Stokely Carmichael Johnnie Carr James Chaney J. L. Chestnut Shirley Chisholm Colia Lafayette Clark Ramsey Clark Septima Clark Xernona Clayton Eldridge Cleaver Kathleen Cleaver Josephine Dobbs Clement Charles E. Cobb Jr.

Annie Lee Cooper Dorothy Cotton Claudette Colvin Vernon Dahmer Jonathan Daniels Abraham Lincoln Davis Angela Davis Joseph DeLaine Dave Dennis Annie Bell Robinson Devine John Wesley Dobbs Patricia Stephens Due Joseph Ellwanger Charles Evers Medgar Evers Myrlie Evers-Williams Chuck Fager James Farmer Walter Fauntroy James Forman Marie Foster Golden Frinks Andrew Goodman Robert Graetz Fred Gray Jack Greenberg Dick Gregory Lawrence Guyot Prathia Hall Fannie Lou Hamer Fred Hampton William E. Harbour Vincent Harding Dorothy Height Audrey Faye Hendricks Lola Hendricks Aaron Henry Oliver Hill Donald L. Hollowell James Hood Myles Horton Zilphia Horton T. R. M. Howard Ruby Hurley Cecil Ivory Jesse Jackson Jimmie Lee Jackson Richie Jean Jackson T. J. Jemison Esau Jenkins Barbara Rose Johns Vernon Johns Frank Minis Johnson Clarence Jones J. Charles Jones Matthew Jones Vernon Jordan Tom Kahn Clyde Kennard A. D. King C.B. King Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Martin Luther King Sr.

Bernard Lafayette James Lawson Bernard Lee Sanford R. Leigh Jim Letherer Stanley Levison John Lewis Viola Liuzzo Z. Alexander Looby Joseph Lowery Clara Luper Danny Lyon Malcolm X Mae Mallory Vivian Malone Bob Mants Thurgood Marshall Benjamin Mays Franklin McCain Charles McDew Ralph McGill Floyd McKissick Joseph McNeil James Meredith William Ming Jack Minnis Amzie Moore Cecil B. Moore Douglas E. Moore Harriette Moore Harry T. Moore Queen Mother Moore William Lewis Moore Irene Morgan Bob Moses William Moyer Elijah Muhammad Diane Nash Charles Neblett Huey P. Newton Edgar Nixon Jack O'Dell James Orange Rosa Parks James Peck Charles Person Homer Plessy Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Fay Bellamy Powell Rodney N. Powell Al Raby Lincoln Ragsdale A. Philip Randolph George Raymond George Raymond Jr.

Bernice Johnson Reagon Cordell Reagon James Reeb Frederick D. Reese Walter Reuther Gloria Richardson David Richmond Bernice Robinson Jo Ann Robinson Angela Russell Bayard Rustin Bernie Sanders Michael Schwerner Bobby Seale Pete Seeger Cleveland Sellers Charles Sherrod Alexander D. Shimkin Fred Shuttlesworth Modjeska Monteith Simkins Glenn E. Smiley A. Maceo Smith Kelly Miller Smith Mary Louise Smith Maxine Smith Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson Charles Kenzie Steele Hank Thomas Dorothy Tillman A. P. Tureaud Hartman Turnbow Albert Turner C. T. Vivian A. T. Walden Wyatt Tee Walker Hollis Watkins Walter Francis White Roy Wilkins Hosea Williams Kale Williams Robert F. Williams Q. V. Williamson Andrew Young Whitney Young Sammy Younge Jr.

Bob Zellner James Zwerg By region Omaha, Nebraska South Carolina Movement songs "Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me 'Round" "If You Miss Me at the Back of the Bus" "Kumbaya" "Keep Your Eyes on the Prize" "Oh, Freedom" "This Little Light of Mine" "We Shall Not Be Moved" "We Shall Overcome" "Woke Up This Morning (With My Mind Stayed On Freedom)" Influences Nonviolence Padayatra Sermon on the Mount Mahatma Gandhi Ahimsa Satyagraha The Kingdom of God Is Within You Frederick Douglass W. E. B. Du Bois Mary McLeod Bethune Related Lyndon B. Johnson Jim Crow laws Lynching in the United States Plessy v. Ferguson Separate but equal Buchanan v. Warley Hocutt v. Wilson Powell v. Alabama Smith v. Allwright Hernandez v. Texas Loving v. Virginia African-American women in the movement Jews in the civil rights movement Fifth Circuit Four 16th Street Baptist Church Kelly Ingram Park A.G. Gaston Motel Bethel Baptist Church Brown Chapel Dexter Avenue Baptist Church Holt Street Baptist Church Edmund Pettus Bridge March on Washington Movement African-American churches attacked List of lynching victims in the United States Freedom Schools Freedom songs Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam " Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence " Voter Education Project 1960s counterculture African American founding fathers of the United States Eyes on the Prize Legacy In popular culture Birmingham Civil Rights Institute Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument Civil Rights Memorial Civil Rights Movement Archive Emmett Till and Mamie Till-Mobley National Monument Medgar and Myrlie Evers Home National Monument Freedom Rides Museum Freedom Riders National Monument King Center for Nonviolent Social Change Martin Luther King Jr. Day Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial other King memorials Mississippi Civil Rights Museum National Civil Rights Museum National Voting Rights Museum St. Augustine Foot Soldiers Monument Olympic Black Power Statue Noted historians Taylor Branch Clayborne Carson John Dittmer Michael Eric Dyson Jonathan Eig Chuck Fager Adam Fairclough David Garrow David Halberstam Vincent Harding Steven F. Lawson Doug McAdam Diane McWhorter Charles M. Payne Thomas E. Ricks Timothy Tyson Akinyele Umoja Movement photographers Civil rights movement portal v t e United States Fourteenth Amendment case law Citizenship Clause Slaughter-House Cases (1873) Minor v. Happersett (1875) Elk v. Wilkins (1884) United States v. Wong Kim Ark (1898) Mackenzie v. Hare (1915) Perez v. Brownell (1958) Afroyim v. Rusk (1967) Rogers v. Bellei (1971) Vance v. Terrazas (1980) Saenz v. Roe (1999) Due Process Clause Economic substantive due process Mugler v. Kansas (1887) Allgeyer v. Louisiana (1897) Holden v. Hardy (1898) Lochner v. New York (1905) Muller v. Oregon (1908) Coppage v. Kansas (1915) Buchanan v. Warley (1917) Adams v. Tanner (1917) O'Gorman & Young, Inc. v. Hartford Fire Insurance Co.

(1931) West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish (1937) Abortion jurisprudence United States v. Vuitch (1971) Roe v. Wade (1973) Doe v. Bolton (1973) Planned Parenthood of Central Missouri v. Danforth (1976) Bellotti v. Baird I (1976) Colautti v. Franklin (1979) Bellotti v. Baird II (1979) H. L. v. Matheson (1981) City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health (1983) Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists (1986) Webster v. Reproductive Health Services (1989) Hodgson v. Minnesota (1990) Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992) Mazurek v. Armstrong (1997) Stenberg v. Carhart (2000) Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of Northern New England (2006) Gonzales v. Carhart (2007) Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt (2016) Azar v. Garza (2018) Box v. Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, Inc.

(2019) June Medical Services, LLC v. Russo (2020) Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization (2022) Right to privacy Meyer v. Nebraska (1923) Pierce v. Society of Sisters (1925) Griswold v. Connecticut (1965) Roe v. Wade (1973) Doe v. Bolton (1973) Bowers v. Hardwick (1986) Webster v. Reproductive Health Services (1989) Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992) Lawrence v. Texas (2003) Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization (2022) Litigation under R.S.

§ 1979 (42 U.S.C. 1983) Monroe v. Pape (1961) McNeese v. Board of Education (1963) Pierson v. Ray (1967) Jenkins v. McKeithen (1969) Scheuer v. Rhodes (1974) Wood v. Strickland (1975) O'Connor v. Donaldson (1975) Paul v. Davis (1976) Imbler v. Pachtman (1976) Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York (1978) Procunier v. Navarette (1978) Owen v. City of Independence (1980) Harlow v. Fitzgerald (1982) Felder v. Casey (1988) Will v. Michigan Department of State Police (1989) Gonzaga University v. Doe (2002) Inyo County v. Paiute-Shoshone Indians of the Bishop Community (2003) City of Rancho Palos Verdes v. Abrams (2005) Fitzgerald v. Barnstable School Committee (2009) Ashcroft v. Iqbal (2009) Los Angeles County v. Humphries (2010) Connick v. Thompson (2011) Other Jacobson v. Massachusetts (1905) Zucht v. King (1922) Buck v. Bell (1927) Powell v. Alabama (1932) Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co.

(1950) NAACP v. Alabama (1958) Hoyt v. Florida (1961) Oyler v. Boles (1962) Loving v. Virginia (1967) Epperson v. Arkansas (1968) In re Winship (1971) Cleveland Board of Education v. LaFleur (1974) Arnett v. Kennedy (1974) Taylor v. Louisiana (1975) Goss v. Lopez (1975) Mathews v. Eldridge (1976) Moore v. City of East Cleveland (1977) Duren v. Missouri (1979) Parham v. J.R.

(1979) Parratt v. Taylor (1981) Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co.

(1982) Kolender v. Lawson (1983) Hudson v. Palmer (1984) Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill (1985) Edwards v. Aguillard (1987) Turner v. Safley (1987) DeShaney v. Winnebago County (1989) Michael H. v. Gerald D.

(1989) Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health (1990) Washington v. Glucksberg (1997) Troxel v. Granville (2000) Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co.

(2009) Obergefell v. Hodges (2015) Williams v. Pennsylvania (2016) Equal Protection Clause Race Pace v. Alabama (1883) Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1886) Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education (1899) Lum v. Rice (1927) Smith v. Texas (1940) Hirabayashi v. United States (1943) Korematsu v. United States (1944) Sipuel v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma (1948) Shelley v. Kraemer (1948) Perez v. Sharp (Cal. 1948) Sweatt v. Painter (1950) McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950) Brown v. Board of Education (1954) Briggs v. Elliott Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County Gebhart v. Belton Lucy v. Adams (1955) Browder v. Gayle (M.D. Ala. 1956) Anderson v. Martin (1964) Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County (1964) McLaughlin v. Florida (1964) Reitman v. Mulkey (1967) Loving v. Virginia (1967) Lee v. Washington (1968) Green v. County School Board of New Kent County (1968) Hunter v. Erickson (1969) Hadnott v. Amos (1969) United States v. Montgomery County Board of Education (1969) Alexander v. Holmes County Board of Education (1969) Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education (1971) McDaniel v. Barresi (1971) Palmer v. Thompson (1971) Coit v. Green (1971) Guey Heung Lee v. Johnson (1971) Jefferson v. Hackney (1972) Keyes v. School District No. 1, Denver (1973) Norwood v. Harrison (1973) Milliken v. Bradley (1974) Village of Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Development Corp.

(1977) Dayton Bd. of Ed. v. Brinkman (1977) Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978) Washington v. Seattle School Dist. No. 1 (1982) Crawford v. Los Angeles Board of Education (1982) Palmore v. Sidoti (1984) Hunter v. Underwood (1985) Wygant v. Jackson Board of Education (1986) City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co.

(1989) Board of Education of Oklahoma City v. Dowell (1991) Freeman v. Pitts (1992) United States v. Fordice (1992) Northeastern Fla. Chapter, Associated Gen. Contractors of America v. Jacksonville (1993) Missouri v. Jenkins (1995) Texas v. Lesage (1999) Gratz v. Bollinger (2003) Grutter v. Bollinger (2003) Johnson v. California (2005) Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1 (2007) Fisher v. University of Texas I (2013) Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action (2014) Fisher v. University of Texas II (2016) Students for Fair Admissions v. President and Fellows of Harvard College (2023) Sex Breedlove v. Suttles (1937) Goesaert v. Cleary (1948) Reed v. Reed (1971) Moritz v. Commissioner (1972) Kahn v. Shevin (1974) Geduldig v. Aiello (1974) Stanton v. Stanton (1975) Edwards v. Healy (1975) Craig v. Boren (1976) Orr v. Orr (1979) Parham v. Hughes (1979) Caban v. Mohammed (1979) Personnel Administrator of Massachusetts v. Feeney (1979) Wengler v. Druggists Mut. Ins. Co.

(1980) Kirchberg v. Feenstra (1981) Michael M. v. Superior Court of Sonoma County (1981) Mississippi University for Women v. Hogan (1982) Lehr v. Robertson (1983) J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B.

(1994) United States v. Virginia (1996) United States v. Skrmetti (2024) Sexual orientation Bowers v. Hardwick (1986) Romer v. Evans (1996) Obergefell v. Hodges (2015) Alienage Patsone v. Pennsylvania (1914) Truax v. Raich (1915) Heim v. McCall (1915) Crane v. New York (1915) Terrace v. Thompson (1923) Porterfield v. Webb (1923) Webb v. O'Brien (1923) Frick v. Webb (1923) Ohio ex rel. Clark v. Deckebach (1927) Takahashi v. Fish and Game Comm'n (1948) Hernandez v. Texas (1954) Graham v. Richardson (1971) Sugarman v. Dougall (1973) In re Griffiths (1973) Examining Board v. Flores de Otero (1976) Nyquist v. Mauclet (1977) Foley v. Connelie (1978) Ambach v. Norwick (1979) Cabell v. Chavez-Salido (1982) Plyler v. Doe (1982) Bernal v. Fainter (1984) Residency Shapiro v. Thompson (1969) Arlington County Board v. Richards (1977) Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. v. Ward (1985) Other United States v. Cruikshank (1876) Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad Co.

(1886) Quaker City Cab Co. v. Commonwealth (1928) Breedlove v. Suttles (1937) Skinner v. Oklahoma (1942) Oyama v. California (1948) Oyler v. Boles (1962) Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections (1966) Rinaldi v. Yeager (1966) Levy v. Louisiana (1968) Williams v. Rhodes (1968) Oregon v. Mitchell (1970) Boddie v. Connecticut (1971) Eisenstadt v. Baird (1972) Lehnhausen v. Lake Shore Auto Parts Co.

(1973) San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez (1973) Richardson v. Ramirez (1974) Village of Belle Terre v. Boraas (1974) Massachusetts Board of Retirement v. Murgia (1976) Trimble v. Gordon (1977) Zablocki v. Redhail (1978) New York City Transit Authority v. Beazer (1979) Mills v. Habluetzel (1982) City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc.

(1985) Clark v. Jeter (1988) Kadrmas v. Dickinson Public Schools (1988) Gregory v. Ashcroft (1991) Vacco v. Quill (1997) Bush v. Gore (2000) Armour v. Indianapolis (2012) Enforcement Clause Civil Rights Cases (1883) Katzenbach v. Morgan (1966) Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer (1976) Dellmuth v. Muth (1989) City of Boerne v. Flores (1997) Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board v. College Savings Bank (1999) Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents (2000) United States v. Morrison (2000) Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett (2001) Nevada Department of Human Resources v. Hibbs (2003) Tennessee v. Lane (2004) United States v. Georgia (2006) Shelby County v. Holder (2013) Other Gold Clause Cases (1935) Trump v. Anderson (2024) v t e African Americans History Timeline Abolitionism African American founding fathers Afrocentrism American Civil War Atlantic slave trade Black Codes Black cowboys Black genocide Black Lives Matter Brown v. Board of Education (1954) Children of the plantation Civil Rights Acts 1964 Voting Rights Act of 1965 1968 Civil rights movement 1865–1896 Civil right movement 1896–1954 Civil rights movement 1954–1968 Montgomery bus boycott Browder v. Gayle (1956) Sit-in movement Freedom Riders Birmingham movement March on Washington Freedom Summer Selma to Montgomery marches Chicago Freedom Movement Post–civil rights era Cornerstone Speech COVID-19 impact Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) Free Negro Free people of color George Floyd protests Great Migration Second New Exodusters Inauguration of Barack Obama 2009 / Inauguration of Barack Obama 2013 Jim Crow laws Lynching Military history Million Man March Nadir of American race relations The Negro Motorist Green Book Partus sequitur ventrem Plantations Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) Reconstruction Amendments Reconstruction era Redlining Separate but equal Silent Parade Slavery Treatment of slaves Tulsa race massacre Underground Railroad Women's suffrage movement Culture Afrofuturism Art Black mecca Businesses Dance Family structure Film Folktales Hair Harlem Renaissance New Negro Hoodoo Juneteenth Kwanzaa LGBTQ community Literature Music Musical theater Names Negro National Anthem Neighborhoods Newspapers Soul food Stereotypes Middle class Upper class Notable people Ralph Abernathy Maya Angelou Crispus Attucks James Baldwin James Bevel Julian Bond Amelia Boynton James Bradley Carol Moseley Braun Edward Brooke Blanche Bruce Ralph Bunche George Washington Carver Shirley Chisholm Claudette Colvin Frederick Douglass W. E. B. Du Bois Medgar Evers James Farmer Henry Highland Garnet Marcus Garvey Fred Gray Prathia Hall Fannie Lou Hamer Kamala Harris Jimi Hendrix Jesse Jackson Ketanji Brown Jackson Michael Jackson Harriet Jacobs Barbara Jordan Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Bernard Lafayette James Lawson Huddie Ledbetter John Lewis Joseph Lowery Malcolm X Thurgood Marshall Toni Morrison Bob Moses Diane Nash Barack Obama Michelle Obama Rosa Parks Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Colin Powell Gabriel Prosser Joseph Rainey A. Philip Randolph Hiram Revels Paul Robeson Al Sharpton Fred Shuttlesworth Clarence Thomas Emmett Till Sojourner Truth Harriet Tubman Nat Turner Denmark Vesey C. T. Vivian David Walker Booker T. Washington Ida B. Wells Roy Wilkins Oprah Winfrey Andrew Young Whitney Young Education, science and technology Black studies Black schools Historically black colleges and universities Inventors and scientists Museums Women in computer science in medicine in STEM fields Religion African-American Jews Islam American Society of Muslims Nation of Islam Black church Azusa Street Revival Black Hebrew Israelites Black theology Doctrine of Father Divine Political movements Anarchism Back-to-Africa movement Black power Movement Capitalism Conservatism Leftism Pan-Africanism Populism Raised fist Self-determination Nationalism Socialism Civic and economic groups Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH) Black Panther Party Committee to Eliminate Media Offensive to African People (CEMOTAP) Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Nashville Student Movement National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC) National Council of Negro Women (NCNW) National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) National Urban League (NUL) Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) Thurgood Marshall College Fund United Negro College Fund (UNCF) Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL) Sports Negro league baseball Baseball color line Black players in professional American football Black NFL quarterbacks Black players in ice hockey Muhammad Ali Arthur Ashe Jack Johnson Joe Louis Jesse Owens Jackie Robinson Serena Williams Athletic associations and conferences Central (CIAA) Mid-Eastern (MEAC) Southern (SIAC) Southwestern (SWAC) Ethnic subdivisions By African descent Fula Gullah Igbo Yoruba Alabama Creole Black Indians Black Seminoles Cherokee Freedmen Choctaw Freedmen Creek Freedmen Black Southerners Blaxicans Great Dismal Swamp maroons Louisiana Creole of color Melungeon Demographics Neighborhoods list U.S. cities with large populations 2000 majorities 2010 majorities Metropolitan areas States and territories Languages Afro-Seminole Creole American Sign Black American Sign English American English African-American English African-American Vernacular English social context Gullah Louisiana Creole By state/city Alabama Arkansas California Los Angeles San Francisco Florida Jacksonville Tallahassee Georgia Atlanta Hawaii Illinois Chicago Indiana Iowa Davenport Kansas Kentucky Lexington Louisiana Maryland Baltimore Massachusetts Boston Michigan Detroit Mississippi Nebraska Omaha New Jersey New York New York City North Carolina Ohio Cleveland Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Philadelphia Puerto Rico South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Austin Dallas–Fort Worth Houston San Antonio Utah Virginia West Virginia Diaspora Africa Gambia Ghana Liberia Sierra Leone America Canada Dominican Republic Haiti Mexico Trinidad and Tobago Israel Europe France Lists African Americans Activists Actors Astronauts Billionaires Journalists Jurists Mathematicians Republicans Singers Sportspeople Spingarn Medal winners US cabinet members US representatives US senators Visual artists Writers African-American firsts Mayors Sports firsts US state firsts Historic places Index of related articles Landmark African-American legislation Lynching victims Monuments Neighborhoods Topics related to the African diaspora Category United States portal Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐db6c4d8dd‐kzn5v
Cached time: 20250815000055
Cache expiry: 86356
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.401 seconds
Real time usage: 2.759 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16458/1000000
Revision size: 105922/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 450520/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 39182/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 365631/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.418/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 33114949/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2282.975      1 -total
 49.35% 1126.638      2 Template:Reflist
 20.12%  459.230     42 Template:Cite_web
  9.74%  222.373      1 Template:Infobox_SCOTUS_case
  8.68%  198.245      2 Template:Infobox
  8.24%  188.009     21 Template:Cite_book
  6.89%  157.354      1 Template:In_lang
  6.27%  143.137     12 Template:Sfnp
  5.64%  128.823      1 Template:Infobox_US_Supreme_Court_case/courts
  5.19%  118.550      9 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:66402:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815000055 and revision id 1304045700. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brown_v._Board_of_Education&oldid=1304045700 " Categories : 1954 in education 1954 in Kansas 1954 in United States case law 20th-century American trials African-American history of Kansas American Civil Liberties Union litigation Civil rights movement case law History of education in the United States Legal history of Kansas May 1954 in the United States Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower Public education in Kansas School segregation in the United States Thurgood Marshall Trials in Kansas United States equal protection case law United States school desegregation case law United States Supreme Court cases of the Warren Court United States Supreme Court cases United States Supreme Court decisions that overrule a prior Supreme Court decision Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from December 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from December 2012 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 16:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Brown v. Board of Education 29 languages Add topic

