Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Series and publishing programs Toggle Series and publishing programs subsection 1.1 Yale Series of Younger Poets 1.2 Yale Drama Series 1.3 Anchor Yale Bible Series 1.4 Future of American Democracy Series 1.5 The Lamar Series in Western History 1.6 Terry Lectures Series 1.7 Yale Nota Bene 2 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 2.1 Mises' Human Action 2.2 Muhammad cartoons 2.3 Internet Archive lawsuit 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Yale University Press 27 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American university international publisher Yale University Press Parent company Yale University Founded 1908 ; 117 years ago ( 1908 ) Founder George Parmly Day Country of origin United States Headquarters location New Haven , Connecticut , U.S.

Distribution TriLiteral (United States) Wiley (international) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Nonfiction topics Various Fiction genres Poetry, Literature in translation Official website yalebooks .yale .edu George Parmly Day, founder of the Yale University Press Yale University Press is the university press of Yale University . It was founded in 1908 by George Parmly Day and Clarence Day , grandsons of Benjamin Day , and became a department of Yale University in 1961, but it remains financially and operationally autonomous.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] As of 2020 [update] , Yale University Press publishes approximately 300 new hardcover and 150 new paperback books annually and has a backlist of about 5,000 books in print. Its books have won five National Book Awards , two National Book Critics Circle Awards and eight Pulitzer Prizes .

[ 5 ] The press maintains offices in New Haven, Connecticut and London, England . Yale is the only American university press with a full-scale publishing operation in Europe. It was a co-founder of the distributor TriLiteral LLC with MIT Press and Harvard University Press .

[ 6 ] TriLiteral was sold to LSC Communications in 2018.

[ 7 ] Series and publishing programs [ edit ] The Yale University Press' original logo, designed by Paul Rand This section needs expansion with: Early years. You can help by adding to it .

( January 2011 ) Yale Series of Younger Poets [ edit ] Main article: Yale Series of Younger Poets Competition Since its inception in 1919, the Yale Series of Younger Poets Competition has published the first collection of poetry by new poets. The first winner was Howard Buck .

Yale Drama Series [ edit ] Yale University Press and Yale Repertory Theatre jointly sponsor the Yale Drama Series, a playwriting competition. The winner of the annual competition is awarded the David C. Horn Prize of $10,000, publication of his/her manuscript by Yale University Press, and a staged reading at Yale Rep. The Yale Drama Series and David C. Horn Prize are funded by the David Charles Horn Foundation.

[ 8 ] Anchor Yale Bible Series [ edit ] In 2007, Yale University Press acquired the Anchor Bible Series , a collection of more than 115 volumes of biblical scholarship, from the Doubleday Publishing Group .

[ 9 ] New and backlist titles are now published under the Anchor Yale Bible Series name.

Future of American Democracy Series [ edit ] Yale University Press is publishing the Future of American Democracy Series, [ 10 ] which "aims to examine, sustain, and renew the historic vision of American democracy in a series of books by some of America's foremost thinkers", in partnership with the Future of American Democracy Foundation .

[ 11 ] The Lamar Series in Western History [ edit ] The Lamar Series in Western History (formerly the Yale Western Americana series) [ 12 ] was established in 1962 to publish works that enhance the understanding of human affairs in the American West and contribute to a wider understanding of why the West matters in the political, social, and cultural life of America.

[ 13 ] Terry Lectures Series [ edit ] The Dwight H. Terry Lectureship was established in 1905 to encourage the consideration of religion in the context of modern science, psychology, and philosophy. Many of the lectures, which are hosted by Yale University, have been edited into book form by the Yale University Press.

Yale Nota Bene [ edit ] On September 22, 2000, Yale University Press announced a new Yale Nota Bene imprint that would "feature reprints of best-selling and classic Yale Press titles encompassing works of history, religion, science, current affairs, reference and biography, in addition to fiction, poetry and drama." [ 14 ] The Annotated Shakespeare A series about the detailed annotations and interpretations of Shakespeare's works.

Ancient Lives It's a series about the biographies of significant historical figures from antiquity.

Black Lives A series that explores the lives and contributions of African Americans.

Jewish Lives A series that includes the biographies of notable Jewish individuals.

The Margellos World Republic of Letters This series focuses on literature and ideas from around the world.

The Papers of Benjamin Franklin This series is a comprehensive collection of Franklin's writings.

The Works of Jonathan Edwards Series Contains a scholarly edition of the writings of Jonathan Edwards.

Yale Nonfiction Book Prize The series recognizes outstanding works of nonfiction by emerging writers.

Publishing Programs General Interest Books Books that appeal to a broad audience, covering topics such as history, politics, science, and culture.

Academic Books Scholarly works that contribute to academic research and education.

Art and Architecture Publications that explore art history, architectural studies, and museum catalogues.

Literature and Translation Works that focus on literary criticism, translations, and contemporary literature.

Publications for Young Readers Books aimed at children and young adults, including educational materials and literature.

Digital Resources Online platforms and digital publications that provide access to scholarly content and educational resources.

Controversies [ edit ] Mises' Human Action [ edit ] In 1963, the Press published a revised edition of Ludwig von Mises 's Human Action . In the May 5, 1964 issue of National Review , Henry Hazlitt wrote the story "Mangling a Masterpiece", accusing Yale University Press of intentionally typesetting the new edition in an amateurish fashion, due to the Press's differing ideological beliefs.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Muhammad cartoons [ edit ] In August 2009, officials at the Press ignited a controversy when they decided to expunge reproductions of the cartoons involved in the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy , along with all other images of Muhammad, from a scholarly book entitled The Cartoons that Shook the World , by professor Jytte Klausen .

[ 17 ] Internet Archive lawsuit [ edit ] Yale University Press joined The Association of American Publishers trade organization in the Hachette v. Internet Archive lawsuit which resulted in the removal of access to over 500,000 books from global readers.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Literature portal Connecticut portal List of English-language book publishing companies List of university presses References [ edit ] ^ "Contact Us" .

^ "Third Party Distribution" .

Wiley . Retrieved February 8, 2018 .

^ Bradley, George (1998).

"Introduction" .

The Yale Younger Poets Anthology . New Haven and London: Yale University Press. p.

24 .

ISBN 9780300074734 .

^ "George P. Day, 83, of Yale is Dead".

New York Times . October 25, 1959.

^ "Donatich Appointed New Director of Yale University Press" (Press release).

Yale University . December 11, 2002. Archived from the original on May 13, 2007 . Retrieved January 25, 2011 .

^ "TriLiteral" .

TriLiteral . Archived from the original on December 2, 2019 . Retrieved February 13, 2024 .

^ "LSC Buys TriLiteral; Turner Purchases Gürze Books" .

PublishersWeekly.com . Retrieved July 8, 2018 .

^ "Yale Drama Series: Prize for Emerging Playwrights" .

Yale University Press . Archived from the original on March 20, 2015.

^ "Yale University Press Acquires Anchor Bible Series from Doubleday" .

Yale Books Unbound . Yale University Press. September 25, 2007. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved January 24, 2017 .

^ "The Future of American Democracy Series" . Archived from the original on October 24, 2015.

^ "The Future of American Democracy Foundation" . Archived from the original on December 23, 2018 . Retrieved February 12, 2024 .

^ Basbanes, Nicholas A.

(2008). "Centennial Highlights".

A World of Letters: Yale University Press, 1908-2008 . New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 222.

doi : 10.12987/9780300142723 .

ISBN 978-0-300-14272-3 .

^ "The Lamar Series in Western History" . Archived from the original on June 21, 2010.

^ "Yale Press launches new imprint with 'global bookstore appeal' " .

Yale Bulletin and Calendar . Yale University Press. September 22, 2000. Archived from the original on February 9, 2012.

^ Hazlitt, Henry (May 5, 1964). "Mangling a Masterpiece".

National Review .

^ North, Gary (May 2, 2013).

"Publishing Atrocity: The 1963 Edition of Human Action" .

^ Cohen, Patricia (August 13, 2009).

"Yale Press Bans Images of Muhammad in New Book" .

The New York Times .

^ "Why are so many books listed as "Borrow Unavailable" at the Internet Archive – Internet Archive Help Center" .

^ "Our Members - AAP" . September 26, 2019.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Yale University Press at Wikimedia Commons Works related to Yale University Press at Wikisource Official website Yale University Press, London Yale University Press Records . Yale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.

v t e Yale University Located in : New Haven, Connecticut People Leadership President Maurie McInnis ( predecessors ) Provost Scott Strobel Yale Corporation Dean of Yale Law School Faculty Sterling Professors People list Elihu Yale Schools Faculty of Arts and Sciences Undergraduate College Graduate Graduate Arts and Sciences Professional Architecture Art Divinity Andover Newton Berkeley Drama Engineering Environment Global Affairs Law Management Medicine Music Nursing Public Health Defunct Sheffield Scientific School Campus Connecticut Hall Evans Hall Harkness Tower Hewitt Quadrangle Hillhouse Avenue Horchow Hall Memorial Quadrangle Old Campus Rudolph Hall Science Hill Steinbach Hall Sterling Law Building Yale-Myers Forest Residential Benjamin Franklin Berkeley Branford Davenport Timothy Dwight Jonathan Edwards Grace Hopper (formerly Calhoun) Morse Pauli Murray Pierson Saybrook Silliman Ezra Stiles Trumbull Library and museums Library Bass Rare Book & Manuscript Medical Law Sterling Memorial Walpole Library Museum of Natural History Art Gallery Center for British Art Collection of Musical Instruments Research Child Study Center Cowles Foundation Haskins Laboratories Human Relations Area Files MacMillan Center Rudd Center Yale Cancer Center Yale Program for the Study of Antisemitism Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse Rugby Sailing Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Swimming and diving Venues Yale Bowl (football) Bush Field Ingalls Rink (hockey) Gilder Boathouse Golf Course Payne Whitney Gymnasium Reese Stadium Culture Handsome Dan Harvard-Yale football rivalry Harvard-Yale rowing rivalry Artistic A cappella The Alley Cats The Spizzwinks The Whiffenpoofs The Society of Orpheus and Bacchus Dramatic Association Precision Marching Band Symphony Orchestra Traditions Coat of arms Yale Blue Bright College Years Publications Alumni Magazine Yale Daily News The Yale Herald Yale Law Journal Yale Literary Magazine The Yale Record Rumpus Student Life Bladderball Manuscript Society Skull and Bones Political Union Programs Gruber Foundation Silliman Lectures Sustainable Food Program World Fellows Yale-NUS College Terry Lectures Open Yale Courses Category Commons Wikinews Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Norway Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) RISM Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yale_University_Press&oldid=1301849989 " Categories : Yale University Press Yale University Visual arts publishing companies Book publishing companies based in Connecticut Publishing companies established in 1908 University presses of the United States 1908 establishments in Connecticut Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2023 Use American English from October 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles to be expanded from January 2011 All articles to be expanded Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 02:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Yale University Press 27 languages Add topic

