Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 New York City 3 Moscow 4 London 5 Notable events 6 Controversy in the UK 7 See also 8 Notes and references Toggle the table of contents Neo-conceptual art 3 languages العربية עברית Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art movement The Shapes Project by artist Allan McCollum John LeKay Untitled , 1991, ladder and wheelchair Neo-conceptual art describes art practices in the 1980s and 1990s that emerged out of the conceptual art movement of the 1960s and 1970s. These subsequent initiatives included the Moscow Conceptualists , the United States Neo-Conceptual artists, such as Sherrie Levine , and the Young British Artists , such as Damien Hirst .

History [ edit ] Many of the concerns of the "conceptual art" movement proper have been taken up by many contemporary artists since the initial wave of conceptual artists. While many of these artists may not term themselves "conceptual artists", ideas such as anti-commodification, social and/or political critique, digital art , and ideas/information as medium continue to be aspects of contemporary art, especially among artists working with computer art , installation art , performance art , net.art and electronic art . Many critics and artists may speak of conceptual aspects of a given artist or art work, reflecting the enduring influence that many of the original conceptual artists have had on the art world.

New York City [ edit ] The idea of neo-conceptual art (sometimes later termed post-conceptual art ) in the United States was clearly articulated by Tricia Collins and Richard Milazzo (working as a team called Collins & Milazzo ) in the early and mid 1980s in New York City, [ 1 ] when they brought to prominence a whole new generation of artists through their copious writings and curatorial activity.

[ 2 ] It was their exhibitions and writings that originally fashioned the theoretical context for a new kind of neo (or post) conceptual art; one that argued simultaneously against Neo-Expressionism and Picture-Theory Art.

[ 3 ] It was through this context that the work of many of the artists associated with Neo-Conceptualism (or what some of the critics reductively called “Simulationism” and “Neo Geo”) was first brought together: artists such as Ross Bleckner , James Welling , Steven Parrino , Richard Prince , Peter Nagy , Joseph Nechvatal , Sarah Charlesworth , Mark Innerst , Allan McCollum , Peter Halley , Jonathan Lasker , Haim Steinbach , Philip Taaffe , Robert Gober and Saint Clair Cemin .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Moscow [ edit ] The Moscow Conceptualists , in the 1970s and 80s, attempted to subvert socialist ideology using the strategies of conceptual art and appropriation art . The central figures were Ilya Kabakov and Komar and Melamid . The group also included Eric Bulatov and Viktor Pivovarov .

[ 6 ] London [ edit ] The Young British Artists (YBAs), led by Damien Hirst , came to prominence in the 1990s and their work was described at the time as neo-conceptual, [ 7 ] even though it relies very heavily on the art object to make its impact. The term is used in relation to them on the basis that the object is not the artwork, or is often a found object , which has not needed artistic skill in its production.

Tracey Emin is seen as a leading YBA and a neo-conceptualist, even though she has denied that she is and has emphasised personal emotional expression. Charles Harrison, a member of the conceptual art group Art and Language in the 1970s, criticizes the neo-conceptual art of the 1990s as conceptual art "without threat or awkwardness" [ 8 ] and a "vacant" prospect.

[ 9 ] Other notable artists associated with neo-conceptualism in the UK include Martin Creed , Liam Gillick , Bethan Huws , Simon Patterson , Simon Starling and Douglas Gordon .

Notable events [ edit ] Work No. 227: The lights going on and off by Martin Creed , (2001) .gif recording of titular event.

1991: Charles Saatchi funds Damien Hirst and the next year in the Saatchi Gallery exhibits his The Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living , a shark in formaldehyde in a vitrine.

1993: Vanessa Beecroft holds her first performance in Milan, Italy, using models to act as a second audience to the display of her diary of food.

1999: Tracey Emin is nominated for the Turner Prize . Part of her exhibit is My Bed , her dishevelled bed, surrounded by detritus such as condoms, blood-stained knickers, bottles and her bedroom slippers.

2001: Martin Creed wins the Turner Prize for Work No. 227: The lights going on and off , an empty room where the lights go on and off.

[ 10 ] 2005: Simon Starling wins the Turner Prize for Shedboatshed , a wooden shed which he had turned into a boat, floated down the Rhine and turned back into a shed again.

[ 11 ] Controversy in the UK [ edit ] In Britain , the rise to prominence of the Young British Artists (YBAs) after the 1988 Freeze show, curated by Damien Hirst, and subsequent promotion of the group by the Saatchi Gallery during the 1990s, generated a media backlash, where the phrases "conceptual art" and "neo-conceptual" came to be terms of derision applied to much contemporary art . This was amplified  by the Turner Prize whose more extreme nominees (most notably Hirst and Emin) caused a controversy annually.

Stuckists' "Death of Conceptual Art" coffin demonstration, 2002 The Stuckist group of artists, founded in 1999, proclaimed themselves "pro-contemporary figurative painting with ideas and anti-conceptual art, mainly because of its lack of concepts." They also called it pretentious, "unremarkable and boring" and on 25 July 2002 deposited a coffin outside the White Cube gallery, marked "The Death of Conceptual Art".

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] They staged yearly demonstrations outside the Turner Prize.

In 2002, Ivan Massow , the Chairman of the Institute of Contemporary Arts branded conceptual art "pretentious, self-indulgent, craftless tat" and in "danger of disappearing up its own arse ... led by cultural tsars such as the Tate 's Sir Nicholas Serota .

[ 14 ] Massow was consequently forced to resign. At the end of the year, the Culture Minister, Kim Howells (an art school graduate) denounced the Turner Prize as "cold, mechanical, conceptual bullshit".

[ 15 ] In October 2004 the Saatchi Gallery told the media that "painting continues to be the most relevant and vital way that artists choose to communicate." [ 16 ] Following this Charles Saatchi began to sell prominent works from his YBA collection.

See also [ edit ] Appropriation art Artificial intelligence art Computer art Cyberarts Electronic art Generative art Interactive film Internet art Institutional Critique New media New media art Postmodern art Superflat Superstroke Systems art Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Alexander, Max (February 19, 1989).

"ART; Now on View, New Work by Freelance Curators" .

The New York Times .

^ Pagliasso, Giancarlo (2012).

La retorica dell'arte contemporanea: Collins & Milazzo e la svolta post-neo-concettuale dell'arte negli anni '80 (in Italian). Pasian di Prato (UD): Campanotto.

ISBN 978-88-456-1206-0 .

OCLC 898566763 .

^ "DAN CAMERON ON Collins & Milazzo" .

www.thefreelibrary.com .

^ "Effects : Magazine for New Art Theory, Neutral Trends I" .

Specific Object .

^ "Effects : Magazine for New Art Theory, Semblance and Mediation" .

Specific Object .

^ Bakshtein, Joseph (1995). "A View from Moscow". In Rosenfeld, Alla; Dodge, Norton T. (eds.).

Nonconformist Art: The Soviet Experience 1956–1986 . London: Thames and Hudson. p. 332.

ISBN 0-500-23709-3 .

^ Scott Lash and Celia Lury, Global Culture Industries: The Mediation of Things , Polity, 2007, p211.

ISBN 0-7456-2483-9 ^ Charles Harrison, Essays on Art & Language , MIT Press, 2001, p29.

ISBN 0-262-58241-4 ^ Charles Harrison, Essays on Art & Language , MIT Press, 2001, p241.

ISBN 0-262-58241-4 ^ "Creed lights up Turner prize" . December 10, 2001 – via news.bbc.co.uk.

^ "The Times & The Sunday Times" .

The Times .

^ "White Cube Demo 2002" , stuckism.com. Retrieved 19 April 2008.

^ Cripps, Charlotte.

"Visual arts: Saying knickers to Sir Nicholas , The Independent , 7 September 2004. Retrieved from findarticles.com, 7 April 2008.

^ "Concept art is pretentious tat, says ICA chief" .

the Guardian . January 17, 2002.

^ "Telegraph | News" . October 2, 2003. Archived from the original on 2003-10-02.

^ Reynolds, Nigel 2004 "Saatchi's latest shock for the art world is – painting" The Daily Telegraph 10 February 2004. Accessed  April 15, 2006 v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neo-conceptual_art&oldid=1301149253 " Categories : Contemporary art movements Conceptual art Postmodern art Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 09:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neo-conceptual art 3 languages Add topic

