Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Krishna Janmashtami 2 Raksha Bandhan 3 Naryal Purnima 4 Nag Panchami 5 Basava Panchami 6 Avani Avittam 7 Balarama Jayanti 8 Gamha Purnima 9 Kajari Purnima 10 Pavitropana 11 Pavitra Ekadashi 12 Jandhyam Purnima 13 Salono 14 Pola 15 Shravani Mela 16 In popular culture 17 See also 18 References 19 External links Toggle the table of contents Shravana (month) 20 languages Afrikaans বাংলা भोजपुरी डोटेली ગુજરાતી हिन्दी ಕನ್ನಡ मैथिली मराठी მარგალური ဘာသာမန် Nederlands नेपाली ଓଡ଼ିଆ ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Русский संस्कृतम् தமிழ் ತುಳು Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Shraavana ) Fourth month of the Hindu lunar calendar For the Ramayana character, see Shravana Kumara . For other uses, see Shravana .

Shravana Calendar Hindu calendar Month number 5 Season Rainy Gregorian equivalent July–August Significant days Krishna Janmashtami (Amanta) Raksha Bandhan Naga Panchami Pola Hariyali Teej ← Ashadha Bhadra → Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Śrāvaṇa is a month of the Hindu calendar . In India's national civil calendar , Śrāvaṇa is the fifth month of the year, typically beginning in mid to late July and ending in late August. Śrāvaṇa begins on the new moon (according to the amanta tradition) or the full moon (according to the purnimanta tradition).

The month of Shravana is very important for the entire Indian subcontinent , as it is connected to the arrival of the south-west monsoons . For many Hindus, the month of Shravana is a month of fasting . Many Hindus will fast every Monday to Shiva and/or every Tuesday to Parvati . This holy month is dedicated to Lord Shiva, one of the principal deities in Hinduism. Devotees observe various rituals and practices during this time to seek blessings and spiritual growth.

[ 1 ] Fasting on Tuesdays of this month is known locally as "Mangala Gauri Vrat".

[ 2 ] Dashama Vrata is dedicated to Dashama and is observed on the first day of Shravana as per Gujarati tradition.

[ 3 ] The period of Shravan month is pious Golden Period for Spiritual Seekers and should be utilised for Worship of Lord Shiva .

Krishna Janmashtami [ edit ] Main article: Krishna Janmashtami Krishna Janmashtami marks the birth of Krishna on the eighth day after the full moon, which is the 23rd day of Shravana according to the amanta tradition, and is celebrated with great pomp by Hindus across the world, especially those of the Vaishnava traditions.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Raksha Bandhan [ edit ] Main article: Raksha Bandhan Raksha Bandhan , also called Rakhi Purnima or simply Rakhi in many parts of India and Nepal , is a Hindu religious festival.

[ 6 ] The festival signifies and celebrates the bond between brothers and sisters. It is celebrated on Shravana Purnima (Full Moon). In simple words, Raksha bandhan means "Bond of Protection".

[ 7 ] Naryal Purnima [ edit ] Main article: Narali Poornima In western India and parts of Maharashtra , Gujarat , and Goa , Shravana Purnima (full moon) day is celebrated as Narali Purnima. On this day, an offering of a coconut ( naryal in Gujarati , naral in Marathi ) is made to the sea, as a mark of respect to Varuna, the God of the Sea. In the coastal regions of Maharashtra i.e.

Konkan , a coconut is offered to the sea for calming it down after the monsoon season . Narali Purnima is the beginning of the fishing season, and the fishermen, who depend on the sea for a living, make an offering to Varuna so that they can reap bountiful fish from the sea. Fishermen start fishing in the sea after this ceremony.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Nag Panchami [ edit ] Main article: Naga Panchami Nag Panchami is also celebrated in many parts of India on the fifth day after Amavasya of Shravana month. The snake god Nāga is worshipped. The last day of Shravana is celebrated as Pola , where the bull is worshipped by farmers from Maharashtra.

[ 10 ] Basava Panchami [ edit ] In Karnataka Basava Panchami ( Kannada : ಬಸವ ಪಂಚಮಿ ) is celebrated on the fifth day after amavasya . In 1196 AD, on this day, Lingayat dharma guru Basava merged with God.

[ clarification needed ] Avani Avittam [ edit ] In southern and central parts of India including Maharashtra , Goa , Kerala , Andhra Pradesh , Tamil Nadu , Karnataka and Odisha , Shravana Purnima day is when many communities perform the rituals of Avani Avittam or Upakarma .

Balarama Jayanti [ edit ] Shravana Purnima day is also celebrated as Balarama's birth ceremony.

Krishna 's elder brother Balarama was born on this Purnima.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Gamha Purnima [ edit ] Gamha Purnima is celebrated in Odisha . On this date, all the domesticated cows and bullocks are decorated and worshipped. Various kinds of country-made cakes called pitha and sweets, mitha , are made and distributed within families, relatives and friends. In Oriya Jagannath culture, the Krishna and Radha enjoy the rainy season of Shravana starting from Shukla Pakhya Ekadashi (usually four days before Purnima) and ending on Rakhi Purnima with a festival called Jhulan Yatra. Idols of Radha-Krishna are beautifully decorated on a swing called Jhulan, hence the name Jhulan Yatra .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Kajari Purnima [ edit ] In central parts of India such as Madhya Pradesh , Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand Shravana Purnima day is celebrated as Kajari Purnima. It is an important day for farmers and women who have sons. On the ninth day after Shravana Amavasya, the preparations for the Kajari festival start. This ninth day is called Kajari Navami and varied rituals are performed by women who have sons until Kajri Purnima or the full moon day.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ unreliable source?

] Pavitropana [ edit ] In parts of Gujarat , Shravana Purnima day is celebrated as Pavitropana. On this holiday, people perform the grand puja or the worship of Shiva. It is the culmination of the prayers done throughout the year.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Pavitra Ekadashi [ edit ] On Ekadashi Day [11th day], Vaishnavas in Gujarat and Rajasthan celebrate it as the birth of Pushtimarga, the path of grace. On this day, Krishna appeared in front of Vallabhacharya. Vallabhacharya offered him a thread ( soothan ), which was pious ( pavitra ). Since that day every year, Pavitra Ekadashi is celebrated. Such threads are offered from Ekadashi till Raksha Bandhan.

Jandhyam Purnima [ edit ] Jandhyam is Sanskrit for 'sacred thread', and Purnima denotes the full moon in Sanskrit. Jandhyala Purnima is observed on the full moon day (Purnima) in the month of Shravana in Andhra Pradesh. Brahmins perform the sacred thread changing ceremony on this day and it is also known as Yajurveda Nutanasahitha Upakarma.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Salono [ edit ] In Haryana and Punjab , in addition to celebrating Raksha Bandhan, people observe the festival of Salono.

[ 24 ] Salono is celebrated by priests solemnly tying amulets on people's wrists for protection against evil [ 25 ] [ 26 ] The day is dedicated to local saints involving devotees receiving such amulets.

[ 27 ] In Haryana , the festival of Salono also involves sisters tying threads on brothers to ward off evil.

[ 28 ] Despite the two festivals being similar in their practices, Salono and Raksha Bandhan are distinct observances with the threads tied for Salono being called ponchis .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Pola [ edit ] See also: Pola (festival) Pola is a festival respecting bulls and oxen which is celebrated by farmers in Maharashtra. Pola is a thanksgiving festival of farmers and their families for their bulls. It is celebrated in Maharashtra to acknowledge the importance of bulls and oxen, who are a crucial part of agriculture and farming activities. It falls on the last day or the new moon day of Shravana.

Shravani Mela [ edit ] See also: Famous Hindu yatras , Hindu pilgrimage sites in India , List of Hindu festivals , and Tirtha and Kshetra Shravani Mela is a major festival time at Deoghar in Jharkhand with thousands of saffron-clad pilgrims bringing holy water around 100 km on foot from the Ganges at Sultanganj , Bihar .

[ 31 ] Shravana is also the time of the annual Kanwar Yatra , the annual pilgrimage of devotees of Shiva , known as Kanwaria make to Hindu pilgrimage places of Haridwar , Gaumukh and Gangotri in Uttarakhand to fetch holy waters of Ganges River [ 32 ] Hindu saint Guru Raghavendra Swami , who advocated Madhvacharya's Dvaita philosophy, achieved Videha Mukti on Sraavana Bahula Dwitiya in 1671.

In popular culture [ edit ] Being the period when the monsoon falls over the heated plains of India, the season is celebrated in various texts, such as the Sanskrit text Meghaduta by Kalidasa . Many films too have been made with Sawan in their title, like Aya Sawan Jhoom Ke , (1969), Sawan Bhadon (1970), Solva Sawan (1979), Sawan Ko Aane Do (1979), Pyaasa Sawan (1980), etc.

In Hindustani classical music , many songs are themed around Radha and Krishna during the rainy season, and also Bollywood songs, e.g., Sawan ki Ritu Aai , Sawan ka Mahina Pawan kare Sor' and 'Rim jhim gire Saawan'.

During Shravana, the Hindu community in the regions of Goa , Maharashtra and Karnataka practice a vegetarian diet. This is because during the monsoon season, it is difficult to get seafood.

See also [ edit ] Hinduism portal Astronomical basis of the Hindu calendar Hindu calendar Indian units of measurement Indian astronomy Hindu astrology Vassa , a similar festival in Buddhism also observed with meditation References [ edit ] ^ "Shravan Mass for Spiritual Growth and Divine Connection" .

Nepa Rudraksha . 11 July 2024.

Archived from the original on 11 July 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "2022 Sawan Somwar, Shravan Somwar Vrat dates for New York City, New York, United States" .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2016 . Retrieved 5 May 2016 .

^ "Hindu Blog" . 30 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 13 October 2021 .

^ Ellwood, Robert (1998).

The Encyclopedia of World Religions . New York: Infobase Publishing. pp.

199 .

ISBN 0-8160-6141-6 .

^ ( Krishna was born at 12 o'clock on that day.) ^ K. Moti Gokulsing, Wimal Dissanayake (4 February 2009), Popular culture in a globalised India , Taylor & Francis, 2009, ISBN 978-0-415-47667-6 , retrieved 16 August 2011 , ... Raksha Bandhan: A popular festival of Indian Sub-continent where sister ties a thread on brother's wrist, signifying love and/or seeking protection ...

^ "Meaning of Raksha Bandhan, Significance of Rakhi, Rakshabandhan Significance, Meaning of Rakhi" .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2024 . Retrieved 19 August 2016 .

^ "Narali Purnima - Narali Pournima Maharashtra, Narali Pournima Festival India" .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2016 . Retrieved 1 August 2011 .

^ "Narali Poornima/ Coconut Festival" . Magicalmumbai.com. Archived from the original on 25 August 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ Maharashtra State Gazetteers: Kolhapur District . Vol. 1. Directorate of Govt. Print., Stationery and Publications, Maharashtra State. 1976. p. 280.

^ "Balaram Jayanti" . Iskconbangalore.org. Archived from the original on 18 August 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ "Balaram Jayanti 2010" . Iskconbangalore.org. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ Event archives orissa.gov.in Archived 18 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Lord Jagannath: Festivals - Gamha Purnima, Festival of lord jagannath, Jagannath Puri, Jagannath Temple" . orissa.oriyaonline.com. Archived from the original on 23 August 2011 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ "Sri Sathya Sai Bal Vikas" . Sssbalvikas.org.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ shubham95.

"Raksha Bandhan" .

Nuvvo . Archived from the original on 23 May 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ "Pavitropana, Pavitropana Festival" . Raksha-bandhan.com. 21 August 2013.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2024 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ John Marshall / Jaya Tirtha Charan Dasa.

"PAvitropAna - PutradA EkAdasi" . Salagram.net.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2024 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ "Pavitra Ekadashi 2011 – Pavitropana Ekadasi ~ Hindu Blog" . Hindu-blog.com. 6 June 2007 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ "Pavitropana Ekadasi" . Archive.is. 20 December 2012. Archived from the original on 20 December 2012 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Pavitra Ekadashi Vrat - How To Observe Pavitropana Ekadashi Vrat, Story Of Pavitra Ekadashi Fasting" . Festivals.iloveindia.com.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2024 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ "Jandhyala Purnima" . 16 August 2021.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2024 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 .

^ "I Love Hyderabad" . 10 October 2007. Archived from the original on 10 October 2007 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ Kumar Suresh Singh, Madan Lal Sharma, A. K. Bhatia, Anthropological Survey of India (1994) [1] Archived 19 August 2024 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Haryana District Gazetteers: Rohtak district gazetteer, 1910" . Gazetteers Organisation, Revenue Department, Haryana. 17 July 2000.

Archived from the original on 10 August 2023 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 – via Google Books.

^ General, India Office of the Registrar (17 July 1965).

"Census of India, 1961" . Manager of Publications.

Archived from the original on 10 August 2023 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 – via Google Books.

^ "Karnal District Gazetteer" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2014.

^ Gupta, Shakti M. (17 July 1990).

Festivals, Fairs, and Fasts of India . Clarion Books.

ISBN 978-81-85120-23-2 .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2024 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 – via Google Books.

^ Beckerlegge, Gwilym (17 July 2001).

World Religions Reader . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-24748-1 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 – via Google Books.

^ Lewis, Oscar (1865) Village Life in Northern India: Studies in a Delhi Village [2] Archived 19 August 2024 at the Wayback Machine ^ Verma, Manish (17 July 2013).

Fasts and Festivals of India . Diamond Pocket Books (P) Ltd.

ISBN 978-81-7182-076-4 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 – via Google Books.

^ "SPOTLIGHT: The long walk for worship" .

Frontline ( The Hindu ). 14–27 August 2004. Archived from the original on 6 August 2010.

External links [ edit ] Sawan somvar Vrat katha Shravan 2025 -- Important tithi & rituals v t e Days and months of the Hindu calendar Days Pratipada Dvitiya Tritiya Chaturthi Panchami Shashthi Saptami Ashtami Navami Dashami Ekadashi Dvadashi Trayodashi Chaturdashi Amavasya Purnima Months Lunar Chaitra Vaishakha Jyeshtha Ashadha Shravana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartika Margashirsha (Agrahayana) Pausha Magha Phalguna Adhika-masa Solar Meṣa Vṛṣabha Mithuna Karkaṭa Siṃha Kanya Tulā Vṛścika Dhanu Makara Kumbha Mīna v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nhql2
Cached time: 20250817043847
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.696 seconds
Real time usage: 0.878 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2932/1000000
Revision size: 20762/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 170428/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2456/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 131513/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.428/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16159792/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  670.615      1 -total
 32.15%  215.576      1 Template:Reflist
 22.98%  154.075     22 Template:Cite_web
 18.87%  126.518      1 Template:Infobox_month
 18.16%  121.766      1 Template:Infobox
 15.47%  103.712      1 Template:Hinduism
 15.12%  101.386      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.22%   81.974      1 Template:Native_name_checker
  8.67%   58.124      1 Template:Short_description
  5.27%   35.367      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1080582:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043847 and revision id 1305596171. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shravana_(month)&oldid=1305596171 " Category : Months of the Hindu calendar Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2025 Use Indian English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles containing Kannada-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2025 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 01:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shravana (month) 20 languages Add topic

