Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Publications 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Jacobus Golius 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Dansk Deutsch Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Latina Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch orientalist and mathematician (1596–1667) Jacobus Golius Jacob Golius , born Jacob van Gool (1596 – September 28, 1667), was an Orientalist and mathematician based at the Leiden University in the Netherlands. He is primarily remembered as an Orientalist. He published Arabic texts in Arabic at Leiden, and did Arabic-to-Latin translations. His best-known work is an Arabic-to-Latin dictionary, Lexicon Arabico-Latinum (1653), which he sourced for the most part from the Sihah dictionary of Al-Jauhari and the Qamous dictionary of Fairuzabadi .

Life [ edit ] Golius was born in The Hague . He went to the University of Leiden in 1612 to study mathematics. In 1618 he registered again to study Arabic and other Eastern languages at Leiden, where he was the most distinguished pupil of Erpenius . In 1622 he accompanied the Dutch embassy to Morocco , and on his return he was chosen to succeed Erpenius as professor of Arabic at Leiden (1625). In the following year he set out on a tour of the Eastern Mediterranean lands, from which he did not return until 1629.

[ 1 ] A key purpose of the tour was to collect Arabic and Persian texts and bring them back to the Leiden University library.

[ 2 ] Jacob also held ownership of a Malay-Dutch dictionary, it was sold to Narcissus Marsh in 1696 who bequethed it to the Bodleian after his death.

[ 3 ] The remainder of his life was spent at Leiden where he held the chair of mathematics as well as that of Arabic.

[ 1 ] Golius taught mathematics to the French philosopher René Descartes , and later corresponded with him.

[ 4 ] It is therefore highly probable that he was able to read to him parts of the mathematical Arabic texts he had started to collect, among others on the Conics.

[ 5 ] Publications [ edit ] Jacobus Golius Among his earlier publications may be mentioned editions of various Arabic texts ( Proverbia quaedam Alis, imperatoris Muslemici, et Carmen Tograipoetae doctissimi, necnon dissertatio quaedam Aben Synae , 1629; and Ahmedis Arabsiadae vitae et rerum gestarum Timuri, gui vulgo Tamer, lanes dicitur, historia , 1636). In 1656 he published a new edition, with considerable additions, of the Grammatica Arabica of Erpenius. After his death, there was found among his papers a Dictionarium Persico-Latinum which was published, with additions, by Edmund Castell in his Lexicon heptaglotton (1669). Golius also edited, translated and annotated the astronomical treatise of the 9th century Arabic astronomer Al-Farghani .

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] Golius's Lexicon Arabico-Latinum , about 1500 pages, published at Leiden in 1653, was a big improvement on the Arabic-to-Latin dictionary of Franciscus Raphelengius , which was published at Leiden in 1613. Golius possessed mainstream medieval Arabic dictionaries written solely in Arabic, and was able to translate their contents into Latin. Raphelengius did not have the benefit of seeing these Arabic dictionaries. Golius's dictionary was later improved and expanded by Georg Freytag 's Arabic-to-Latin dictionary in 1837.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Chisholm 1911 .

^ Biography of Jacobus Golius at the Baheyeldin Dynasty site .

^ Greentree, Richard (1910).

CATALOGUE OF MALAY MANUSCRIPTS AND MANUSCRIPTS RELATING TO THE MALAY LANGUAGE IN THE BODLEIAN LIBRARY (PDF) . Oxford. p. 14.

^ Sasaki, Chikara (2003).

Descartes's mathematical thought. (Volume 237 of Boston studies in the philosophy of science) .

Springer-Verlag . pp. 3, 206– 207, 222– 225.

ISBN 1-4020-1746-4 .

^ Hattab suggests that this collection was the primary reason for Descartes' choice to study with Golius: Hattab, Helen (2009), Descartes on Forms and Mechanisms , Cambridge University Press, p. 156, ISBN 9780521518925 .

^ Alfraganus: Elementa astronomica , in Arabic and Latin, year 1669, translation by Golius. Alfraganus is a medieval Latin spelling of Al-Farghani.

External links [ edit ] Biography of Jacobus Golius at the Baheyeldin Dynasty site Lexicon Arabico-Latinum , by Jacobus Golius , year 1653, about 1500 pages Jacobus Golius at the Mathematics Genealogy Project This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Golius, Jacobus ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 226.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain 2 Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jacobus_Golius&oldid=1302636131 " Categories : 1596 births 1667 deaths 17th-century Dutch mathematicians Dutch orientalists Dutch Arabists Scientists from The Hague Academic staff of Leiden University 17th-century Dutch scholars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 17:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jacobus Golius 15 languages Add topic

