Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and family 2 Organizing 3 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 3.1 "The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm" 3.2 "Women and the Radical Movement" 3.3 "Notes From the First Year" 3.4 Other writings 4 Activism 5 Selected works 6 References Toggle the table of contents Anne Koedt 12 languages বাংলা Deutsch Español 한국어 Italiano Kiswahili مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American feminist activist and author (born 1941) Anne Koedt Born 1941 (age 83–84) Copenhagen , Denmark Nationality American Danish Occupation Activist Notable work " The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm " (1970) Spouse Ellen Levine ​ ​ ( m.

2011; died 2012) ​ Parent Inger Koedt Anne Koedt (born 1941) [ 1 ] is an American radical feminist activist and author of " The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm ", [ 2 ] a 1970 classic feminist work on women's sexuality.

[ 1 ] She was connected to the group New York Radical Women and was a founding member of New York Radical Feminists .

[ 3 ] Early life and family [ edit ] Koedt was born in Copenhagen in 1941 to Bobs Koedt (born Andreas Peschcke-Koedt) and Inger Koedt . Her parents had been members of the Danish resistance during World War II , harboring Jews in their basement until the refugees could be smuggled to Sweden . Her father was an architect and photographer who forged passports for leaders of the Danish resistance. Born in Riverside, California , Bobs grew up outside of Copenhagen. Bobs was arrested and interrogated by the Germans and sent to Nazi headquarters, but survived unharmed. Due to her father's American citizenship, the Koedt family was able to easily immigrate to the United States and settled in San Francisco . Her father, suffering from depression and seizures, died by suicide shortly before his 80th birthday. Her mother lived in Jackson Hole , Wyoming , for over 60 years. While having been raised Protestant , Inger was active with the Jackson Hole Jewish Community.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In September 2011, Koedt married Ellen Levine, her partner for 40 years. In May 2012, Levine died.

[ 6 ] Inger died on 14 August 2021 at the age of 106. She was among the oldest residents of Teton County .

[ 7 ] Organizing [ edit ] Koedt was a founding member of the New York Radical Women , an early feminist group begun in fall, 1967 which pioneered women's liberation through activism, such as disrupting the 1968 Miss America pageant, writing and publishing feminist work, and connecting personal issues to political oppression in the form of small-group consciousness-raising.

[ 8 ] By late 1968, she also co-founded The Feminists , a strict feminist separatist group begun by Ti-Grace Atkinson after she left the New York City chapter of the National Organization for Women ; other prominent members included Sheila Michaels , Barbara Mehrhof, Pamela Kearon, and Sheila Cronan. In 1969, Koedt left the Feminists to form the New York Radical Feminists (NYRF) with Shulamith Firestone . NYRF (not to be confused, as it often is, with the larger and older New York Radical Women, which was still meeting and whose membership was fluid and often overlapped with the smaller groups] was organized into small cells or "brigades" named after notable feminists of the past; Koedt and Firestone led the Stanton - Anthony Brigade. By 1970, conflicting factions within NYRF had driven both Koedt and Firestone out of the group they had founded and Koedt withdrew from organized activism, later commenting "I was done with groups after that." [ 9 ] Writings [ edit ] "The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm" [ edit ] Main article: The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm In 1968, Anne Koedt published her most influential work, "The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm" in a radical-feminist journal from New York Radical Women's members, titled Notes from the First Year .

[ 10 ] In the article, Koedt frankly challenged the dominant understandings of female sexual pleasure held by most medical and psychoanalytic experts of the time, who were almost exclusively male. In particular, the article took issue with the predominant Freudian account of female sexuality that discounted the clitoral orgasm as "juvenile" and viewed orgasm achieved through the vagina as the only "mature" form. Women who failed to achieve orgasm through penetrative, heterosexual intercourse were therefore labeled as dysfunctional or frigid by the professional community. In Koedt's view, this approach placed unfair blame on women for their lack of satisfaction during straight sex, inaccurately pathologized normal female sexual function, and caused many women to seek unnecessary psychoanalytic treatment for a nonexistent ailment rather than exploring techniques that would lead to a more pleasurable sexual experience. In support of her position, Koedt marshaled up-to-date research on the female anatomy and sexual response, including recent work by Alfred Kinsey and Masters and Johnson , to demonstrate that the clitoris, rather than the vagina, is the primary site of erotic stimulation. Koedt went on to argue that male chauvinism and the urge to maintain women in a subservient role were the primary driving force perpetuating misconceptions surrounding female sexuality.

The article was widely circulated in pamphlet form, inspiring many supporters to advocate for celibacy or to promote lesbianism as positive alternative to heterosexuality for women.

[ 11 ] Other feminist readers were more critical, taking particular issue with Koedt's assertion that women who testified to experiencing vaginal orgasms were either confused due to lack of education regarding their own bodies or " faking it " so as not to offend their male lovers' egos.

[ 12 ] "Women and the Radical Movement" [ edit ] On February 17, 1968, Koedt delivered a speech regarding women's liberation and the role that radical women must play in the female revolution in order to change the overall fundamental concept of women. Koedt advocates for a systematic change, and urges radical women to challenge dominant/submissive dynamic that shapes the relationships between men and women. Koedt refers to women's issues and women's liberation as a social and political issue that has many similarities to the black power struggle. Koedt also touches on the topic of male supremacy and how to improve the condition of women as an oppressed group within society, highlighting the importance of fighting for women everywhere, not just within the radical movement. In her speech, Koedt calls for radical women to learn from history and from past revolutions in which women were a part of yet reaped none of the benefits, such as the American revolution and the Economic/Soviet revolution. The speech concludes that in order to change the basic structure of society which gives men power over women, women shouldn't support any revolution that aims to create change but does not care about the liberation of women from men's dominant position in society. It is not enough to improve secondary characteristics of freedom or to gain certain privileges, the real radical revolution must tackle the basic structure of female oppression within a patriarchal society.

[ 13 ] "Notes From the First Year" [ edit ] New York Radical Women compiled a group of feminist texts and speeches from their work in 1968 called "Notes From the First Year," which was edited by Koedt. The compilation included texts from Shulamith Firestone , Jennifer Gardner, Kathy Amatniek, and Koedt herself. Koedt's writings included The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm and "Women and the Radical Movement," the speech she gave at the Free University in New York City on February 17, 1968.

[ 14 ] Other writings [ edit ] Koedt's December 1969 Politics of the Ego, A Manifesto for New York Radical Feminists was first published in Notes from the Second Year and later in her anthology Radical Feminism .

[ 11 ] An excerpt from this manifesto continued to be circulated as part of the 1976 "Introduction to New York Radical Feminists" pamphlet until the NYRF post office box closed in 1989.

Koedt became the editor of Notes From the Third Year replacing Shulamith Firestone in 1972. Some feminist groups felt that the more radical feminist positions that had been previously included were edited out of this third edition.

[ 15 ] Activism [ edit ] In 1978, Koedt became an associate of the Women's Institute for Freedom of the Press (WIFP).

[ 16 ] WIFP is an American nonprofit publishing organization. The organization works to increase communication between women and connect the public with forms of women-based media.

Selected works [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Anne Koedt .

" The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm " (1970) "Lesbianism and Feminism" (1971) [ 17 ] Koedt, Anne; Levine, Ellen; Rapone, Anita (eds.) (1973).

Radical Feminism .

References [ edit ] ^ a b Gerhard, Jane (Summer 2000). "Revisiting " The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm ": the female orgasm in American sexual thought and second wave feminism".

Feminist Studies .

26 (2): 449– 476.

doi : 10.2307/3178545 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0026.216 .

JSTOR 3178545 .

PMID 16856271 .

^ Joannou, Maroula (2000), "From The Golden Notebook ", in Joannou, Maroula (ed.), Contemporary women's writing: from "The Golden Notebook" to "The Color Purple" , Manchester, UK / New York, US: Manchester University Press , p. 40, ISBN 9780719053399 .

Preview.

^ Echols, Alice (1989), "Appendix C: a guide to women's liberation groups (The Feminists)", in Echols, Alice (ed.), Daring to be bad: radical feminism in America 1967-1975 , Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, p.

388 , ISBN 9780816617876 .

Preview.

^ "Centenarian feels lucky, is still enjoying life" . Jackson Hole News & Guide. September 2, 2015 . Retrieved October 22, 2019 .

^ "Koedt still cooking as she nears 104" . Jackson Hole News & Guide. December 12, 2018 . Retrieved October 22, 2019 .

^ Shapiro, T. Ress (May 29, 2012).

"Ellen Levine, author of children's books, dies at 73" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved February 24, 2022 .

^ "Longtime Jackson resident, Inger Koedt, dies at age 106" . Jackson Hole News & Guide. August 16, 2021 . Retrieved September 19, 2021 .

^ "In Our Time: memoir of a revolution" by Susan Brownmiller, Dial Press, 1999, p. 20-21 ^ Faludi, Susan (April 15, 2013).

"Death of a Revolutionary" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved October 21, 2016 .

^ Koedt, Anne (1968).

"The myth of the vaginal orgasm" .

Notes from the Second Year .

OCLC 2265246 .

Available online.

Archived 2016-05-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Thompson, Denise (1991).

Reading between the lines: a lesbian feminist critique of feminist accounts of sexuality . Spinifex Press.

ISBN 9780646041964 .

Details.

^ eck25 (June 14, 2010).

"A Reaction to Anne Koedt's " The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm "" .

www.wstudies.pitt.edu . Gender, Sexuality, & Women's Studies Program, University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved October 14, 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Koedt, Levine, Rapone (1973).

Radical Feminism . Quadrangle/The New York Times Book Company. pp.

318– 321.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Koedt, Levine, Rapone (1973).

Radical Feminism . Quadrangle/The New York Times Book Company. p. 318.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Bouchier, David (September 1979). "The deradicalisation of feminism: ideology and utopia in action".

Sociology .

13 (3): 387– 402.

doi : 10.1177/003803857901300302 .

JSTOR 42853376 .

S2CID 143628657 .

^ "Associates | The Women's Institute for Freedom of the Press" .

www.wifp.org . Retrieved June 21, 2017 .

^ Koedt, Anne (1971).

"Lesbianism and Feminism" . Chicago: Chicago Women's Liberation Union .

OCLC 61667966 . Archived from the original on April 29, 2015.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States Netherlands Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Radical feminism People Wim Hora Adema Chude Pam Allen Ti-Grace Atkinson Kathleen Barry Rosalyn Baxandall Linda Bellos Julie Bindel Jenny Brown Judith Brown Susan Brownmiller Phyllis Chesler D. A. Clarke Nikki Craft Kimberlé Crenshaw Mary Daly Christine Delphy Gail Dines Andrea Dworkin Melissa Farley Shulamith Firestone Marilyn French Marilyn Frye Germaine Greer Carol Hanisch Merle Hoffman bell hooks Sheila Jeffreys Robert Jensen Lierre Keith Anne Koedt Marjorie Kramer Holly Lawford-Smith Audre Lorde Catharine A. MacKinnon Sheila Michaels Kate Millett Robin Morgan Meghan Murphy Irene Peslikis Janice Raymond Rosetta Reitz Adrienne Rich Florence Rush Kathie Sarachild Alix Kates Shulman Valerie Solanas Gloria Steinem John Stoltenberg Michele Wallace Marilyn Salzman Webb Ellen Willis Harriet Wistrich Monique Wittig Laura X Groups Cell 16 Chicago Women's Liberation Union Coalition Against Trafficking in Women Deep Green Resistance Lesbian Organization of Toronto Michigan Womyn's Music Festival Mountain Moving Coffeehouse New York Radical Feminists New York Radical Women Redstockings Stop Porn Culture The Feminists The Furies Collective WOMAD Women Against Pornography Women's Liberation Center Women's Liberation Front (WoLF) Issues 4 NOs Child sexual abuse False consciousness Feminism Lesbian Second wave Feminist separatism Feminist views on transgender topics Gender role Male privilege Patriarchy Political lesbianism Pornography Feminist views on pornography Postgenderism Prostitution Feminist views Reproductive rights Sexism Misogyny Internalized sexism Social construction of gender Violence against women Media Books The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution ( 1970) Sexual Politics (1970) Sisterhood Is Powerful (1970) " The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm " (1970) The Female Eunuch (1970) Lesbian Nation (1973) Woman Hating (1974) Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape (1974) Pornography: Men Possessing Women (1981) Ain't I a Woman?

(1981) Against Sadomasochism (1982) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984) Sisterhood Is Global (1984) Intercourse (1987) Feminism Unmodified (1987) Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989) The Straight Mind and Other Essays (1992) Only Words (1993) Scapegoat: The Jews, Israel, and Women's Liberation (2000) Sisterhood Is Forever (2003) The Industrial Vagina (2008) Other Off Our Backs (1970–2008) SCUM Manifesto (1967) She's Beautiful When She's Angry (2014) Other Consciousness raising Herstory Miss America protest (1968) Radical lesbianism Womyn's land Feminism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anne_Koedt&oldid=1296725026 " Categories : 1941 births 20th-century American LGBTQ people 21st-century American LGBTQ people American feminist writers American socialist feminists American women writers Danish emigrants to the United States Danish feminists Danish people of American descent Danish women writers The Feminists members New York Radical Feminists members New York Radical Women members Writers from Copenhagen Writers from Palo Alto, California Activists from San Francisco Radical feminists Living people Second wave feminists American women founders American founders Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from June 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2022 Articles with hCards Articles with excerpts Date of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 21:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anne Koedt 12 languages Add topic

