Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Offshore islands 3 Fenced enclosures 4 References 5 See also Toggle the table of contents Ecological island 9 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Nederlands Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia An ecological island is a term used in New Zealand , and increasingly in Australia , to refer to an area of land (not necessarily an actual island) isolated by natural or artificial means from the surrounding land, [ 1 ] where a natural micro-habitat exists amidst a larger differing ecosystem . In New Zealand the term is used to refer to one of several types of nationally protected areas .

In artificial ecological islands (also known as mainland islands ): all non-native species (at least predator species) have been eradicated, native species are reintroduced and nurtured, and the natural or artificial border is maintained to prevent reintroduction of non-native species.

The ultimate goal is to recreate an ecological microcosm of the country as a whole as it was before human arrival. There is usually provision for controlled public access, and scientific study and research.

The definition does not include land within a fence erected to: protect farm animals from wild predators protect a specific species from specific predators exclude farm animals only exclude native animals (although some native animals, weka for example, may need to be excluded during a species' recovery phase).

Background [ edit ] The concept of mainland islands was pioneered in New Zealand and arose mainly from the particular circumstances of that country's history.  For millions of years New Zealand was part of the supercontinent Gondwanaland , which included Australia , Africa , and South America , and shared the same flora and fauna .  About 70 million years ago New Zealand became separated, earlier than Australia, South America and Antarctica.  About five million years later non-avian dinosaurs became globally extinct leaving the way open to mammals to dominate - except in New Zealand where there were no land mammals (only 3 species of bats and seals ). In the absence of mammals, birds became dominant.  Evolutionary processes resulted in a unique assemblage of plants and animals, and New Zealand became a land dominated by birds. Without competition from browsing mammals, birds evolved to occupy niches that mammals occupied elsewhere. Threatened by few predators , many birds had no need to fly and many species became flightless.  Birds, reptiles , plants, insects , and bats, all evolved in the absence of terrestrial mammals, and have little defence against alien species.

With human colonisation came many accidental or deliberate introductions of mammals and birds.  These wrought havoc with native species and many became extinct, many others were reduced in range and number, with some teetering on extinction. Traditionally pacific rats ( Rattus exulans ), Norway rats ( Rattus norveigucus ), ship rats ( Rattus rattus ) cats, ferrets, stoats, and weasels were all considered to be the main culprits in the decline of native species of New Zealand birds, reptiles and insects.  More recent information adds hedgehogs and mice to the list. These species have been introduced for a variety of reasons and some inadvertently. The effect remains the same: they have all contributed to the decline of native animals. Possums and deer did the same for the forest.

However, New Zealand also includes many offshore islands, some of which contained species rare or extinct on the mainland because introduced pests could not reach them.

Offshore islands [ edit ] Increasingly over the last hundred years, New Zealand's Department of Conservation together with many volunteers have developed and perfected world-first methods of clearing some of these islands of all introduced pests, and island restoration , creating safe havens for the reintroduction of at-risk species, thereby saving them from extinction.  These islands are also used to expand the range of rare species so that an ecological disaster on one island would not result in the total extinction of a species.  As many species rebound in numbers in the absence of predators the islands act as species reservoirs enabling the periodic removal of some to create breeding colonies on other cleared islands, or on the mainland itself.

[ 2 ] Fenced enclosures [ edit ] Xcluder pest-exclusion fence around perimeter of Maungatautari .

Following the example of what had been achieved on offshore islands, groups of New Zealanders decided to create artificial ecological islands on the mainland so that the public could have easier access and learn what New Zealand looked and sounded like before human colonisation.

[ 3 ] There are excellent projects where alien species numbers are kept down by various methods other than a pest-exclusion fence or the coastline, but these are not generally described as ecological islands.

Projects that do meet the criteria, or are aiming to, include: New Zealand 1999 Zealandia 2004 Tawharanui Open Sanctuary [ 4 ] 2005 Bushy Park [ 5 ] 2006 Maungatautari Restoration Project [ 6 ] 2007 Orokonui Ecosanctuary 2009 Glenfern Sanctuary Charitable Trust [ 7 ] 2011 Shakespear Regional Park 2016 Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Moehau Environment Group [ 8 ] Australia 2015 Nangak Tamboree Wildlife Sanctuary [ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ Cartwright, Jennifer (2019).

"Ecological islands: conserving biodiversity hotspots in a changing climate" .

Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment .

17 (6): 331– 340.

Bibcode : 2019FrEE...17..331C .

doi : 10.1002/fee.2058 .

ISSN 1540-9309 .

^ "Ecological restoration of offshore islands" .

Department of Conservation . Retrieved 2021-01-29 .

^ Innes, John; Lee, William G.; Burns, Bruce; Campbell-Hunt, Colin; Watts, Corinne; Phipps, Hilary; Stephens, Theo (2012-01-01).

"Role of predator-proof fences in restoring New Zealand's biodiversity: a response to Scofield et al. (2011)" .

New Zealand Journal of Ecology .

36 (2): 232– 238.

^ "Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Society" .

Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Society . Retrieved 2021-01-29 .

^ "Bushy Park Tarapuruhi – Bushy Park Tarapuruhi Forest Sanctuary & Historic Homestead" . Retrieved 2021-01-29 .

^ "Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari" .

MOCA . Retrieved 2021-01-29 .

^ "Glenfern Sanctuary | About Us" .

Glenfern2019 . Retrieved 2021-01-29 .

^ "Vandals hit conservation fence on Coromandel" .

The New Zealand Herald . Retrieved 2021-01-29 .

^ University, La Trobe.

"Nangak Tamboree Wildlife Sanctuary" .

www.latrobe.edu.au . Retrieved 2021-01-29 .

See also [ edit ] Ecology portal Biodiversity of New Zealand Conservation in New Zealand Invasive species in New Zealand Exclosure v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecological_island&oldid=1303121178 " Categories : Protected areas Nature reserves Ecological connectivity Nature conservation in New Zealand Protected areas of New Zealand This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 05:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecological island 9 languages Add topic

