Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Five phases 3 Hype in new media 4 Criticisms of the model 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Gartner hype cycle 16 languages العربية Bosanski Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Hype cycle ) Graphical presentation of the maturity of specific technologies Hype cycle Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e The Gartner hype cycle is a graphical presentation to represent the maturity, adoption, and social application of specific technologies . The hype cycle's veracity has been largely disputed, with studies pointing to it being inconsistently true at best.

History [ edit ] Gartner's hype cycle framework was introduced in 1995 by analyst Jackie Fenn, who had joined the firm the year before.

[ 1 ] In her research reports, Fenn identified common patterns related to the maturity of emerging technologies.

[ 2 ] Fenn referred to this familiar progression as a "hype cycle" and created a graph depicting its ups and downs with each distinct stage given a title, starting with Technology trigger and ending with Plateau of productivity.

[ 3 ] The chart was included in a one-off research report, but it was popular with other Gartner analysts and clients and the "Hype Cycle of Emerging Technologies" was soon developed into an annual report.

[ 2 ] Five phases [ edit ] General hype cycle for technology Each hype cycle consists of five key phases of a technology's life cycle.

1. Technology trigger A potential technology breakthrough kicks things off. Early proof-of-concept stories and media interest trigger significant publicity. Often no usable products exist and commercial viability is unproven.

2. Peak of inflated expectations Early publicity produces a number of success stories—often accompanied by scores of failures. Some companies take action; most do not.

3. Trough of disillusionment Interest wanes as experiments and implementations fail to deliver. Producers of the technology shake out or fail. Investment continues only if the surviving providers improve their products to the satisfaction of early adopters.

4. Slope of enlightenment More instances of the technology's benefits start to crystallize and become more widely understood. Second- and third-generation products appear from technology providers. More enterprises fund pilots; conservative companies remain cautious.

5. Plateau of productivity Mainstream adoption starts to take off. Criteria for assessing provider viability are more clearly defined. The technology's broad market applicability and relevance are clearly paying off. If the technology has more than a niche market, then it will continue to grow.

[ 4 ] The term "hype cycle" and each of the associated phases are now used more broadly in the marketing of new technologies.

Hype in new media [ edit ] Hype (in the more general media sense of the term "hype" [ 5 ] ) has played a large part in the adoption of new media . Analyses of the Internet in the 1990s featured large amounts of hype, [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] and that created "debunking" responses.

[ 5 ] A longer-term historical perspective on such cycles can be found in the research of the economist Carlota Perez .

[ 9 ] Desmond Roger Laurence, in the field of clinical pharmacology , described a similar process in drug development in the seventies.

[ citation needed ] Criticisms of the model [ edit ] There have been numerous criticisms [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] of the hype cycle model, prominent among which are that it is not a cycle, that the outcome does not depend on the nature of the technology itself, that it is not scientific in nature, and that it does not reflect changes over time in the speed at which technology develops. Another is that it is limited in its application, as it prioritizes economic considerations in decision-making processes. It seems to assume that a business' performance is tied to the hype cycle, whereas this may actually have more to do with the way a company devises its branding strategy.

[ citation needed ] A related criticism is that the "cycle" has no real benefits to the development or marketing of new technologies and merely comments on pre-existing trends. Specific disadvantages when compared to, for example, technology readiness level are: The cycle is not scientific in nature, and there is no data or analysis that would justify the cycle.

With the (subjective) terms disillusionment , enlightenment and expectations it cannot be described objectively or clearly where technology now really is.

The terms are misleading in the sense that one gets the wrong idea what they can use a technology for. The user does not want to be disappointed, so should they stay away from technology in the Trough of Disillusionment?

No action perspective is offered to move technology to a next phase.

This appears to be a very simplified impulse response of an elastic system representable by a differential equation.  Perhaps more telling would be to formulate a system model with solutions conforming to observable behavior.

An analysis of Gartner Hype Cycles since 2000 [ 13 ] shows that few technologies actually travel through an identifiable hype cycle, and that in practice most of the important technologies adopted since 2000 were not identified early in their adoption cycles.

The Economist researched the hype cycle in 2024: [ 14 ] We find, in short, that the cycle is a rarity. Tracing breakthrough technologies over time, only a small share—perhaps a fifth—move from innovation to excitement to despondency to widespread adoption. Lots of tech becomes widely used without such a rollercoaster ride. Others go from boom to bust, but do not come back. We estimate that of all the forms of tech which fall into the trough of disillusionment, six in ten do not rise again.

See also [ edit ] AI winter – Period of reduced funding and interest in AI research Dunning–Kruger effect – Cognitive bias about one's own skill Kondratiev wave – Hypothesized cycle-like phenomena in the modern world economy Product lifecycle – Duration of processing of products from inception, to engineering, design & manufacture Roy Amara – American researcher, scientist Stock market bubble – Economic bubble in a stock market Transient response – Response of a system to a change from an equilibrium state Tulip mania – 17th-century economic bubble in the Netherlands Uncanny valley – Hypothesis that human replicas elicit revulsion References [ edit ] ^ Edwards, Chris (May 2015).

"Waiting for the drop" .

Engineering & Technology .

10 (4): 32– 53.

doi : 10.1049/et.2015.0415 . Retrieved April 7, 2025 .

^ a b Fenn, Jackie; Raskino, Mark (2008).

Mastering the Hype Cycle: How to Choose the Right Innovation at the Right Time .

Harvard Business Review Press . p. xiii.

ISBN 978-1-4221-2110-8 .

^ Walton, Nigel; Pyper, Neil (2020).

Technology Strategy . Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1137605344 .

^ Chaffey, Dave (2016).

Digital marketing . Ellis-Chadwick, Fiona (Sixth ed.). Harlow: Pearson. pp.

140– 141.

ISBN 9781292077611 .

OCLC 942844494 .

^ a b Flew, Terry (2008).

New Media: An Introduction (3rd ed.). South Melbourne: OUP Australia and New Zealand.

ISBN 978-0-19-555149-5 .

^ Negroponte, Nicolas (1996-01-03).

Being Digital (1st ed.). Vintage.

ISBN 978-0-679-76290-4 .

^ Kelly, Kevin (1997-09-01).

"New Rules For The New Economy" .

Wired . Vol. 5, no. 9 . Retrieved 2011-12-30 .

^ Dyson, Esther (1997).

Release 2.0: A Design For Living In The Digital Age (1st ed.). New York: Broadway Books.

^ Henton, Doug; Held, Kim (2013). "The dynamics of Silicon Valley: Creative destruction and the evolution of the innovation habitat".

Social Science Information .

52 (4): 539– 557.

doi : 10.1177/0539018413497542 .

ISSN 0539-0184 .

S2CID 145780832 .

^ Steinert, Martin (July 2010).

"Scrutinizing Gartner's hype cycle approach" .

ResearchGate . IEEE Xplore . Retrieved 29 September 2021 .

^ First published in the 2005 blog: Veryard, Richard (September 16, 2005).

"Technology Hype Curve" . Retrieved March 10, 2016 .

^ Aranda, Jorge (October 22, 2006).

"Cheap shots at the Gartner Hype Curve" . Retrieved March 10, 2016 .

^ a b "8 Lessons from 20 Years of Hype Cycles" .

LinkedIn Pulse . 2016-12-07 . Retrieved 2017-01-04 .

^ "Artificial intelligence is losing hype" .

The Economist . August 19, 2024.

Further reading [ edit ] Fenn, Jackie & Raskino, Mark (2008).

Mastering the Hype Cycle: How to Choose the Right Innovation at the Right Time .

Harvard Business Review Press .

ISBN 978-1-4221-2110-8 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hype cycle .

Hype Cycle Research Methodology , the official materials v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars v t e Emerging technologies Topics Automation Collingridge dilemma Differential technological development Disruptive innovation Ephemeralization Ethics AI Bioethics Cyberethics Neuroethics Robot ethics Exploratory engineering Proactionary principle Technological change Technological unemployment Technological convergence Technological evolution Technological paradigm Technology forecasting Accelerating change Future-oriented technology analysis Horizon scanning Moore's law Technological singularity Technology scouting Technology in science fiction Technology readiness level Technology roadmap Transhumanism List Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gartner_hype_cycle&oldid=1305483972 " Categories : Diffusion Innovation economics Innovation Product development Product lifecycle management Science and technology studies Sociology of culture Technological change Technology in society Technology assessment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 09:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gartner hype cycle 16 languages Add topic

