Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Subsidiaries and imprints 3 See also 4 Notes and references 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Holtzbrinck Publishing Group 12 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Frysk Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Simple English Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German publishing conglomerate Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Parent company Verlagsgruppe Georg von Holtzbrinck GmbH Status Private Founded 1948 ; 77 years ago ( 1948 ) Founder Georg von Holtzbrinck Country of origin Germany Headquarters location Stuttgart , Germany Distribution Worldwide Publication types Books , Newspapers , Academic journals , Magazines Imprints See below Owner(s) Monika Schoeller Stefan von Holtzbrinck [ 1 ] Official website holtzbrinck.com Holtzbrinck Publishing Group ( German : Verlagsgruppe Georg von Holtzbrinck ) is a privately held German company headquartered in Stuttgart , that owns publishing companies worldwide. Through Macmillan Publishers , it is one of the Big Five English-language publishing companies.

In 2015, it merged most of its Macmillan Science and Education unit (including Nature Publishing Group ) with Springer Science+Business Media , creating the company Springer Nature . Holtzbrinck owns 53% of the combined company.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] History [ edit ] The history of Georg von Holtzbrink's publishing activities during the Nazi years 1933-1945 has been controversial.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] After World War II, Georg von Holtzbrinck , a former member of the Nazi party, [ 6 ] reestablished a group in 1948, beginning as a German book club . In the 1960s, it purchased the German publishing companies Droemer , Kindler, Rowohlt and S. Fischer Verlag . In 1985, it acquired the retail book division of Holt, Rinehart and Winston , naming it the Henry Holt Book Company . One year later, the company acquired Scientific American magazine for $52.6 million. In 1994, it purchased a majority interest in Farrar, Straus & Giroux from retiring Roger W. Straus, Jr.

A year later, it purchased a 70% majority interest in Macmillan Publishers , and then the remaining shares in 1999. In 2001, Pearson sold the Macmillan trademark in the United States (gained with the acquisition of Simon & Schuster educational and professional division, which included the assets of former Macmillan Inc.

) to Holtzbrinck.

[ 7 ] In March 2006, Holtzbrinck forced Tor Books , which is owned by Holtzbrinck, to stop making its books available as e-books via Baen Ebooks because of concerns regarding the lack of digital rights management (DRM) . The policy was later changed and Tor titles became available as DRM-free e-books in 2012. The Tor UK label in Britain (and hence the EU) does the same. The company also received a good deal of attention when it bought the then leading German social networking platform StudiVZ in January 2007.

Holtzbrinck has total annual sales of 2.1 billion euros (as of 2005); 49% of sales are in Germany and 23% in North America. It had 2005 earnings before taxes of 142 million euros, and a total of 14,000 employees.

The current chairman of the group is Stefan von Holtzbrinck. Don Weisberg is CEO of Macmillan, the company that unites the US-based businesses of the group. Previous CEOs of Macmillan include John Sargent .

[ 8 ] Subsidiaries and imprints [ edit ] German newspaper Die Zeit in newsstand In Germany: S. Fischer Verlag FISCHER Krüger [ 9 ] Argon Verlag [ de ] FISCHER Scherz [ 10 ] Rowohlt Verlag Kiepenheuer & Witsch (85%) Verlagsgruppe Droemer Knaur (50%) O.W. Barth Die Zeit (50%) In the United States: Using the Macmillan name: Farrar, Straus and Giroux Faber & Faber (formerly; ended partnership in 2015) Henry Holt and Company Holt Paperbacks Metropolitan Books Times Books Owl Books Palgrave Macmillan Picador Roaring Brook Press Neal Porter Books First Second Books St. Martin's Press Thomas Dunne Books Tom Doherty Associates Tor Books Forge Books Bedford, Freeman and Worth Publishing Group W.H. Freeman Bedford-St. Martin's Worth Publishers Macmillan Learning Hayden-McNeil Nature Publishing Group Scientific American Former in the United States: Renaissance Media - was based in Los Angeles when its catalogue was acquired by Holtzbrinck in 2001 [ 11 ] Renaissance Books - assets and back catalogue fully merged into Holtzbrinck's St. Martin's Press, which formerly provided the book printing service for Rennaissance [ 11 ] Audio Renaissance - renamed Macmillan Audio when Holtzbrinck switched to Macmillan name in the United States In the United Kingdom: Macmillan Publishers Pan Macmillan Macmillan Pan Books Picador Macmillan Children's Books Campbell Books Priddy Books Boxtree Sidgwick & Jackson Macmillan Education Springer Nature (53%) Palgrave Macmillan Digital Science See also [ edit ] The Big Five English-language book publishers: Simon & Schuster , Penguin Random House , HarperCollins , Macmillan Publishers , and Hachette Springer Nature Books in Germany Bertelsmann Elsevier Lagardère Publishing McGraw Hill Education Pearson plc News Corp Scholastic Corporation Thomson Reuters Wiley (publisher) Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Verlagsgruppe Georg von Holtzbrinck.

"Management" .

Verlagsgruppe Georg von Holtzbrinck . Archived from the original on 30 July 2013 . Retrieved 1 April 2013 .

^ Bray, Chad (15 January 2015).

"Publisher of Nature and Scientific American to Form Joint Venture" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 14 January 2016 .

^ Carpenter, Caroline (6 May 2015).

"Completed merger forms 'Springer Nature' " .

The Bookseller . Retrieved 14 January 2016 .

^ Landler, Mark (14 October 2002).

"Another German Publisher Mulls Its Wartime Past" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 15 January 2022 .

^ O'Toole, Fintan.

"Empire of publishing built on barbarism" .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 January 2022 .

The founder of the firm, Georg von Holtzbrinck, was until the early 1930s an impoverished student who sold books door to door. He joined a Nazi student group in 1931, two years before Hitler came to power. He became a member of the Nazi Party in 1933, and stayed loyal to it until the end of the war.

^ "Verlagsgruppe Georg von Holtzbrinck" .

mediadb.eu .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2011 . Retrieved 15 January 2022 .

Denn Georg von Holtzbrinck sei „ein wichtiger Akteur" in der Buchhandels- und Verlagsgeschichte im Dritten Reich gewesen. Er war Mitglied der NSDAP, aber nicht als fanatischer Nazi in Erscheinung getreten.

^ Bookseller , Allbusiness.com ^ Book View Archived 20 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Publishing Trends , April 2006 ^ https://www.fischerverlage.de/verlage/fischer_krueger , 24 April 2020 ^ https://www.fischerverlage.de/verlage/fischer_scherz , 24 April 2020 ^ a b Maughan, Shannon (1 October 2001).

"Holtzbrinck Acquires Renaissance Media" .

Publishers Weekly . Vol. 248, no. 40. Archived from the original on 8 March 2017 . Retrieved 25 May 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Verlagsgruppe Georg von Holtzbrinck .

Official website Mary H. Munroe (2004).

"Holtzbrinck Timeline" .

The Academic Publishing Industry: A Story of Merger and Acquisition . Archived from the original on 20 October 2014 – via Northern Illinois University.

v t e Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Holtzbrinck DIE ZEIT Verlagsgruppe Die Zeit (50%) Zeit Wissen Spotlight Verlag Digital & Services Digital Science Altmetric Gutefrage.net Macmillan United States Trade Farrar, Straus and Giroux First Second Henry Holt Macmillan Audio Picador Quick and Dirty Tips St. Martin's Press Tor/Forge Tor.com Macmillan Learning Bedford-St. Martin's W. H. Freeman Worth Publishers i>clicker Hayden-McNeil Children's FSG Books for Young Readers Feiwel and Friends Holt Books for Young Readers Kingfisher Roaring Brook Priddy Square Fish United Kingdom Macmillan Pan Picador Tor Macmillan Children's Books Campbell Young Picador Sidgwick & Jackson Mantle Macmillan Audio Books Macmillan New Writing The Collector's Library Germany S. Fischer Rowohlt Kiepenheuer & Witsch (85%) Droemer Knaur (50%) Springer Nature (53%) Apress BioMed Central Birkhäuser Macmillan Education Nature Research Journals Palgrave Macmillan Journals Scientific American Springer Journals Springer Gabler Springer Medizin Ärzte-Zeitung Springer Vieweg v t e The "big five" publishers in the United States Penguin Random House Penguin Dutton Puffin Riverhead Viking Signet Putnam Ace Dorling Kindersley Penguin Classics Random House Alfred A. Knopf Doubleday Crown Bantam Ballantine Del Rey Dell Everyman's Library Pantheon Vintage Fodor's Modern Library Dial Addison-Wesley Simon & Schuster Atria Scribner Atheneum Pocket Threshold HarperCollins Walden Pond Harlequin Harper Prism Harper Perennial Harper Ecco Macmillan Farrar, Straus and Giroux Henry Holt and Company Picador St. Martin's Press Tor Pan Nature Publishing Group Palgrave Macmillan Hachette Little, Brown and Company Grand Central Publishing Orbit Yen Center Street List of English-language book publishers Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Holtzbrinck_Publishing_Group&oldid=1292279817 " Categories : Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Book publishing companies of Germany Newspaper companies of Germany Magazine publishing companies of Germany Multinational publishing companies Publishing companies established in 1948 1948 establishments in Germany Mass media in Stuttgart German companies established in 1948 Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2014 Articles containing German-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 04:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Holtzbrinck Publishing Group 12 languages Add topic

