Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of measurement systems in India 2 History of the National Physical Laboratory, India 3 Maintenance of standards of measurements in India Toggle Maintenance of standards of measurements in India subsection 3.1 Metre 3.2 Kilogramme 3.3 Second 3.4 Ampere 3.5 Kelvin 3.6 Candela 3.7 Mole 3.8 Radiation 4 Calibrator of weights and measures 5 Bharatiya Nirdeshak Dravya (BND) or Indian Reference Materials 6 Research programs Toggle Research programs subsection 6.1 India’s polar research program 7 NPL's contributions Toggle NPL's contributions subsection 7.1 The indelible mark/ink 7.2 Pristine air-quality monitoring station at Palampur 7.3 Gold standard (BND-4201) 8 Honors and awards bestowed upon CSIR-NPL Staff Toggle Honors and awards bestowed upon CSIR-NPL Staff subsection 8.1 Padma Bhushan 8.2 Padma Shri 8.3 Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize 9 Other awards 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents National Physical Laboratory of India 4 languages हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Português தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian laboratory to set standards This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "National Physical Laboratory of India" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) National Physical Laboratory Agency overview Formed 4 January 1947 Headquarters New Delhi Agency executive Prof.Dr. Venu Gopal Achanta, Director Parent agency Council of Scientific and Industrial Research Website nplindia.in The CSIR- National Physical Laboratory of India , situated in New Delhi , is the measurement standards laboratory of India. It maintains standards of SI units in India and calibrates the national standards of weights and measures.

National physical laboratory in Delhi.

History of measurement systems in India [ edit ] Main article: History of measurement systems in India In the Harappan era, which is nearly 5000 years old, one finds excellent examples of town planning and architecture. The sizes of the bricks were the same all over the region. In the time of Chandragupta Maurya , some 2400 years ago, there was a well - defined system of weights and measures. The government of that time ensured that everybody used the same system. In the Indian medical system, Ayurveda , the units of mass and volume were well defined.

The measurement system during the time of the Mughal emperor, Akbar , the guz was the measure of length. The guz was widely used till the introduction of the metric system in India in 1956. During the British period , efforts were made to achieve uniformity in weights and measures. A compromise was reached in the system of measurements which continued till India's independence in 1947. After independence in 1947, it was realized that for fast industrial growth of the country, it would be necessary to establish a modern measurement system in the country. The Lok Sabha in April 1955 resolved : This house is of the opinion that the Government of India should take necessary steps to introduce uniform weights and measures throughout the country based on metric system [ 1 ] [ circular reference ] Key Functions of NPL: Maintaining SI Units: NPL establishes and maintains the Indian standards for the International System of Units (SI), which includes units like meter, kilogram, second, ampere, kelvin, candela, and mole.

Calibrating National Standards: NPL calibrates the national standards of weights and measures to ensure their accuracy and traceability to international standards.

Conducting Research: NPL conducts research in various fields of physics, including metrology, materials science, and nanotechnology.

Providing Calibration and Testing Services: NPL offers calibration and testing services to industries and other organizations to help them maintain product quality and comply with regulatory standards.

Disseminating Time and Frequency: NPL provides accurate time and frequency signals to various users through satellite, radio, and television broadcasts.

History of the National Physical Laboratory, India [ edit ] See also: National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom) The National Physical Laboratory, India was one of the earliest national laboratories set up under the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research .

Jawaharlal Nehru laid the foundation stone of NPL on 4 January 1947. Dr.

K. S. Krishnan was the first Director of the laboratory. The main building of the laboratory was formally opened by Former Deputy Prime Minister Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel on 21 January 1950. Former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi , inaugurated the Silver Jubilee Celebration of the Laboratory on 23 December 1975.

NPL Charter:- The main aim of the laboratory is to strengthen and advance physics-based research and development for the overall development of science and technology in the country. In particular its objectives are: To establish, maintain and improve continuously by research, for the benefit of the nation, National Standards of Measurements and to realize the Units based on International System (Under the subordinate Legislations of Weights and Measures Act 1956, reissued in 1988 under the 1976 Act). 
To identify and conduct after due consideration, research in areas of physics which are most appropriate to the needsof the nation and for advancement of field To assist industries, national and other agencies in their developmental tasks by precision measurements, calibration, development of devices, processes, and other allied problems related to physics.

To keep itself informed of and study critically the status of physics.

Newly established structures at NPL campus In 1957, India became member of the General Conference of Weight and Measures (CGPM), BIPM, an International Intergovernmental organization constituted by diplomatic treaty, i.e. ‘The Metre Convention’. Being NMI of India and to fulfil the mandate, Dr. K. S. Krishnan, the then Director, CSIR-NPL signed the ‘Metre Convention’ on behalf of Government of India. In 1958, BIPM provided CSIR-NPL the Copies No. 57 (NPK) and No. 4 of International Prototypes of the Kilogram (IPK) and the platinum-iridium (Pt–Ir) Metre bar, respectively, to realize the SI base units ‘kilogram’ and ‘metre’. This was the milestone in the foundation of quality infrastructure in independent India.

In 1960, when the metric system was officially adopted as the basis for SI units, the number of base units being maintained at the NPL increased. However, in 1963 on the recommendation of Nobel Laureate P.M.S. Blackett, these groups were brought together under a single umbrella. The objective was to bring greater coordination between the various groups and to give the standards activity a programme-based approach on a
bigger scale and enable the Laboratory to play its role more effectively. Other physical standards in the form of standard cells, standard resistance coils, standard lamps, etc. were acquired and calibration and testing work were started in these areas also. It has since been maintaining six SI base units; namely, metre (for length), kilogram (for mass), second (for time), kelvin (for temperature), ampere (for current) and candela (for luminous intensity).

Maintenance of standards of measurements in India [ edit ] Each modernized country, including India has a National Metrological Institute (NMI), which maintains the standards of measurements. This responsibility has been given to the National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi .

Metre [ edit ] The standard unit of length , metre , is realized by employing a stabilized helium-neon laser as a source of light. Its frequency is measured experimentally. From this value of frequency and the internationally accepted value of the speed of light ( 299 792 458 m/s ), the wavelength is determined using the relation: w a v e l e n g t h = v e l o c i t y − − o f − − l i g h t f r e q u e n c y {\displaystyle wavelength={\frac {velocity-of-light}{frequency}}} The nominal value of wavelength, employed at NPL is 633 nanometer. By a sophisticated instrument, known as an optical interferometer, any length can be measured in terms of the wavelength of laser light.

The present level of uncertainty attained at NPL in length measurements is ±3 × 10 −9 . However, in most measurements, an uncertainty of ±1 × 10 −6 is adequate.

Kilogramme [ edit ] The Indian national standard of mass , kilogramme , is copy number 57 of the international prototype of the kilogram supplied by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM: French – Bureau International des Poids et Mesures), Paris . This is a platinum-iridium cylinder whose mass is measured against the international prototype at BIPM. The NPL also maintains a group of transfer standard kilograms made of non-magnetic stainless steel and nickel - chromium alloy.

The uncertainty in mass measurements at NPL is ±4.6 × 10 −9 .

Second [ edit ] The national standard of time interval, second as well as frequency , is maintained through four parameters, which can be measured most accurately. Therefore, attempts are made to link other physical quantities to time and frequency. The standard maintained at NPL has to be linked to different users. This process, known as dissemination, is carried out in a number of ways. For applications requiring low levels of uncertainty, there is satellite based dissemination service, which utilizes the Indian national satellite, INSAT . Time is also disseminated through TV , radio , and special telephone services. The caesium atomic clocks maintained at NPL are linked to other such instituted all over the world through a set of global positioning satellites .

Ampere [ edit ] The unit of electric current, ampere , is realized at NPL by measuring the volt and the ohm separately.

The uncertainty in measurement of ampere is ± 1 × 10 −6 .

Kelvin [ edit ] The standard of temperature is based on the International Temperature Scale of 1990 (ITS-90). This is based on the assigned temperatures to several fixed points. One of the most fundamental temperatures of these is the triple point of water. At this temperature, ice, water and steam are at equilibrium with each other. This temperature has been assigned the value of 273.16 kelvins . This temperature can be realized, maintained and measured in the laboratory. At present temperature standards maintained at NPL cover a range of 54 to 2,473 kelvins.

The uncertainty in its measure is ± 2.5 × 10 −4 .

Candela [ edit ] The unit of luminous intensity , candela , is realized by using an absolute radiometer. For practical work, a group of tungsten incandescent lamps are used.

The level of uncertainty is ± 1.3 × 10 −2 .

Mole [ edit ] Experimental work has been initiated to realize mole , the SI unit for amount of substance Radiation [ edit ] The NPL does not maintain standards of measurements for ionizing radiations . This is the responsibility of the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre , Mumbai .

Calibrator of weights and measures [ edit ] The standards maintained at NPL are periodically compared with standards maintained at other National Metrological Institutes in the world as well as the BIPM in Paris . This exercise ensures that Indian national standards are equivalent to those of the rest of the world.

Any measurement made in a country should be directly or indirectly linked to the national standards of the country, For this purpose, a chain of laboratories are set up in different states of the country. The weights and measures used in daily life are tested in the laboratories and certified. It is the responsibility of the NPL to calibrate the measurement standards in these laboratories at different levels. In this manner, the measurements made in any part of the country are linked to the national standards and through them to the international standards.

The weights and balances used in local markets and other areas are expected to be certified by the Department of Weights and Measures of the local government. Working standards of these local departments should, in turn, be calibrated against the state level standards or any other laboratory which is entitled to do so. The state level laboratories are required to get their standards calibrated from the NPL at the national level which is equivalent to the international standards.

Bharatiya Nirdeshak Dravya (BND) or Indian Reference Materials [ edit ] Bharatiya Nirdeshak Dravya (BND) or Indian reference materials are reference materials developed by NPL which derive their traceability from National Standards.

Research programs [ edit ] NPL is also involved in research. One of the important research activities undertaken by NPL is to devise the chemical formula for the indelible ink which is being used in the Indian elections to prevent fraudulent voting. This ink, manufactured by the Mysore Paints and Varnish Limited is applied on the finger nail of the voter as an indicator that the voter has already cast his vote.

NPL also have section working on development of biosensors . Currently the division is headed by Dr. C. Sharma and section is primarily focusing on development of sensor for cholesterol ,  measurement and microfluidic based biosensors. Section is also developing biosensors for Uric acid detection.

India’s polar research program [ edit ] During the 28th Indian Scientific Expeditions to Antarctica (ISEA) (2008-2009), CSIR-NPL established a state of art Indian Polar Space Physics Laboratory (IPSPL) at Indian Permanent Research Base Maitri (70 0 46’ S, 110 43’ E), Antarctica on the occasion of International Polar Year (IPY) for continuous and real time monitoring of high latitude ionosphere to address the scientific interest of high latitudinal ionospheric consequences caused by the modulation of near-earth space environmental conditions. In 2011 CSIR-NPL provided leadership to the Antarctic expedition to India's newly constructed 3rd permanent scientific base “Bharati” (69° 24’ S, 76 ° 11’) to test & validate its facilities during extreme winter conditions.
CSIR NPL is also the part of India's arctic expeditions. Himadri is India's first permanent Arctic research station located at the International Arctic Research base, Ny-Ålesund at Spitsbergen, Svalbard Norway. It was set up during India's second Arctic expedition in June 2008. It is located 1200 km from the North Pole.

NPL's contributions [ edit ] The indelible mark/ink [ edit ] During general election, nearly 40 million people wear a CSIR mark on their fingers. The indelible ink used to mark the fingernail of a voter during general elections is a time-tested gift of CSIR to the spirit of democracy. Developed in 1952, it was first produced in-campus. Subsequently, industry has been manufacturing the Ink. It is also exported to Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Turkey and other democracies.

Pristine air-quality monitoring station at Palampur [ edit ] National Physical Laboratory (NPL) has established an atmospheric monitoring station in the campus of Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology (IHBT) at Palampur (H.P.) at an altitude of 1391 m for generating the base data for atmospheric trace species & properties to serve as reference for comparison of polluted atmosphere in India. At this station, NPL has installed state of art air monitoring system, greenhouse gas measurement system and Raman Lidar. A number of parameters like CO, NO, NO 2 , NH 3 , SO 2 , O 3 , PM, HC & BC besides CO 2 & CH 4 are being currently monitored at this station which is also equipped with weather station (AWS) for measurement of weather parameters.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Gold standard (BND-4201) [ edit ] The BND-4201 is first Indian reference material for gold of ‘9999’ fineness (gold that is 99.99% pure with impurities of only 100 parts-per-million).

Honors and awards bestowed upon CSIR-NPL Staff [ edit ] Padma Bhushan [ edit ] Dr. K.S. Krishnan - 1954 Dr. A.R. Verma – 1982 Dr. A.P. Mitra - 1989 Dr. S.K. Joshi - 2003 Padma Shri [ edit ] Dr. S.K. Joshi – 1991 Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize [ edit ] Dr. K.S. Krishnan - 1958 Dr. A.P. Mitra – 1968 Dr. Vinay Gupta - 2017 Other awards [ edit ] Contributors to Nobel Peace Prize-winning team for Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC Dr. A.P. Mitra & Dr. Chhemmendra Sharma – 2007 See also [ edit ] National Institute of Standards and Technology in the United States National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom) Versailles project on advanced materials and standards References [ edit ] ^ Indian units of measurement ^ "National Physical Laboratory(NPL)- CSIR dedicates the first "Pristine air-quality monitoring station at Palampur" to the Nation" .

pib.nic.in .

^ "CSIR-NPL launches India's First Pristine Air-Quality Monitoring Station at Palampur" .

MyGov Blogs . 25 March 2017.

External links [ edit ] Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (BIPM) Authority control databases ISNI NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐gvggx
Cached time: 20250817052410
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.433 seconds
Real time usage: 0.597 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2125/1000000
Revision size: 17524/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 32871/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2765/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 18286/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.264/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7381541/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  486.292      1 -total
 19.51%   94.885      1 Template:Reflist
 17.05%   82.927      2 Template:Cite_web
 15.50%   75.391      1 Template:Authority_control
 13.57%   66.013      1 Template:Short_description
 12.44%   60.475      1 Template:Infobox_government_agency
 12.15%   59.063      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.99%   53.420      1 Template:Infobox
 10.67%   51.867      1 Template:Ambox
  7.39%   35.935      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2910814:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052410 and revision id 1291473035. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Physical_Laboratory_of_India&oldid=1291473035 " Categories : Science and technology in India Council of Scientific and Industrial Research Systems of units Organisations based in Delhi Research institutes in Delhi Research institutes established in 1947 1947 establishments in India Standards organisations in India Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2018 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from October 2018 Use Indian English from October 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2017 This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 13:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Physical Laboratory of India 4 languages Add topic

