Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career Toggle Life and career subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Early writing career 1.3 Later career 1.4 International renown 1.5 Later personal life 2 Death 3 Legacy 4 Political opinions Toggle Political opinions subsection 4.1 Anti-communism 4.2 Anti-fascism 4.3 Anti-Peronism 4.4 Military junta 4.5 Indigenous cultures 5 Works Toggle Works subsection 5.1 Translations by Borges 5.2 Discography 5.2.1 Music 5.2.2 Poetry 5.2.3 Lectures and other works 5.3 Hoaxes and forgeries 5.4 Criticism of Borges's work 5.5 Sexuality and perception of women 5.6 Nobel Prize omission 6 Fact, fantasy and non-linearity Toggle Fact, fantasy and non-linearity subsection 6.1 Borges and science fiction 6.2 Borgesian conundrum 7 Culture and Argentine literature Toggle Culture and Argentine literature subsection 7.1 Martín Fierro and Argentine tradition 7.2 Argentine culture 7.3 Multicultural influences 8 Influences Toggle Influences subsection 8.1 Modernism 8.2 Mathematics 8.3 Philosophy 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 11.1 Documentaries 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Jorge Luis Borges 144 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Armãneashti অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bislama Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Livvinkarjala La .lojban.

Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Тыва дыл Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Argentine writer (1899–1986) "Borges" and "Jorge Borges" redirect here. For other people with the surname, see Borges (surname) . For other uses, see Borges (disambiguation) . For the Cape Verdean politician, see Jorge Borges (politician) .

Jorge Luis Borges Borges in 1951 Born Jorge Francisco Luis Isidoro Borges ( 1899-08-24 ) 24 August 1899 Buenos Aires , Argentina Died 14 June 1986 (1986-06-14) (aged 86) Geneva , Switzerland Occupation Writer poet philosopher translator editor critic librarian Language Spanish Notable works Ficciones (1944) El Aleph (1949) Labyrinths (1962) Notable awards Commandeur de l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres (1962) [ 1 ] Relatives Leonor Acevedo (mother) Jorge Guillermo Borges (father) Norah Borges (sister) Guillermo de Torre (brother-in-law) Francisco Borges (grandfather) Manuel Isidoro Suárez (great-grandfather) Signature Jorge Luis Borges's voice Recorded 1962 Jorge Francisco Luis Isidoro Borges ( / ˈ b ɔːr h ɛ s / BOR -hess ; [ 2 ] Spanish: [ˈxoɾxe ˈlwis ˈboɾxes] ⓘ ; 24 August 1899 – 14 June 1986) was an Argentine short-story writer , essayist, poet and translator regarded as a key figure in Spanish-language and international literature. His best-known works, Ficciones ( transl.

Fictions ) and El Aleph ( transl.

The Aleph ), published in the 1940s, are collections of short stories exploring motifs such as dreams , labyrinths , chance , infinity , archives , mirrors , fictional writers and mythology .

[ 3 ] Borges's works have contributed to philosophical literature and the fantasy genre, [ citation needed ] and have had a major influence on the magical realist movement in 20th century Latin American literature .

[ 4 ] Born in Buenos Aires , Borges later moved with his family to Switzerland in 1914, where he studied at the Collège de Genève . The family travelled widely in Europe, including Spain. On his return to Argentina in 1921, Borges began publishing his poems and essays in surrealist literary journals. He also worked as a librarian and public lecturer .

[ 5 ] In 1955, he was appointed director of the National Public Library and professor of English Literature at the University of Buenos Aires . He became completely blind by the age of 55. Scholars have suggested that his progressive blindness helped him to create innovative literary symbols through imagination.

[ Note 1 ] By the 1960s, his work was translated and published widely in the United States and Europe. Borges himself was fluent in several languages.

In 1961, Borges came to international attention when he received the first Formentor Prize , which he shared with Samuel Beckett . In 1971, he won the Jerusalem Prize . His international reputation was consolidated in the 1960s, aided by the growing number of English translations, the Latin American Boom , and by the success of García Márquez 's One Hundred Years of Solitude .

[ 6 ] He dedicated his final work, The Conspirators , to the city of Geneva , Switzerland.

[ 7 ] Writer and essayist J. M. Coetzee said of him: "He, more than anyone, renovated the language of fiction and thus opened the way to a remarkable generation of Spanish-American novelists." [ 8 ] David Foster Wallace wrote: "The truth, briefly stated, is that Borges is arguably the great bridge between modernism and post-modernism in world literature... His stories are inbent and hermetic, with the oblique terror of a game whose rules are unknown and its stakes everything." [ 9 ] Life and career [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Jorge Francisco Luis Isidoro Borges was born into an educated middle-class family on 24 August 1899.

[ 10 ] They lived in Palermo , a then-poor area of Buenos Aires. Borges's mother, Leonor Acevedo Suárez , worked as a translator and came from a family of criollo (Spanish) origin. Her family had been much involved in the European settling of South America and the Argentine War of Independence , and she spoke often of their heroic actions.

[ 11 ] His 1929 book Cuaderno San Martín includes the poem "Isidoro Acevedo", commemorating his grandfather, Isidoro de Acevedo Laprida, a soldier of the Buenos Aires Army. A descendant of the Argentine lawyer and politician Francisco Narciso de Laprida , Acevedo Laprida fought in the battles of Cepeda in 1859, Pavón in 1861, and Los Corrales in 1880. Acevedo Laprida died of pulmonary congestion in the house where his grandson Jorge Luis Borges was born. According to a study by Antonio Andrade, Jorge Luis Borges had Portuguese ancestry: Borges's great-grandfather, Francisco, was born in Portugal in 1770, and lived in Torre de Moncorvo , in the north of the country, before he emigrated to Argentina, where he married Carmen Lafinur.

Borges's own father, Jorge Guillermo Borges Haslam , was a lawyer and wrote the novel El caudillo in 1921. Borges Haslam was born in Entre Ríos of Spanish, Portuguese, and English descent, the son of Francisco Borges Lafinur, a colonel, and Frances Ann Haslam, an Englishwoman. Borges Haslam grew up speaking English at home. The family frequently traveled to Europe. Borges Haslam wedded Leonor Acevedo Suárez in 1898 and their children also included the painter Norah Borges , sister of Jorge Luis Borges.

[ 11 ] At age ten, Jorge Luis Borges translated Oscar Wilde 's The Happy Prince into Spanish. It was published in a local journal, but Borges's friends thought the real author was his father.

[ 12 ] Borges Haslam was a lawyer and psychology teacher who harboured literary aspirations. Borges said his father "tried to become a writer and failed in the attempt", despite the 1921 opus El caudillo . Jorge Luis Borges wrote, "As most of my people had been soldiers and I knew I would never be, I felt ashamed, quite early, to be a bookish kind of person and not a man of action." [ 11 ] Jorge Luis Borges was taught at home until the age of 11 and was bilingual in Spanish and English, reading Shakespeare in the latter at the age of twelve.

[ 11 ] The family lived in a large house with an English library of over one thousand volumes; Borges would later remark that "if I were asked to name the chief event in my life, I should say my father's library." [ 13 ] His father gave up practicing law due to the failing eyesight that would eventually affect his son. In 1914, the family moved to Geneva , Switzerland, and spent the next decade in Europe.

[ 11 ] In Geneva, Borges Haslam was treated by an eye specialist, while his son and daughter attended school. Jorge Luis learned French, read Thomas Carlyle in English, and began to read philosophy in German. In 1917, when he was eighteen, he met writer Maurice Abramowicz and began a literary friendship that lasted for the remainder of his life.

[ 11 ] He received his baccalauréat from the Collège de Genève in 1918.

[ 14 ] [ Note 2 ] The Borges family decided that, due to political unrest in Argentina, they would remain in Switzerland during the war. After World War I , the family spent three years living in various cities: Lugano , Barcelona, Mallorca , Seville, and Madrid.

[ 11 ] They remained in Europe until 1921.

At that time, Borges discovered the writings of Arthur Schopenhauer and Gustav Meyrink 's The Golem (1915), which became influential to his work. In Spain, Borges became a member of the avant-garde , anti- Modernismo Ultraist literary movement, inspired by Guillaume Apollinaire and Filippo Tommaso Marinetti , close to the Imagists . His first poem, "Hymn to the Sea", written in the style of Walt Whitman , was published in the magazine Grecia .

[ 15 ] While in Spain, he met such noted Spanish writers as Rafael Cansinos Assens and Ramón Gómez de la Serna .

[ 16 ] Borges in 1921 Early writing career [ edit ] In 1921, Borges returned with his family to Buenos Aires. He had little formal education, no qualifications and few friends. He wrote to a friend that Buenos Aires was now "overrun by arrivistes, by correct youths lacking any mental equipment, and decorative young ladies".

[ 11 ] He brought with him the doctrine of Ultraism and launched his career, publishing surreal poems and essays in literary journals. In 1923, Borges first published his poetry, a collection called Fervor de Buenos Aires , and contributed to the avant-garde review Martín Fierro . Borges co-founded the journals Prisma , a broadsheet distributed largely by pasting copies to walls in Buenos Aires, and Proa . Later in life, Borges regretted some of these early publications, attempting to purchase all known copies to ensure their destruction.

[ 17 ] By the mid-1930s, he began to explore existential questions and fiction. He worked in a style that Argentine critic Ana María Barrenechea has called "irreality". Many other Latin American writers, such as Juan Rulfo , Juan José Arreola , and Alejo Carpentier , were investigating these themes, influenced by the phenomenology of Husserl and Heidegger . In this vein, Borges biographer Edwin Williamson underlines the danger of inferring an autobiographically inspired basis for the content or tone of certain of his works: books, philosophy, and imagination were as much a source of real inspiration to him as his own lived experience, if not more so.

[ 11 ] Adolfo Bioy Casares , Victoria Ocampo and Borges in 1935 From the first issue, Borges was a regular contributor to Sur , founded in 1931 by Victoria Ocampo . It was then Argentina's most important literary journal and helped Borges find his fame.

[ 18 ] Ocampo introduced Borges to Adolfo Bioy Casares , another well-known figure of Argentine literature who was to become a frequent collaborator and close friend. They wrote a number of works together, some under the nom de plume H. Bustos Domecq , including a parody detective series and fantasy stories. During these years, a family friend, Macedonio Fernández , became a major influence on Borges. The two would preside over discussions in cafés, at country retreats, or in Fernandez's tiny apartment in the Balvanera district. He appears by name in Borges's Dialogue about a Dialogue , [ 19 ] in which the two discuss the immortality of the soul.

In 1933, Borges gained an editorial appointment at Revista Multicolor de los Sábados (the literary supplement of the Buenos Aires newspaper Crítica ), where he first published the pieces collected as Historia universal de la infamia ( A Universal History of Infamy ) in 1935.

[ 11 ] The book includes two types of writing: the first lies somewhere between non-fiction essays and short stories, using fictional techniques to tell essentially true stories. The second consists of literary forgeries, which Borges initially passed off as translations of passages from famous but seldom-read works.

In the following years, he served as a literary adviser for the publishing house Emecé Editores , and from 1936 to 1939 wrote weekly columns for El Hogar . In 1938, Borges found work as the first assistant at the Miguel Cané Municipal Library. It was in a working-class area [ 20 ] and there were so few books that cataloging more than one hundred books per day, he was told, would leave little to do for the other staff and would make them look bad. The task took him about an hour each day and the rest of his time he spent in the basement of the library, writing and translating.

[ 11 ] Later career [ edit ] Borges in the 1940s Borges's father died in 1938, shortly before his 64th birthday. On Christmas Eve that year, Borges had a severe head injury; during treatment, he nearly died of sepsis .

[ 21 ] While recovering from the accident, Borges began exploring  a new style of writing for which he would become famous.

[ 22 ] His first story written after his accident, " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote ," came out in May 1939. One of his most famous works, "Menard" examines the nature of authorship, as well as the relationship between an author and his historical context. His first collection of short stories, El jardín de senderos que se bifurcan ( The Garden of Forking Paths ), appeared in 1941, composed mostly of works previously published in Sur .

[ 11 ] The title story concerns a Chinese professor in England, Dr. Yu Tsun, who spies for Germany during World War I, in an attempt to prove to the authorities that an Asian person is able to obtain the information that they seek. A combination of book and maze, it can be read in many ways. Through it, Borges arguably invented the hypertext novel and went on to describe a theory of the universe based upon the structure of such a novel.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Composed of stories taking up over sixty pages, the book was generally well received, but El jardín de senderos que se bifurcan failed to garner for him the literary prizes many in his circle expected.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Victoria Ocampo dedicated a large portion of the July 1942 issue of Sur to a "Reparation for Borges". Numerous leading writers and critics from Argentina and throughout the Spanish-speaking world contributed writings to the "reparation" project.

With his vision beginning to fade in his early thirties and unable to support himself as a writer, Borges began a new career as a public lecturer.

[ Note 3 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] He became an increasingly public figure, obtaining appointments as president of the Argentine Society of Writers and as professor of English and American Literature at the Argentine Association of English Culture. His short story " Emma Zunz " was made into a film (under the name of Días de odio , Days of Hate , directed in 1954 by Leopoldo Torre Nilsson ).

[ 29 ] Around this time, Borges also began writing screenplays.

The American novelist William Faulkner was already a well-known writer in the Spanish-speaking world when Borges translated his novel The Wild Palms in 1940. Borges was a great admirer of Faulkner, but it is likely that his choice to translate a lesser novel was born out of opportunity and need. The novel had been published in the US in 1939, and Borges may have needed the money such work would bring. Nevertheless, his translation formed an indelible bridge between contemporary Latin American literature and the writer of the southern United States. Borges' intuitive understanding of and ability to render Faulkner's style was an important influence on a later generation of writers such as Juan Rulfo , Mario Vargas Llosa , and Gabriel García Márquez .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] In 1955, Borges became director of the Argentine National Library. By the late 1950s he had become completely blind. Neither the coincidence nor the irony of his blindness as a writer escaped Borges: [ 11 ] Nadie rebaje a lágrima o reproche esta declaración de la maestría de Dios, que con magnífica ironía me dio a la vez los libros y la noche.

(No one should read self-pity or reproach Into this statement of the majesty Of God; who with such splendid irony, At one touch granted me books and night.) [ 32 ] His later collection of poetry, Elogio de la Sombra ( In Praise of Darkness ), [ 33 ] develops this theme. In 1956 the University of Cuyo awarded Borges the first of many honorary doctorates and the following year he received the National Prize for Literature.

[ 34 ] From 1956 to 1970, Borges also held a position as a professor of literature at the University of Buenos Aires and other temporary appointments at other universities.

[ 34 ] He received a British honorary knighthood in 1964.

[ 35 ] In the fall of 1967 and spring of 1968, he delivered the Charles Eliot Norton Lectures at Harvard University .

[ 36 ] As his eyesight deteriorated, Borges relied increasingly on his mother's help.

[ 34 ] When he was not able to read and write anymore (he never learned to read Braille ), his mother, to whom he had always been close, became his personal secretary.

[ 34 ] When Perón returned from exile and was re-elected president in 1973, Borges immediately resigned as director of the National Library.

[ 37 ] International renown [ edit ] Borges in 1967 Eight of Borges's poems appear in the 1943 anthology of Spanish American Poets by H. R. Hays.

[ 38 ] [ Note 4 ] "The Garden of Forking Paths", one of the first Borges stories to be translated into English, appeared in the August 1948 issue of Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine , translated by Anthony Boucher .

[ 39 ] Though several other Borges translations appeared in literary magazines and anthologies during the 1950s (and one story appeared in the fantasy and science fiction magazine Fantastic Universe in 1960), [ 40 ] his international fame dates from the early 1960s.

[ 41 ] In 1961, Borges received the first Prix International , which he shared with Samuel Beckett . While Beckett had garnered a distinguished reputation in Europe and America, Borges had been largely unknown and untranslated in the English-speaking world and the prize stirred great interest in his work. The Italian government named Borges Commendatore and the University of Texas at Austin appointed him for one year to the Tinker Chair. This led to his first lecture tour in the United States. In 1962, two major anthologies of Borges's writings were published in English by New York presses: Ficciones and Labyrinths . In that year, Borges began lecture tours of Europe.  Numerous honors were to accumulate over the years such as a Special Edgar Allan Poe Award from the Mystery Writers of America "for distinguished contribution to the mystery genre" (1976), [ 42 ] the Balzan Prize (for philology, linguistics and literary criticism) and the Prix mondial Cino Del Duca , the Miguel de Cervantes Prize (all 1980), as well as the French Legion of Honour (1983) and the Diamond Konex Award for Literature Arts as the most important writer in the last decade in his country.

At L'Hôtel , Paris, 1969 In 1967, Borges began a five-year period of collaboration with the American translator Norman Thomas di Giovanni , through whom he became better known in the English-speaking world.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] Di Giovanni contended that Borges's popularity was due to his writing with multiple languages in mind and deliberately using Latin words as a bridge from Spanish to English.

[ 46 ] Borges continued to publish books, among them El libro de los seres imaginarios ( Book of Imaginary Beings , 1967, co-written with Margarita Guerrero ), [ 47 ] El informe de Brodie ( Dr. Brodie's Report , 1970), [ 48 ] and El libro de arena ( The Book of Sand , 1975 [ 47 ] [ 48 ] ). He lectured prolifically. Many of these lectures were anthologized in volumes such as Siete noches ( Seven Nights ) [ 49 ] and Nueve ensayos dantescos ( Nine Dantesque Essays ).

[ 50 ] His presence in 1967 on campus at the University of Virginia (UVA) in the U.S. mirrored William Faulkner's tenure there ten years earlier as UVa's first writer-in-residence [ 51 ] and influenced a group of students among whom was Jared Loewenstein, who would later become founder and curator of the Jorge Luis Borges Collection at UVA, [ 52 ] one of the largest repositories of documents and manuscripts pertaining to Borges's early works.

[ 53 ] In 1984, he travelled to Athens, Greece, and later to Rethymnon, Crete, where he was awarded an honorary doctorate from the School of Philosophy at the University of Crete .

[ 54 ] Later personal life [ edit ] María Kodama at the 2010 Frankfurt Book Fair In the mid-1960s, Borges became acquainted with Jorge Mario Bergoglio, the future Pope Francis , who was at the time a young Jesuit priest. In 1979, Borges spoke appreciatively and at some length about Bergoglio to the Argentine poet and essayist Roberto Alifano.

[ 55 ] In 1967, Borges married the recently widowed Elsa Astete Millán. Friends believed that his mother, who was 90 and anticipating her own death, wanted to find someone to care for her blind son. The marriage lasted less than three years. After a legal separation, Borges moved back in with his mother, with whom he lived until her death at age 99.

[ 56 ] Thereafter, he lived alone in the small flat he had shared with her, cared for by Fanny, their housekeeper of many decades.

[ 57 ] From 1975 until the time of his death, Borges traveled internationally. He was often accompanied in these travels by his personal assistant María Kodama , an Argentine woman of Japanese and German ancestry. In April 1986, a few months before his death, he married her via an attorney in Paraguay , in what was then a common practice among Argentines wishing to circumvent the Argentine laws of the time regarding divorce. According to Kodama, Borges drank as a young man, but eventually gave up alcohol as he aged and "felt more secure." [ 58 ] On his religious views, Borges declared himself an agnostic, clarifying: "Being an agnostic means all things are possible, even God, even the Holy Trinity. This world is so strange that anything may happen, or may not happen." [ 59 ] Borges was taught to read the Bible by his English Protestant grandmother and he prayed the Our Father each night because of a promise he made to his mother. He also died in the presence of a priest.

[ 60 ] Death [ edit ] Borges's grave, Cimetière des Rois , Plainpalais, Geneva .

During his final days in Geneva, Borges began brooding about the possibility of an afterlife . Although calm and collected about his own death, Borges began probing Kodama as to whether she inclined more towards the Shinto beliefs of her father or the Catholicism of her mother. Kodama "had always regarded Borges as an Agnostic, as she was herself", but given the insistence of his questioning, she offered to call someone more "qualified".

[ 61 ] Borges responded, "You are asking me if I want a priest." He then instructed her to call two clergymen, a Catholic priest, in memory of his mother, and a Protestant minister, in memory of his English grandmother. He was visited first by Father Pierre Jacquet and by Pastor Edouard de Montmollin.

[ 61 ] Borges died of liver cancer on 14 June 1986, aged 86, in Geneva. His burial was preceded by an ecumenical service at the Protestant St. Pierre Cathedral on 18 June. With many Swiss and Argentine dignitaries present, Pastor de Montmollin read the First Chapter of St John's Gospel . He then preached that "Borges was a man who had unceasingly searched for the right word, the term that could sum up the whole, the final meaning of things." He said, however, that no man can reach that word through his own efforts and in trying becomes lost in a labyrinth. Pastor de Montmollin concluded, "It is not man who discovers the word, it is the Word that comes to him." [ 62 ] Father Jacquet also preached, saying that, when visiting Borges before his death, he had found "a man full of love, who received from the Church the forgiveness of his sins".

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] After the funeral, Borges was laid to rest in Geneva's Cimetière de Plainpalais . His grave, marked by a rough-hewn headstone, is adorned with carvings derived from Anglo-Saxon and Old Norse art and literature.

[ 64 ] Legacy [ edit ] Maria Kodama, his widow and heir on the basis of the marriage and two wills, gained control over his works. Her assertive administration of his estate resulted in a bitter dispute with the French publisher Gallimard regarding the republication of the complete works of Borges in French, with Pierre Assouline in Le Nouvel Observateur (August 2006) calling her "an obstacle to the dissemination of the works of Borges". Kodama took legal action against Assouline, considering the remark unjustified and defamatory, asking for a symbolic compensation of one euro.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] Kodama also rescinded all publishing rights for existing collections of his work in English, including the translations by Norman Thomas di Giovanni , in which Borges himself had collaborated, and from which di Giovanni would have received an unusually high fifty percent of the royalties. Kodama commissioned new translations by Andrew Hurley , which have become the official translations in English.

[ 68 ] At the time of her death, Kodama left no will and the status of the Borges estate is in limbo.

[ citation needed ] Political opinions [ edit ] During the 1920s and 1930s, Borges was a vocal supporter of Hipólito Yrigoyen and the social democratic Radical Civic Union .

[ 69 ] In 1945, Borges signed a manifesto calling for an end to military rule and the establishment of political liberty and democratic elections.

[ 70 ] By the 1960s, he had grown more skeptical of democracy. During a 1971 conference at Columbia University , a creative writing student asked Borges what he regarded as "a writer's duty to his time". Borges replied, "I think a writer's duty is to be a writer, and if he can be a good writer, he is doing his duty. Besides, I think of my own opinions as being superficial. For example, I am a Conservative, I hate the Communists, I hate the Nazis, I hate the anti-Semites, and so on; but I don't allow these opinions to find their way into my writings—except, of course, when I was greatly elated about the Six-Day War . Generally speaking, I think of keeping them in watertight compartments. Everybody knows my opinions, but as for my dreams and my stories, they should be allowed their full freedom, I think. I don't want to intrude into them, I'm writing fiction, not fables." [ 71 ] In the 1980s, towards the end of his life, Borges regained his earlier faith in democracy and held it out as the only hope for Argentina.

[ 70 ] In 1983, Borges applauded the election of the Radical Civic Union's Raúl Alfonsín and welcomed the end of military rule with the following words: "I once wrote that democracy is the abuse of statistics ... On October 30, 1983, Argentine democracy refuted me splendidly. Splendidly and resoundingly." [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Anti-communism [ edit ] Borges recurrently declared himself a " Spencerian anarchist who believes in the individual and not in the State" due to his father's influence.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] In an interview with Richard Burgin during the late 1960s, Borges described himself as a "mild" adherent of classical liberalism . He further recalled that his opposition to communism and to Marxism was absorbed in his childhood, stating: "Well, I have been brought up to think that the individual should be strong and the State should be weak. I couldn't be enthusiastic about theories where the State is more important than the individual." [ 77 ] After the overthrow via coup d'état of President Juan Domingo Perón in 1955, Borges supported efforts to purge Argentina's Government of Peronists and dismantle the former President's welfare state. He was enraged that the Communist Party of Argentina opposed these measures and sharply criticized them in lectures and in print. Borges's opposition to the Party in this matter ultimately led to a permanent rift with his longtime lover, Argentine Communist Estela Canto .

[ 78 ] In a 1956 interview given to El Hogar , Borges stated that communists "are in favor of totalitarian regimes and systematically combat freedom of thought, oblivious of the fact that the principal victims of dictatorships are, precisely, intelligence and culture." [ 79 ] He elaborated: "Many people are in favor of dictatorships because they allow them to avoid thinking for themselves. Everything is presented to them ready-made. There are even agencies of the State that supply them with opinions, passwords, slogans, and even idols to exalt or cast down according to the prevailing wind or in keeping with the directives of the thinking heads of the single party ." [ 80 ] In later years, Borges frequently expressed contempt for Marxist and communist authors, poets, and intellectuals. In an interview with Burgin, Borges referred to Chilean poet Pablo Neruda as "a very fine poet" but a "very mean man" for unconditionally supporting the Soviet Union and demonizing the United States. Borges commented about Neruda, "Now he knows that's rubbish." [ 81 ] In the same interview, Borges also criticized famed poet and playwright Federico García Lorca , who was abducted by Nationalist soldiers and executed without trial during the Spanish Civil War . In Borges's opinion, Lorca's poetry and plays, when examined against his tragic death, appeared better than they actually were.

[ 82 ] Anti-fascism [ edit ] In 1934, Argentine ultra-nationalists , sympathetic to Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party , asserted Borges was secretly Jewish and by implication not truly Argentinian. Borges responded with the essay " Yo, Judío " ("I, a Jew"), a reference to the old phrase "Yo, Argentino" ("I, an Argentine") uttered by potential victims during pogroms against Argentine Jews to signify one was not Jewish.

[ 83 ] In the essay, Borges declares he would be proud to be a Jew, and remarks that any pure Castilian is likely to come from ancient Jewish descent, from a millennium ago.

[ 83 ] Both before and during the Second World War , Borges regularly published essays attacking the Nazi police state and its racist ideology. His outrage was fueled by his deep love for German literature . In an essay published in 1937, Borges attacked the Nazi Party's use of children's books to inflame antisemitism. He wrote, "I don't know if the world can do without German civilization, but I do know that its corruption by the teachings of hatred is a crime." [ 84 ] In a 1938 essay, Borges reviewed an anthology which rewrote German authors of the past to fit the Nazi party line. He was disgusted by what he described as Germany's "chaotic descent into darkness" and the attendant rewriting of history. He argued that such books sacrificed the German people's culture, history and integrity in the name of restoring their national honour. Such use of children's books for propaganda he writes, "perfect the criminal arts of barbarians." [ 85 ] In a 1944 essay, Borges postulated, Nazism suffers from unreality, like Erigena 's hell. It is uninhabitable; men can only die for it, lie for it, wound and kill for it. No one, in the intimate depths of his being, can wish it to triumph. I shall risk this conjecture: Hitler wants to be defeated . Hitler is blindly collaborating with the inevitable armies that will annihilate him, as the metal vultures and the dragon (which must have known that they were monsters) collaborated, mysteriously, with Hercules ." [ 86 ] In 1946, Borges published the short story " Deutsches Requiem ", which masquerades as the last testament of a condemned Nazi war criminal named Otto Dietrich zur Linde. In a 1971 conference at Columbia University , Borges was asked about the story by a student from the creative writing program. He recalled, "When the Germans were defeated I felt great joy and relief, but at the same time I thought of the German defeat as being somehow tragic, because here we have perhaps the most educated people in Europe,  who have a fine literature, a fine tradition of philosophy and poetry. Yet these people were bamboozled by a madman named Adolf Hitler , and I think there is tragedy there." [ 87 ] In a 1967 interview with Burgin, Borges recalled how his interactions with Argentina's Nazi sympathisers led him to create the story. He recalled, "And then I realized that those people that were on the side of Germany, that they never thought of German victories or the German glory. What they really liked was the idea of the Blitzkrieg , of London being on fire, of the country being destroyed. As to the German fighters, they took no stock in them. Then I thought, well now Germany has lost, now America has saved us from this nightmare, but since nobody can doubt on which side I stood, I'll see what can be done from a literary point of view in favor of the Nazis. And then I created the ideal Nazi." [ 88 ] At Columbia University in 1971, Borges further elaborated on the story's creation, "I tried to imagine what a real Nazi might be like. I mean someone who thought of violence as being praiseworthy for its own sake. Then I thought that this archetype of the Nazis wouldn't mind being defeated; after all, defeats and victories are mere matters of chance. He would still be glad of the fact, even if the Americans and British won the war. Naturally, when I am with Nazis, I find they are not my idea of what a Nazi is, but this wasn't meant to be a political tract. It was meant to stand for the fact that there was something tragic in the fate of a real Nazi. Except that I wonder if a real Nazi ever existed. At least, when I went to Germany, I never met one. They were all feeling sorry for themselves and wanted me to feel sorry for them as well." [ 89 ] Anti-Peronism [ edit ] In 1946, Argentine President Juan Perón began transforming Argentina into a one-party state with the assistance of his wife, Evita . Almost immediately, the spoils system was the rule of the day, as ideological critics of the ruling Partido Justicialista were fired from government jobs. During this period, Borges was informed that he was being "promoted" from his position at the Miguel Cané Library to a post as inspector of poultry and rabbits at the Buenos Aires municipal market. Upon demanding to know the reason, Borges was told, "Well, you were on the side of the Allies, what do you expect?" [ 90 ] Borges resigned the following day. Perón's treatment of Borges became a cause célèbre for the Argentine intelligentsia. The Argentine Society of Writers (SADE) held a formal dinner in his honour. At the dinner, a speech was read which Borges had written for the occasion. It said: Dictatorships breed oppression, dictatorships breed servility, dictatorships breed cruelty; more loathsome still is the fact that they breed idiocy. Bellboys babbling orders, portraits of caudillos , prearranged cheers or insults, walls covered with names, unanimous ceremonies, mere discipline usurping the place of clear thinking ... Fighting these sad monotonies is one of the duties of a writer. Need I remind readers of Martín Fierro or Don Segundo that individualism is an old Argentine virtue.

[ 91 ] In the aftermath, Borges found himself much in demand as a lecturer and one of the intellectual leaders of the Argentine opposition. In 1951 he was asked by anti-Peronist friends to run for president of SADE. Borges, then having depression caused by a failed romance, reluctantly accepted. He later recalled that he would awake every morning and remember that Perón was president and feel deeply depressed and ashamed.

[ 92 ] Perón's government had seized control of the Argentine mass media and regarded SADE with indifference. Borges later recalled, however, "Many distinguished men of letters did not dare set foot inside its doors." [ 93 ] Meanwhile, SADE became an increasing refuge for critics of the Perón government. SADE official Luisa Mercedes Levinson noted, "We would gather every week to tell the latest jokes about the ruling couple and even dared to sing the songs of the French Resistance , as well as ' La Marseillaise '".

[ 93 ] After Evita Perón's death on 26 July 1952, Borges received a visit from two policemen, who ordered him to put up two portraits of the ruling couple on the premises of SADE. Borges indignantly refused, calling it a ridiculous demand. The policemen replied that he would soon face the consequences.

[ 94 ] The Justicialist Party placed Borges under 24-hour surveillance and sent policemen to sit in on his lectures; in September they ordered SADE to be permanently closed down. Like much of the Argentine opposition to Perón, SADE had become marginalized due to persecution by the State, and very few active members remained.

[ 95 ] According to Edwin Williamson, Borges had agreed to stand for the presidency of the SADE in order [to] fight for intellectual freedom, but he also wanted to avenge the humiliation he believed he had suffered in 1946, when the Peronists had proposed to make him an inspector of chickens. In his letter of 1950 to Attilio Rossi , he claimed that his infamous promotion had been a clever way the Peronists had found of damaging him and diminishing his reputation. The closure of the SADE meant that the Peronists had damaged him a second time, as was borne out by the visit of the Spanish writer Julián Marías , who arrived in Buenos Aires shortly after the closure of the SADE. It was impossible for Borges, as president, to hold the usual reception for the distinguished visitor; instead, one of Borges's friends brought a lamb from his ranch, and they had it roasted at a tavern across the road from the SADE building on Calle Mexico. After dinner, a friendly janitor let them into the premises, and they showed Marías around by candlelight. That tiny group of writers leading a foreign guest through a dark building by the light of guttering candles was vivid proof of the extent to which the SADE had been diminished under the rule of Juan Perón.

[ 96 ] On 16 September 1955, General Pedro Eugenio Aramburu 's Revolución Libertadora toppled the ruling party and forced Perón into exile. Borges was overjoyed and joined demonstrators marching through the streets of Buenos Aires. According to Williamson, Borges shouted, "Viva la Patria", until his voice grew hoarse. Due to the influence of Borges's mother and his own role on the opposition to Peron, the provisional government appointed Borges as the Director of the National Library .

[ 97 ] In his essay L'Illusion Comique , Borges wrote there were two histories of Peronism in Argentina. The first he described as "the criminal one", composed of the police state tactics used against both real and imagined anti-Peronists. The second history was, according to Borges, "the theatrical one" composed of "tales and fables made for consumption by dolts." He argued that, despite their claims to detest capitalism, Juan and Eva Perón "copied its methods, dictating names and slogans to the people" in the same way that multi-national corporations "impose their razor blades, cigarettes, and washing machines." Borges then listed the numerous conspiracy theories the ruling couple dictated to their followers and how those theories were accepted without question.

[ 98 ] Borges concluded: It is useless to list the examples; one can only denounce the duplicity of the fictions of the former regime, which can't be believed and were believed. It will be said that the public's lack of sophistication is enough to explain the contradiction; I believe that the cause is more profound.

Coleridge spoke of the "willing suspension of disbelief ," that is, poetic faith; Samuel Johnson said, in defense of Shakespeare, that the spectators at a tragedy do not believe they are in Alexandria in the first act and Rome in the second but submit to the pleasure of a fiction. Similarly, the lies of a dictatorship are neither believed nor disbelieved; they pertain to an intermediate plane, and their purpose is to conceal or justify sordid or atrocious realities. They pertain to the pathetic or the clumsily sentimental. Happily, for the enlightenment and security of the Argentines, the current regime has understood that the function of government is not to inspire pathos.

[ 99 ] In a 1967 interview, Borges said, "Perón was a humbug, and he knew it, and everybody knew it. But Perón could be very cruel. I mean, he had people tortured, killed. And his wife was a common prostitute." [ 100 ] When Perón returned from exile in 1973 and regained the Presidency, Borges was enraged. In a 1975 interview for National Geographic , he said "Damn, the snobs are back in the saddle. If their posters and slogans again defile the city, I'll be glad I've lost my sight. Well, they can't humiliate me as they did before my books sold well." [ 101 ] After being accused of being unforgiving, Borges quipped, "I resented Perón's making Argentina look ridiculous to the world ... as in 1951, when he announced control over thermonuclear fusion , which still hasn't happened anywhere but in the sun and the stars. For a time, Argentines hesitated to wear band aids for fear friends would ask, 'Did the atomic bomb go off in your hand?' A shame, because Argentina really has world-class scientists." [ 101 ] After Borges's death in 1986, the Peronist Partido Justicialista declined to send a delegate to the writer's memorial service in Buenos Aires. A spokesman for the Party said that this was in reaction to "certain declarations he had made about the country." [ 102 ] Later, at the City Council of Buenos Aires, Peronist politicians refused to honor Borges as an Argentine, commenting that he "chose to die abroad." When infuriated politicians from the other parties demanded to know the real reason, the Peronists finally explained that Borges had made statements about Evita Perón which they called "unacceptable".

[ 102 ] Military junta [ edit ] During the 1970s, Borges at first expressed support for Argentina's military junta , but was scandalized by the junta's actions during the Dirty War . In protest against their support of the regime, Borges ceased publishing in the newspaper La Nación .

[ 103 ] In 1985, he wrote a short poem about the Falklands War called Juan López y John Ward , about two fictional soldiers (one from each side), who died in the Falklands, in which he refers to "islands that were too famous". He also said about the war: "The Falklands thing was a fight between two bald men over a comb." [ 104 ] Borges was an observer at the trials of the military junta in 1985 and wrote that "not to judge and condemn the crimes would be to encourage impunity and to become, somehow, its accomplice." [ 72 ] Borges added that "the news of the missing people, the crimes and atrocities [the military] committed" had inspired him to return to his earlier Emersonian faith in democracy.

[ 72 ] Indigenous cultures [ edit ] Borges believed that indigenous peoples in what is now called Argentina had no traditions: "There's no native tradition of any kind since the Indians here were mere barbarians. We have to fall back on the European tradition, why not? It's a very fine tradition." [ 105 ] Works [ edit ] Main article: Jorge Luis Borges bibliography Wardrip-Fruin and Montfort argue that Borges "may have been the most important figure in Spanish-language literature since Cervantes . He was clearly of tremendous influence, writing intricate poems, short stories, and essays that instantiated concepts of dizzying power." [ 106 ] Borges's work has been compared to that of Homer and Milton .

[ 107 ] Indeed, the critic Harold Bloom numbers Borges among the key figures of the Western literary canon .

[ 108 ] In addition to short stories, for which he is most noted, Borges also wrote poetry, essays, screenplays, and literary criticism, and edited numerous anthologies. His longest work of fiction is a fourteen-page story, "The Congress", first published in 1971.

[ 11 ] His late-onset blindness strongly influenced his later writing. Borges wrote: "When I think of what I've lost, I ask, 'Who know themselves better than the blind?' – for every thought becomes a tool." [ 109 ] Paramount among his intellectual interests were elements of mythology, mathematics, theology, integrating these through literature, sometimes playfully, sometimes with great seriousness.

[ 110 ] Borges composed poetry throughout his life. As his eyesight waned (it came and went, with a struggle between advancing age and advances in eye surgery), he increasingly focused on writing poetry, since he could memorize an entire work in progress.

[ 111 ] His poems embrace the same wide range of interests as his fiction, along with issues that emerge in his critical works and translations, and from more personal musings. For example, his interest in idealism runs through his work, reflected in the fictional world of Tlön in " Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius " and in his essay " A New Refutation of Time ".

[ 112 ] Translations by Borges [ edit ] Borges was a notable translator. He translated works of literature in English, French, German, Old English , and Old Norse into Spanish. His first publication, for a Buenos Aires newspaper, was a translation of Oscar Wilde 's story " The Happy Prince " into Spanish when he was ten.

[ 12 ] At the end of his life he produced a Spanish-language version of a part of Snorri Sturluson 's Prose Edda . He also translated (while simultaneously subtly transforming) the works of, among others, Ambrose Bierce , William Faulkner , [ 113 ] André Gide , Hermann Hesse , Franz Kafka , Rudyard Kipling , Edgar Allan Poe , Walt Whitman , and Virginia Woolf .

[ Note 5 ] Borges wrote and lectured extensively on the art of translation, holding that a translation may improve upon the original, may even be unfaithful to it, and that alternative and potentially contradictory renderings of the same work can be equally valid.

[ 114 ] Borges employed the devices of literary forgery and the review of an imaginary work, both forms of modern pseudo-epigrapha .

Discography [ edit ] Borges’ recorded work includes readings of his poems, a collaboration with Argentine composer Astor Piazzolla , and a series of lectures on a characteristically wide range of topics, from Buddhism to the nature of poetry.

[ 115 ] Music [ edit ] El Tango (1965) with Astor Piazzolla Polydor – 20291 Poetry [ edit ] Por El Mismo Sus Poemas Y Su Voz (1967) AMB Discografica – 123 – 1 Jorge Luis Borges (1968) Universidad Nacional Autonoma De Mexico – VVAL-13, UNAM-113/114 de Souza, Marcelo Mendes. “Unoriginal Opinions of an Original Man: Jorge Luis Borges’s Views on Race and Brazilian People in His Conversations with Adolfo Bioy Casares and His Literary Works.” Latin American research review 56.3 (2021): 668–678. Web.

[ 116 ] Lectures and other works [ edit ] La Divina Comedia (1978) Microfon – SUP 955 ¿Qué Es La Poesía?

(1978) Microfon – SUP 959 El Budismo (1978) Microfon – SUP 958 La Cabala (1978) Microfon – SUP 960 El Libro De Las Mil Y Una Noches (1978) Microfon – SUP 957 Borges Para Millones. Banda Original De Sonido De La Pelicula (1978) with Luis Maria Serra EMI – 8569/70 Hoaxes and forgeries [ edit ] Borges's best-known set of literary forgeries date from his early work as a translator and literary critic with a regular column in the Argentine magazine El Hogar . Along with publishing numerous legitimate translations, he also published original works, for example, in the style of Emanuel Swedenborg [ Note 6 ] or One Thousand and One Nights , originally claiming them to be translations of works he had chanced upon.  In another case, he added three short, falsely attributed pieces into his otherwise legitimate and carefully researched anthology El matrero .

[ Note 6 ] Several of these are gathered in A Universal History of Infamy . While Borges was the great popularizer of the review of an imaginary work, he had developed the idea from Thomas Carlyle 's Sartor Resartus , a book-length review of a non-existent German transcendentalist work, and the biography of its equally non-existent author. In This Craft of Verse , Borges says that in 1916 in Geneva "[I] discovered, and was overwhelmed by, Thomas Carlyle. I read Sartor Resartus , and I can recall many of its pages; I know them by heart." [ 117 ] In the introduction to his first published volume of fiction, The Garden of Forking Paths , Borges remarks, "It is a laborious madness and an impoverishing one, the madness of composing vast books, setting out in five hundred pages an idea that can be perfectly related orally in five minutes. The better way to go about it is to pretend that those books already exist, and offer a summary, a commentary on them." He then cites both Sartor Resartus and Samuel Butler 's The Fair Haven , remarking, however, that "those works suffer under the imperfection that they themselves are books, and not a whit less tautological than the others. A more reasonable, more inept, and more lazy man, I have chosen to write notes on imaginary books." [ 118 ] On the other hand, some works were wrongly attributed to Borges, like the poem "Instantes" .

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] Criticism of Borges's work [ edit ] Borges's change in style from regionalist criollismo to a more cosmopolitan style brought him much criticism from journals such as Contorno , a leftist, Sartre-influenced Argentine publication founded by David Viñas and his brother, along with other intellectuals such as Noé Jitrik and Adolfo Prieto. In the post-Peronist Argentina of the early 1960s, Contorno met with wide approval from the youth who challenged the authenticity of older writers such as Borges and questioned their legacy of experimentation.

Magic realism and exploration of universal truths, they argued, had come at the cost of responsibility and seriousness in the face of society's problems.

[ 121 ] The Contorno writers acknowledged Borges and Eduardo Mallea for being "doctors of technique" but argued that their work lacked substance due to their lack of interaction with the reality that they inhabited, an existentialist critique of their refusal to embrace existence and reality in their artwork.

[ 121 ] Sexuality and perception of women [ edit ] The story " The Sect of the Phoenix " is famously interpreted to allude to the ubiquity of sexual intercourse among humans [ 122 ] – a concept whose essential qualities the narrator of the story is not able to relate to. With a few notable exceptions, women are almost entirely absent from Borges's fiction.

[ 123 ] However, there are some instances in Borges's later writings of romantic love, for example the story " Ulrikke " from The Book of Sand . The protagonist of the story "El muerto" also lusts after the "splendid, contemptuous, red-haired woman" of Azevedo Bandeira [ 124 ] : 197 and later "sleeps with the woman with shining hair".

[ 124 ] : 200 Although they do not appear in the stories, women are significantly discussed as objects of unrequited love in his short stories "The Zahir" and "The Aleph".

[ 124 ] [ page needed ] The plot of La Intrusa was based on a true story of two friends. Borges turned their fictional counterparts into brothers, excluding the possibility of a homosexual relationship.

[ 125 ] " Emma Zunz " is a story with an eminent female protagonist. Originally published in 1948, this work tells the tale of a young Jewish woman who kills a man in order to avenge the disgrace and suicide of her father. She carefully plans the crime, submitting to an unpleasant sexual encounter with a stranger in order to create the appearance of sexual impropriety in her intended victim. Despite the fact that she premeditates and executes a murder, the eponymous heroine of this story is surprisingly likable, both because of intrinsic qualities in the character (interestingly enough, she believes in nonviolence) and because the story is narrated from a "remote but sympathetic" point of view that highlights the poignancy of her situation.

[ 126 ] Nobel Prize omission [ edit ] Borges was never awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature , something which continually distressed the writer.

[ 11 ] He was one of several distinguished authors who never received the honour.

[ 127 ] Borges commented, "Not granting me the Nobel Prize has become a Scandinavian tradition; since I was born they have not been granting it to me." [ 128 ] Some observers speculated that Borges did not receive the award in his later life because of his conservative political views, or more specifically because he had accepted an honour from Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet .

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] Borges was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature over thirty times, [ 131 ] and was among the short-listed candidates several times. In 1965 he was considered along with Vladimir Nabokov , Pablo Neruda , and Mikhail Sholokhov , and in 1966 a shared prize to Borges and Miguel Ángel Asturias was proposed.

[ 132 ] Borges was nominated again in 1967, and was among the final three choices considered by the committee according to Nobel records unsealed on the 50th anniversary in 2017. The committee considered Borges, Graham Greene and Miguel Ángel Asturias , choosing Asturias as the winner.

[ 133 ] Fact, fantasy and non-linearity [ edit ] Monument in Lisbon Many of Borges's best-known stories deal with themes of time (" The Secret Miracle "), infinity (" The Aleph "), mirrors (" Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius ") and labyrinths (" The Two Kings and the Two Labyrinths ", " The House of Asterion ", " The Immortal ", and " The Garden of Forking Paths "). Williamson writes, "His basic contention was that fiction did not depend on the illusion of reality; what mattered ultimately was an author's ability to generate 'poetic faith' in his reader." [ 11 ] His stories often have fantastical themes, such as a library containing every possible 410-page text (" The Library of Babel "), a man who forgets nothing he experiences (" Funes, the Memorious "), an artifact through which the user can see everything in the universe ("The Aleph"), and a year of still time given to a man standing before a firing squad ("The Secret Miracle"). Borges told realistic stories of South American life, of folk heroes, street fighters, soldiers, gauchos , detectives, and historical figures. He mixed the real and the fantastic, fact with fiction. His interest in compounding fantasy, philosophy, and the art of translation are evident in articles such as "The Translators of The Book of One Thousand and One Nights ". In the Book of Imaginary Beings , a thoroughly researched bestiary of mythical creatures, Borges wrote, "There is a kind of lazy pleasure in useless and out-of-the-way erudition." [ 134 ] Borges's interest in fantasy was shared by Bioy Casares, with whom he coauthored several collections of tales between 1942 and 1967.

[ citation needed ] Often, especially early in his career, the mixture of fact and fantasy crossed the line into the realm of hoax or literary forgery.

[ Note 6 ] "The Garden of Forking Paths" (1941) presents the idea of forking paths through networks of time, none of which is the same, all of which are equal. Borges uses the recurring image of "a labyrinth that folds back upon itself in infinite regression" so we "become aware of all the possible choices we might make." [ 135 ] The forking paths have branches to represent these choices that ultimately lead to different endings. Borges saw man's search for meaning in a seemingly infinite universe as fruitless and instead uses the maze as a riddle for time, not space.

[ 135 ] He examined the themes of universal randomness (" The Lottery in Babylon ") and madness (" The Zahir "). Due to the success of the "Forking Paths" story, the term "Borgesian" came to reflect a quality of narrative non-linearity .

[ Note 7 ] Borges and science fiction [ edit ] John Clute writes: "as was earlier the case with Franz Kafka , a collection of whose work he translated as La Metamorfosis (coll. 1938), Borges's influence on twentieth century literature worldwide has been so deep and pervasive that any sf written in English since about 1960 may consciously or subliminally reflect his work. Any sf story whose structure or arguments question or play with the nature of reality – or which makes fantastic use of images of the Labyrinth, the Mirror, the Library, the Map, and/or the Book and/or the Dream to inform the world – will necessarily navigate seas of imagination he has already plumbed, apodictically, in ten or twenty short stories." Clute notes that Borges "revealed a first-hand (if at points inaccurate) knowledge of sf and its authors, including H. P. Lovecraft , Robert A Heinlein , A. E. van Vogt and Ray Bradbury " and cites Philip K. Dick , Thomas Pynchon , Kurt Vonnegut and Gene Wolfe as being directly influenced by Borges.

[ 136 ] William Gibson recalls "the sensation, both complex and eerily simple", of reading " Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius " in Labyrinths as a young man, seated at a writing desk said to have belonged to Francis Marion : Had the concept of software been available to me, I imagine I would have felt as though I were installing something that exponentially increased what one day would be called bandwidth, though bandwidth of what , exactly, I remain unable to say. This sublime and cosmically comic fable of utterly pure information (i.e. the utterly fictive)  gradually and relentlessly infiltrating and eventually consuming the quotidian, opened something within me which has never yet closed... Works we all our lives recall reading for the first time are among the truest milestones, but Labyrinths was a profoundly singular one, for me, and I believe I knew that, then, in my early adolescence. It was demonstrated to me, that afternoon. Proven. For, by the time I had finished with "Tlön" (though one never finishes with Tlön, nor indeed any story by Borges) and had traversed " The Garden of Forking Paths " and had wondered, literally bug-eyed, at " Pierre Menaud, Author of the Quixote ", I discovered that I had ceased to be afraid of any influence that might dwell within Francis Marion's towering desk." [ 137 ] Borgesian conundrum [ edit ] The philosophical term "Borgesian conundrum" is named after him and has been defined as the ontological question of "whether the writer writes the story, or it writes him." [ 138 ] The original concept was put forward by Borges in his essay "Kafka and His Precursors". After reviewing works that were written before those of Kafka, Borges wrote: If I am not mistaken, the heterogeneous pieces I have enumerated resemble Kafka; if I am not mistaken, not all of them resemble each other. The second fact is the more significant. In each of these texts we find Kafka's idiosyncrasy to a greater or lesser degree, but if Kafka had never written a line, we would not perceive this quality; in other words, it would not exist. The poem "Fears and Scruples" by Browning foretells Kafka's work, but our reading of Kafka perceptibly sharpens and deflects our reading of the poem. Browning did not read it as we do now. In the critics' vocabulary, the word 'precursor' is indispensable, but it should be cleansed of all connotation of polemics or rivalry. The fact is that every writer creates his own precursors. His work modifies our conception of the past, as it will modify the future." [ 139 ] Culture and Argentine literature [ edit ] Martín Fierro and Argentine tradition [ edit ] Main article: Borges on Martín Fierro Along with other young Argentine writers of his generation, Borges initially rallied around the fictional character of Martín Fierro.

Martín Fierro , a poem by José Hernández , was a dominant work of 19th-century Argentine literature . Its eponymous hero became a symbol of Argentine sensibility, untied from European values – a gaucho , free, poor, pampas -dwelling.

[ 140 ] The character Fierro is illegally drafted to serve at a border fort to defend it against the indigenous population but ultimately deserts to become a gaucho matrero , the Argentine equivalent of a North American western outlaw. Borges contributed keenly to the avant garde Martín Fierro magazine in the early 1920s.

[ 141 ] As Borges matured, he came to a more nuanced attitude toward the Hernández poem. In his book of essays on the poem, Borges separates his admiration for the aesthetic virtues of the work from his mixed opinion of the moral virtues of its protagonist.

[ 142 ] In his essay "The Argentine Writer and Tradition" (1951), Borges celebrates how Hernández expresses the Argentine character. In a key scene in the poem, Martín Fierro and El Moreno compete by improvising songs on universal themes such as time, night, and the sea, reflecting the real-world gaucho tradition of payadas , improvised musical dialogues on philosophical themes.

[ 140 ] [ 143 ] Borges points out that Hernández evidently knew the difference between actual gaucho tradition of composing poetry versus the "gauchesque" fashion among Buenos Aires literati.

[ 144 ] In his works he refutes the arch-nationalist interpreters of the poem and disdains others, such as critic Eleuterio Tiscornia, for their Europeanising approach. Borges denies that Argentine literature should distinguish itself by limiting itself to "local colour", which he equates with cultural nationalism.

[ 143 ] Racine and Shakespeare 's work, he says, looked beyond their countries' borders. Neither, he argues, need the literature be bound to the heritage of old-world Spanish or European tradition. Nor should it define itself by the conscious rejection of its colonial past. He asserts that Argentine writers need to be free to define Argentine literature anew, writing about Argentina and the world from the point of view of those who have inherited the whole of world literature.

[ 143 ] Williamson says "Borges's main argument is that the very fact of writing from the margins provides Argentine writers with a special opportunity to innovate without being bound to the canons of the centre, ... at once a part of and apart from the centre, which gives them much potential freedom".

[ 140 ] Argentine culture [ edit ] Borges focused on universal themes, but also composed a substantial body of literature on themes from Argentine folklore and history. His first book, the poetry collection Fervor de Buenos Aires ( Passion for Buenos Aires ), appeared in 1923. Borges's writings on things Argentine include Argentine culture ("History of the Tango"; "Inscriptions on Horse Wagons"), folklore ("Juan Muraña", "Night of the Gifts"), literature ("The Argentine Writer and Tradition", "Almafuerte"; " Evaristo Carriego "), and national concerns ("Celebration of the Monster", "Hurry, Hurry", "The Mountebank", "Pedro Salvadores"). Ultranationalists, however, continued to question his Argentine identity.

[ 145 ] Borges's interest in Argentine themes reflects in part the inspiration of his family tree. Borges had an English paternal grandmother who, around 1870, married the criollo Francisco Borges, a man with a military command and a historic role in the Argentine Civil Wars in what are now Argentina and Uruguay .

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] [ 148 ] Spurred by pride in his family's heritage, Borges often used those civil wars as settings in fiction and quasi-fiction (for example, "The Life of Tadeo Isidoro Cruz", "The Dead Man", "Avelino Arredondo") as well as poetry ("General Quiroga Rides to His Death in a Carriage"). Borges's maternal great-grandfather, Manuel Isidoro Suárez , was another military hero, whom Borges immortalized in the poem "A Page to Commemorate Colonel Suárez, Victor at Junín".

[ 149 ] His nonfiction explores many of the themes found in his fiction. Essays such as "The History of the Tango " or his writings on the epic poem " Martín Fierro " explore Argentine themes, such as the identity of the Argentine people and of various Argentine subcultures. The varying genealogies of characters, settings, and themes in his stories, such as "La muerte y la brújula", used Argentine models without pandering to his readers or framing Argentine culture as "exotic".

[ 145 ] In fact, contrary to what is usually supposed, the geographies found in his fictions often do not correspond to those of real-world Argentina.

[ 150 ] In his essay "El escritor argentino y la tradición", Borges notes that the very absence of camels in the Qur'an was proof enough that it was an Arabian work, despite the fact that camels are mentioned in the Qur'an. He suggested that only someone trying to write an "Arab" work would purposefully include a camel.

[ 145 ] He uses this example to illustrate how his dialogue with universal existential concerns was just as Argentine as writing about gauchos and tangos.

[ citation needed ] Borges detested football .

[ 151 ] Multicultural influences [ edit ] At the time of the Argentine Declaration of Independence in 1816, the population was predominantly criollo (of Spanish ancestry). From the mid-1850s on, waves of immigration from Europe, especially Italy and Spain, arrived in the country, and in the following decades the Argentine national identity diversified.

[ 11 ] [ 152 ] Borges was writing in a strongly European literary context, immersed in Spanish, English, French, German, Italian, Anglo-Saxon and Old Norse literature. He also read translations of Near Eastern and Far Eastern works. Borges's writing is also informed by scholarship of Christianity , Buddhism, Islam , and Judaism , including prominent religious figures, heretics, and mystics.

[ 153 ] Religion and heresy are explored in such stories as " Averroes's Search ", " The Writing of the God ", " The Theologians ", and " Three Versions of Judas ". The curious inversion of mainstream Christian concepts of redemption in the last story is characteristic of Borges's approach to theology in his literature.

[ 154 ] In describing himself, Borges said, "I am not sure that I exist, actually. I am all the writers that I have read, all the people that I have met, all the women that I have loved; all the cities that I have visited, all my ancestors." [ 128 ] As a young man, he visited the frontier pampas which extend beyond Argentina into Uruguay and Brazil . Borges said that his father wished him "to become a citizen of the world, a great cosmopolitan," in the way of Henry and William James .

[ 155 ] Borges lived and studied in Switzerland and Spain as a young student. As Borges matured, he traveled through Argentina as a lecturer and, internationally, as a visiting professor; he continued to tour the world as he grew older, finally settling in Geneva , where he had spent some of his youth. Drawing on the influence of many times and places, Borges's work belittled nationalism and racism.

[ 145 ] However, Borges also scorned his own Basque ancestry and criticised the abolition of slavery in America because he believed black people were happier remaining uneducated and without freedom.

[ 156 ] Portraits of diverse coexisting cultures characteristic of Argentina are especially pronounced in the book Six Problems for don Isidoro Parodi (co-authored with Bioy Casares) and Death and the Compass . Borges wrote that he considered Mexican writer Alfonso Reyes to be "the best prose-writer in the Spanish language of any time." [ 157 ] Borges was also an admirer of Asian culture, e.g. the ancient Chinese board game of Go , about which he penned some verses, [ 158 ] while " The Garden of Forking Paths " had a strong Chinese theme.

Influences [ edit ] Modernism [ edit ] Plaque, 13 rue des Beaux-Arts, Paris Borges was rooted in the Modernism predominant in its early years and was influenced by Symbolism .

[ 159 ] Like Vladimir Nabokov and James Joyce , he combined an interest in his native culture with broader perspectives, also sharing their multilingualism and inventiveness with language. However, while Nabokov and Joyce tended toward progressively larger works, Borges remained a miniaturist. His work progressed away from what he referred to as "the baroque": his later style is far more transparent and naturalistic than his earlier works. Borges represented the humanist view of media that stressed the social aspect of art driven by emotion. If art represented the tool, then Borges was more interested in how the tool could be used to relate to people.

[ 106 ] Existentialism saw its apogee during the years of Borges's greatest artistic production. It has been argued that his choice of topics largely ignored existentialism's central tenets. Critic Paul de Man notes, "Whatever Borges's existential anxieties may be, they have little in common with Sartre's robustly prosaic view of literature, with the earnestness of Camus' moralism, or with the weighty profundity of German existential thought. Rather, they are the consistent expansion of a purely poetic consciousness to its furthest limits." [ 160 ] Mathematics [ edit ] Main article: Borges and mathematics The essay collection Borges y la Matemática (Borges and Mathematics, 2003) by Argentine mathematician and writer Guillermo Martínez outlines how Borges used concepts from mathematics in his work. Martínez states that Borges had, for example, at least a superficial knowledge of set theory , which he handles with elegance in stories such as " The Book of Sand ".

[ 161 ] Other books such as The Unimaginable Mathematics of Borges' Library of Babel by William Goldbloom Bloch (2008) and Unthinking Thinking: Jorge Luis Borges, Mathematics, and the New Physics by Floyd Merrell (1991) also explore this relationship.

Philosophy [ edit ] Fritz Mauthner , philosopher of language and author of the Wörterbuch der Philosophie ( Dictionary of Philosophy ), had an important influence on Borges. Borges always recognized the influence of this German philosopher.

[ 162 ] According to the literary review Sur , the book was one of the five books most noted and read by Borges. The first time that Borges mentioned Mauthner was in 1928 in his book The language of the Argentines (El idioma de los argentinos). In a 1962 interview Borges described Mauthner as possessing a fine sense of humor as well as great knowledge and erudition.

[ 163 ] In an interview, [ 164 ] Denis Dutton asked Borges who were the "philosophers who have influenced your works, in whom you've been the most interested". In reply, Borges named Berkeley and Schopenhauer . He was also influenced by Spinoza , about whom Borges wrote a famous poem.

[ 165 ] It is not without humour that Borges once wrote: "Siempre imaginé que el Paraíso sería algún tipo de biblioteca." ("I always imagined Paradise to be some kind of a library.") [ 166 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ In short, Borges's blindness led him to favour poetry and shorter narratives over novels.

Ferriera , Eliane Fernanda C. "O (In)visível imaginado em Borges". In: Pedro Pires Bessa (ed.).

Riqueza Cultural Ibero-Americana . Campus de Divinópolis-UEMG, 1996, pp. 313–14.

^ Edwin Williamson suggests in Borges (Viking, 2004) that Borges did not finish his baccalauréat (pp. 79–80): "he cannot have been too bothered about his baccalauréat , not least because he loathed and feared examination. (He was never to finish his high school education, in fact)." ^ "His was a particular kind of blindness, grown on him gradually since the age of thirty and settled in for good after his fifty-eighth birthday." From Manguel, Alberto (2006) With Borges . London: Telegram Books, pp. 15–16.

^ The Borges poems in H. R. Hays, ed. (1943) 12 Spanish American Poets are "A Patio", "Butcher Shop", "Benares", "The Recoleta", "A Day's Run", "General Quiroga Rides to Death in a Carriage", "July Avenue", and "Natural Flow of Memory".

^ Notable translations also include work by Melville , Sir Thomas Browne , and G. K. Chesterton .

^ a b c His imitations of Swedenborg and others were originally passed off as translations, in his literary column in Crítica . "El teólogo" was originally published with the note "Lo anterior ... es obra de Manuel Swedenborg, eminente ingeniero y hombre de ciencia, que durante 27 años estuvo en comercio lúcido y familiar con el otro mundo." ("The preceding ... is the work of Emanuel Swedenborg, eminent engineer and man of science, who during 27 years was in lucid and familiar commerce with the other world.") See "Borges y Revista multicolor de los sábados: confabulados en una escritura de la infamia" by Raquel Atena Green, Wor(l)ds of Change: Latin American and Iberian Literature , volume 32, (2010) Peter Lang Publishing; ISBN 978-0-8204-3467-4 ^ Non-linearity was key to the development of digital media . See Murray, Janet H. "Inventing the Medium" The New Media Reader . Cambridge: MIT Press , 2003.

References [ edit ] ^ Troop Software Factory.

"Jorge Luis Borges" .

^ "Borges" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary ; accessed 1 April 2016.

^ David Wheatley (Director) (1983).

Profile of a Writer: Borges and I (Feature Documentary).

Arena .

^ Theo L. D'Haen (1995) "Magical Realism and Postmodernism: Decentering Privileged Centers", in: Louis P. Zamora and Wendy B. Faris, Magical Realism: Theory, History and Community . Duhan and London, Duke University Press, pp. 191–208.

^ di Giovanni, Thomas (2008).

"Jorge Luis Borges: The Blind Librarian with Extraordinary Vision" (PDF) .

University of Hawai'i .

^ (in Portuguese) Masina, Lea. (2001) "Murilo Rubião, o mágico do conto". In: O pirotécnico Zacarias e outros contos escolhidos .

Porto Alegre : L & PM, pg. 5.

^ Borges on Life and Death , Interview by Amelia Barili.

^ Coetzee, J.M. "Borges' Dark Mirror", New York Review of Books , Volume 45, Number 16. 22 October 1998.

^ David Foster Wallace (7 November 2004).

"Borges on the Couch" .

The New York Times .

^ Bell-Villada, Gene (1999).

Borges and His Fiction . United States of America: University of Texas Press. pp.

14 .

ISBN 0-292-70877-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Tóibín, Colm (11 May 2006).

"Don't abandon me" .

London Review of Books . Archived from the original on 18 April 2009.

^ a b Harold Bloom (2004) Jorge Luis Borges , Infobase Publishing.

ISBN 978-950-07-1121-0 ^ Borges, Jorge Luis, "Autobiographical Notes", The New Yorker , 19 September 1970.

^ Gene H. Bell-Villada, Borges and His Fiction: A Guide to His Mind and Art , University of Texas Press (1999), p. 16; ISBN 978-0-292-70878-5 ^ Wilson, Jason (2006).

Jorge Luis Borges . Reaktion Books. p.

37 .

ISBN 1-86189-286-1 .

^ Wilson, Jason (2006).

Jorge Luis Borges . London: Reaktion. pp.

45– 47.

ISBN 1-86189-286-1 .

OCLC 65768057 .

^ Borges: Other Inquisitions 1937–1952 . Full introduction by James Irby . University of Texas, ISBN 978-0-292-76002-8 ; accessed 16 August 2010.

^ "Ivonne Bordelois, "The Sur Magazine" Villa Ocampo Website" . Villaocampo.org . Retrieved 24 August 2011 .

^ Borges, Jorge Luis. Trans. Mildred Boyer and Harold Morland.

Dreamtigers , University of Texas Press, 1985, p. 25.

^ Boldy (2009) p. 32 ^ Castillo-Torres, S. A., et. al. (2021). "The books and the night", neurological perspective on Jorge Luis Borges’ blindness.

Gaceta médica de México , 155(5).

https://www.scielo.org.mx/scielo.php?pid=S0016-38132019000500516&script=sci_arttext&tlng=en ^ Toibin, C. (2006) Don't abandon me. Review of Borges: A Life by Edwin Williamson.

London Review of Books, 28 (9).

https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v28/n09/colm-toibin/don-t-abandon-me ^ Bolter, Jay David; Joyce, Michael (1987).

"Hypertext and Creative Writing" .

Hypertext '87 Papers . ACM. pp.

41– 50.

^ Moulthrop, Stuart (1991). "Reading From the Map: Metonymy and Metaphor in the Fiction of 'Forking Paths' ". In Delany, Paul; Landow, George P. (eds.).

Hypermedia and Literary Studies . Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England: The MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-585-35444-6 .

^ "Borges, Jorge Luis (Vol.32)" . enotes . Retrieved 3 December 2008 .

^ Wardrip-Fruin, Noah & Montfort, Nick (2003).

The New Media Reader . MIT Press.

^ Alberto Manguel (2006) With Borges , London: Telegram Books, pp. 15–16.

^ Woodall, J.: The Man in Mirror of the Book, A Life of Luis Borges , (1996), Hodder and Stoughton, pxxx.

^ "Days of Hate" . Imdb. 3 June 1954 . Retrieved 4 December 2008 .

^ Stavans, Ilan (2001).

"Beyond Translation: Borges and Faulkner" .

Michigan Quarterly Review .

XL (4). University of Michigan . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ Day, Douglas (1980). "Borges, Faulkner, and The Wild Palms".

Virginia Quarterly Review .

56 (1). University of Virginia.

^ Jorge Luis Borges (1984) Seven Nights , A New Directions Book pp 109–110.

^ Elogio de la Sombra , 1969, poetry. English title In Praise of Darkness , 1974; ISBN 0-525-03635-0 .

^ a b c d Burgin (1988) p xvii ^ The American Hispanist . American Hispanist. 1975. p. 3.

^ "The Craft of Verse: The Norton Lectures, 1967–68" .

UbuWeb: Sound . Retrieved 1 January 2014 .

^ Borges, Jorge Luis (2013).

Jorge Luis Borges: The Last Interview: and Other Conversations (The Last Interview Series) . Melville House.

ISBN 978-1-61219-204-8 .

^ H. R. Hays, ed. (1943) 12 Spanish American Poets .  New Haven: Yale University Press p118-139.

^ Jeffrey Alan Marks, Anthony Boucher: A Biobibliography McFarland (2008), pg. 77; ISBN 978-0-7864-3320-9 ^ "Title: The Rejected Sorcerer" .

www.isfdb.org .

^ Borges, Jorge Luis (1998) Collected Fictions Viking Penguin. Translation and notes by Andrew Hurley (editorial note), pg 517.

^ "Edgar Award Winners and Nominees Database" .

theedgars.com . Archived from the original on 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 13 July 2012 .

^ Pack, Scott (14 March 2017).

"Norman Thomas di Giovanni obituary" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 22 May 2021 .

^ Fraser, Ryan (22 December 2005) [Published in print 2004].

"Past Lives of Knives: On Borges, Translation, and Sticking Old Texts" .

TTR: Traduction, terminologie, rédaction .

17 (1): 55– 80.

doi : 10.7202/011973ar .

ISSN 1708-2188 .

S2CID 193238162 .

^ Graham-Yooll, Andrew (2017).

"Norman di Giovanni, the Master's Translator" .

The Antioch Review .

75 (2): 8– 10.

doi : 10.7723/antiochreview.75.2.0008 .

ISSN 0003-5769 .

JSTOR 10.7723/antiochreview.75.2.0008 .

^ Christ, Ronald (Summer 1971). "A Modest Proposal for the Criticism of Borges".

Books Abroad .

45 (3): 388– 398.

doi : 10.2307/40125492 .

JSTOR 40125492 .

^ a b Henderson, Caspar (23 November 2012).

"Caspar Henderson: rereading The Book of Imaginary Beings by Jorge Luis Borges" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 10 February 2024 .

^ a b Monegal, Emir Rodriguez (27 May 1999).

"Jorge Luis Borges: Biography, Books, Poems, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 10 February 2024 .

^ Funsten, Kenneth (20 January 1985).

"Seven Nights by Jorge Luis Borges, translated..." Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 10 February 2024 .

^ Manguel, Alberto (30 January 2000).

"For Borges, Hell was English, Paradise Italian" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 10 February 2024 .

^ Blotner, Joseph L.; Gwynn, Frederick L., eds. (1995).

Faulkner in the University . University of Virginia Press.

^ UVA, Special Collections Library.

"The Jorge Luis Borges Collection" . Archived from the original on 2 November 2011 . Retrieved 1 April 2016 .

^ Montes-Bradley, Eduardo . "Cada pieza es de un valor incalculable" Cover Article. Revista Ñ, Diario Clarín . Buenos Aires, 5 September 2011.

^ Kefala, Eleni (1 January 2007).

Peripheral (post) Modernity: The Syncretist Aesthetics of Borges, Piglia, Kalokyris and Kyriakidis . Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-0-8204-8639-0 .

^ "Borges y Bergoglio, crónica de una entrañable amistad" .

infobae (in European Spanish). 17 September 2022 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ Norman Thomas Di Giovanni, The Lessons of the Master .

^ "Fanny", El Señor Borges ^ Escribano, Pedro (20 July 2006).

"María Kodama: "Borges no necesitó de vino ni alcohol" " .

La República (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 16 May 2017.

^ Israel Shenker (31 August 1997).

"Borges, a Blind Writer With Insight" .

New York Times . Retrieved 30 April 2013 .

Being an agnostic makes me live in a larger, a more fantastic kind of world, almost uncanny. It makes me more tolerant.

^ Ivereigh, Austen (2014).

The Great Reformer: Francis and the Making of a Radical Pope . New York: Henry Holt and Company. p. 82.

^ a b Williamson 2004 , p. 489.

^ a b Williamson 2004 , p. 490.

^ "Borges era ateo pero rezaba cada noche un Avemaría, evoca un sacerdote en un homenaje ante su tumba" .

Religión en Libertad (in Spanish). 14 June 2016.

^ Borges (2004), pages 490–492.

^ María Kodama demanda a un periodista francés por difamación y reclama nada más que 1 euro Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , edant.revistaenie.clarin.com, 14 May 2008; accessed 1 April 2016.

^ "Se suspendió un juicio por obras de Borges: reacción de Kodama" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 14 September 2011 .

^ (in Spanish) Octavi Martí, Kodama frente a Borges, El País (Madrid), Edición Impresa, 16 August 2006.

Abstract online ; full text accessible online by subscription only.

^ Richard Flanagan, "Writing with Borges" , The Age (Australia), 12 July 2003; accessed 16 August 2010.

^ Salinas, Alejandra M. (2016).

Liberty, Individuality, and Democracy in Jorge Luis Borges . Lexington Books. p. 94.

^ a b Salinas, Alejandra M. (2016).

Liberty, Individuality, and Democracy in Jorge Luis Borges . Lexington Books. p. 95.

^ Borges on Writing (1973), Edited by Norman Thomas DoGiovanni, Daniel Halpern, and Frank MacShane. E.P. Dutton & Co, Inc., New York. Page 59.

^ a b c Salinas, Alejandra M. (2016).

Liberty, Individuality, and Democracy in Jorge Luis Borges . Lexington Books. p. 108.

^ Borges, Jorge Luis (29 October 2018).

"La vuelta de la democracia: el texto que Jorge Luis Borges escribió para Clarín en 1983" (in Spanish). Clarín . Retrieved 3 April 2020 .

^ Yudin, Florence (1997).

Nightglow: Borges' Poetics of Blindness . City: Universidad Pontificia de Salamanca. p. 31.

ISBN 84-7299-385-X .

^ Bell-Villada, Gene (1981).

Borges and His Fiction . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. p. 13.

ISBN 0-8078-1458-X .

^ Yudin, Florence (1997).

Nightglow: Borges' Poetics of Blindness . City: Universidad Pontificia de Salamanca. p. 31.

ISBN 84-7299-385-X .

^ Burgin (1968). p. 104.

^ Williamson 2004 , p. 332–333.

^ Williamson 2004 , p. 334.

^ Williamson 2004 , p. 334–335.

^ Burgin (1968) pp. 95–96 ^ Burgin (1969), pages 93–95.

^ a b De Costa, René (2000) Humor in Borges (Humor in Life & Letters) . Wayne State University Press p. 49 ISBN 0-8143-2888-1 ^ Jorge Luis Borges, Selected Nonfictions , p 200.

^ Selected Nonfictions , p. 201.

^ Borges, Selected Nonfictions , p. 211.

^ Borges on Writing (1970), pages 60–61.

^ Burgin (1968), pp 331–332.

^ Borges on Writing (1970), page 61.

^ Williamson 2004 , p. 292.

^ Williamson 2004 , p. 295.

^ Williamson 2004 , p. 312.

^ a b Williamson 2004 , p. 313.

^ Williamson 2004 , p. 320.

^ Kovacs, Katherine Singer (September 1977).

"Borges on the Right" .

Boston Review . Retrieved 13 February 2024 .

^ Williamson 2004 , p. 320–321.

^ (in Spanish) Jorge Luis Borges. Galería de Directores, Biblioteca Nacional (Argentina) at the Wayback Machine (archived 16 April 2008). (archived from the original , on 16 April 2008.) ^ Jorge Luis Borges, Selected Nonfictions , pp. 409–10.

^ Jorge Luis Borges, Selected Nonfictions , p. 410.

^ Burgin (1969), p. 121 ^ a b National Geographic , p. 303. (March 1975).

^ a b Williamson 2004 , p. 491.

^ Willis Barnstone , With Borges on an Ordinary Evening in Buenos Aires , University of Illinois Press, 1993, pp. 30–31.

^ Falkland Islands: Imperial pride , theguardian.com, 19 February 2010.

^ Goñi, Uki (8 February 2021).

"The Hidden History of Black Argentina | Uki Goñi" .

The New York Review of Books . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ a b Wardrip-Fruin, Noah, and Nick Montfort, ed. (2003).

The New Media Reader , Cambridge: The MIT Press, p. 29; ISBN 0-262-23227-8 ^ Firing Line with William F. Buckley Jr.: Borges: South America's Titan , 30 January 2017, archived from the original on 30 October 2021 , retrieved 3 September 2021 ^ Harold Bloom, The Western Canon , 1994, p. 2 ^ Borges, Jorge Luis. (1994) Siete Noches . Obras Completas, vol. III. Buenos Aires: Emecé ^ Unthinking Thinking: Jorge Luis Borges, Mathematics, and the New Physics (1991) Floyd Merrell, Purdue University Press pxii; ISBN 978-1-55753-011-0 ^ "The Other Borges Than the Central One" , nytimes.com; accessed 1 April 2016.

^ Kate Jenckes, Reading Borges After Benjamin: Allegory, Afterlife, and the Writing of History (2008), SUNY Press, pp. 101, 117, 136; ISBN 978-0-7914-6990-3 ^ Day, Douglas (1980).

"Borges, Faulkner, and The Wild Palms" .

Virginia Quarterly Review .

56 (1). University of Virginia.

JSTOR 26436092 .

^ Jorge Luis Borges, This Craft of Verse , Harvard University Press , 2000. pp. 57–76.

Word Music and Translation , Lecture, Delivered 28 February 1968.

^ [1] , discogs.com; accessed 18 February 2024.

^ https://catalyst.library.jhu.edu/permalink/01JHU_INST/c0999v/cdi_gale_infotracmisc_A677807095 ^ Borges This Craft of Verse (p. 104) ^ Borges Collected Fictions , p67 ^ University of Pittsburgh, Borges Center Jorge Luis Borges, autor del poema "Instantes" , by Iván Almeida. Retrieved 10 January 2011 ^ Martin Hadis' site on The Life & Works of Jorge Luis Borges , Internetaleph.com; retrieved 10 January 2011.

^ a b Katra, William H. (1988) Contorno: Literary Engagement in Post-Perónist Argentina . Teaneck, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson UP, pp. 56–57 ^ Williamson 2004 , p. 489, "years later Borges would tell Ronald Christ that he meant the Secret to refer to sexual intercourse".

^ "The Queer Use of Communal Women in Borges's "El muerto" and "La intrusa" ", XIX Latin American Studies Association (LASA) Congress (paper), Washington DC, September 1995 ^ a b c Jorge Luis Borges: Collected Fictions , translated by Hurley, Andrew , New York: Penguin, 1988 ^ Keller, Gary; Van Hooft, Karen S. (1976). "Jorge Luis Borges' "La intrusa": The Awakening of Love and Consciousness/The Sacrifice of Love and Consciousness". In Davis, Lisa E.; Tarán, Isabel C. (eds.).

The Analysis of Hispanic Texts: Current Trends in Methodology . Bilingual P. pp.

300– 19.

^ Brodzki, Bella. "'She Was Unable Not to Think': Borges' 'Emma Zunz' and the Female Subject." MLN, vol. 100, no. 2, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985, p. 338, https://doi.org/10.2307/2905740 .

^ Feldman, Burton. (2000) The Nobel Prize: a History of Genius, Controversy and Prestige , Arcade Publishing p 57 ^ a b Jorge Luis Borges profile , guardian.co.uk, 22 July 2008; accessed 15 August 2010.

^ James M. Markham, "Briton Wins the Nobel Literature Prize" , The New York Times , 7 October 1983; accessed 15 August 2010.

^ Feldman, Burton (2000) The Nobel Prize: a History of Genius, Controversy and Prestige ,  Arcade Publishing, pg. 81.

^ "Nomination archive Jorge Luis Borges" . nobelprize.org. 21 May 2024.

^ Nabokov, Neruda and Borges revealed as losers of 1965 Nobel prize The Guardian 6 January 2016 ^ Kaj Schueler (January 2018).

"Hemliga dokument visar kampen om Nobelpriset" .

Svenska Dagbladet . Retrieved 3 January 2018 .

^ Borges, Luis Borges (1979) Book of Imaginary Beings Penguin Books Australia, p. 11; ISBN 0-525-47538-9 ^ a b Murray, Janet H. "Inventing the Medium" The New Media Reader . Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003.

^ Clute, John.

"SFE: Borges, Jorge Luis" .

^ Gibson, William. "An Invitation By William Gibson." Labyrinths by Jorge Luis Borges. p. ix–x. 2007.

^ Ella Taylor (18 July 2010).

"Book review: 'The Thieves of Manhattan' by Adam Langer" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Jorge Luis Borges (1988).

Labyrinths: Selected Stories & Other Writings . New Direction Books. p. 201.

^ a b c Gabriel Waisman, Sergio (2005) Borges and Translation: The Irreverence of the Periphery , Bucknell University Press, pp. 126–29; ISBN 0-8387-5592-5 ^ Walker, Carlos (2011).

"Jorge Luis Borges: De Martín Fierro a Sur (1924-1935)" .

IBEROAMERICANA. América Latina - España - Portugal (in Spanish).

11 (41): 25– 42.

doi : 10.18441/ibam.11.2011.41.25-42 .

ISSN 2255-520X .

^ Borges and Guerrero (1953) El "Martín Fierro ISBN 84-206-1933-7 ^ a b c Borges, Jorge Luis and Lanuza, Eduardo González (1961) "The Argentine writer and tradition" Latin American and European Literary Society ^ Queiroz, Maria José De (30 September 1973).

"Resenha: BORGES, Jorge Luis. El oro de los tigres. Buenos Aires: Emecé, 1968. 168 p." Phasis .

1 (1): 126.

doi : 10.17851/1678-3549.1.1.126-130 (inactive 12 July 2025).

ISSN 1678-3549 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b c d Takolander, Maria, (2007) Catching butterflies: bringing magical realism to ground Peter Lang Pub Inc pp. 55–60; ISBN 3-03911-193-0 ^ "Borges, Francisco" .

Borges Center at the University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved 9 November 2022 .

^ Zunini, Patricio (27 December 2019).

"Francisco Borges, el abuelo del gran escritor: un héroe atrapado entre dos lealtades" .

Infobae (in Spanish) . Retrieved 9 November 2022 .

^ Woodall, James (1996).

Borges : a life (1st U.S. ed.). New York: BasicBooks.

ISBN 0-465-04361-5 .

OCLC 35792375 .

^ Rodriguez Monegal, Emir (Winter 1974). "Borges, the Reader".

Diacritics .

4 (4): 44– 45.

doi : 10.2307/465123 .

JSTOR 465123 .

^ David Boruchoff (1985), "In Pursuit of the Detective Genre: 'La muerte y la brújula' of Jorge Luis Borges", Inti: Revista de Literatura Hispánica no. 21, pp. 13–26.

^ Barrera, Daniela (24 August 2021).

"Las mejores frases antifutboleras de Jorge Luis Borges" .

Diario AS (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2 September 2024 .

^ Velez, Wanda (1990).

"South American Immigration: Argentina" .

The Autobiographical Mode in Latin American Literature . Volume I. Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute. Archived from the original on 6 September 2011 . Retrieved 24 August 2011 .

^ Bell-Villada, Gene, Borges and His Fiction: A Guide to His Mind and Art , University of Texas Press; ISBN 978-0-292-70878-5 .

^ Stabb, Martin S. (1970).

Jorge Luis Borges . New York: Twayne Publishers, Inc. pp.

99– 100.

^ Williamson 2004 , p. 53.

^ (in Spanish) Rodolfo Braceli (1996) "Borges", in: Caras, Caritas y Caretas . Buenos Aires: Editorial Sudamericana.

ISBN 0-7910-7872-8 .

^ Borges, Siete Noches , p. 156 ^ "El Go" . GoBase . Retrieved 26 August 2011 .

^ Britton, R (July 1979). "History, Myth, and Archetype in Borges's View of Argentina".

The Modern Language Review .

74 (3). Modern Humanities Research Association: 607– 16.

doi : 10.2307/3726707 .

JSTOR 3726707 .

^ de Man, Paul. "A Modern Master", Jorge Luis Borges , Ed. Harold Bloom, New York: Chelsea House Pub, 1986. p. 22.

^ Martinez, Guillermo (2003) Borges y la Matemática (Spanish Edition) Editorial Universitaria de Buenos Aires.

ISBN 950-23-1296-1 ^ Báez, Fernando " Mauthner en Borges " -nº 19 Espéculo (UCM): [2] ^ Entrevista con Borges publicada en la " Revista de la Universidad de México" , vol. 16, nro. 10, México, junio de 1962, pg. 9 ^ " Philosophy and Literature ", Volume 1, Number 3, Fall 1977, pp. 337–41.

^ Borges, Poesía completa, Debolsillo, Penguin, Barcelona 2016, p. 461 ^ Borges, Jorge Luis (1999) [Lecture the chapter is based on given in 1977]. "Blindness". In Wienberger, Eliot (ed.).

Selected Non-Fictions . Penguin Publishing. p. 475.

ISBN 0-670-84947-2 .

Little by little I came to realize the strange irony of events. I had always imagined Paradise as a kind of library. Others think of a garden or of a palace. There I was, the center, in a way, of nine hundred thousand books in various languages, but I found I could barely make out the title pages and the spines.

Further reading [ edit ] Agheana, Ion (1988).

The Meaning of Experience in the Prose of Jorge Luis Borges . Frankfurt Am Main: P. Lang.

ISBN 0-8204-0595-7 .

Agheana, Ion (1984).

The Prose of Jorge Luis Borges . Frankfurt Am Main: P. Lang.

ISBN 0-8204-0130-7 .

Aizenberg, Edna (1984).

The Aleph Weaver: Biblical, Kabbalistic and Judaic Elements in Borges . Potomac: Scripta Humanistica.

ISBN 0-916379-12-4 .

Aizenberg, Edna (1990).

Borges and His Successors . Columbia: University of Missouri Press.

ISBN 0-8262-0712-X .

Alazraki, Jaime (1988).

Borges and the Kabbalah . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-30684-1 .

Alazraki, Jaime (1987).

Critical Essays on Jorge Luis Borges . Boston: G.K. Hall.

ISBN 0-8161-8829-7 .

Balderston, Daniel (1993).

Out of Context . Durham: Duke University Press.

ISBN 0-8223-1316-2 .

Barnstone, Willis (1993).

With Borges on an Ordinary Evening in Buenos Aires . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 0-252-01888-5 .

Barrenechea, Ana María (1965).

Borges the Labyrinth Maker. Edited and Translated by Robert Lima . New York City: New York University Press.

LCCN 65-10764 .

Bell-Villada, Gene (1981).

Borges and His Fiction . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 0-8078-1458-X .

Bioy Casares, Adolfo (2006).

Borges . City: Destino Ediciones.

ISBN 978-950-732-085-9 .

Block de Behar, Lisa (2014).

Borges. The Passion of an Endless Quotation. 2nd Ed . Albany: SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-1-4384-5031-5 .

Block de Behar, Lisa (2003).

Borges, the Passion of an Endless Quotation . Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 1-4175-2020-5 .

Bloom, Harold (1986).

Jorge Luis Borges . New York: Chelsea House Publishers.

ISBN 0-87754-721-1 .

Bulacio, Cristina; Grima, Donato (1998).

Dos Miradas sobre Borges . Buenos Aires: Ediciones de Arte Gaglianone.

ISBN 950-554-266-6 .

Illustrated by Donato Grima .

Burgin, Richard (1969) Jorge Luis Borges: Conversations , Holt Rinehart & Winston Burgin, Richard (1998) Jorge Luis Borges: Conversations , University Press of Mississippi Di Giovanni, Norman Thomas (1995).

The Borges Tradition . London: Constable in association with the Anglo-Argentine Society.

ISBN 0-09-473840-8 .

Di Giovanni, Norman Thomas (2003).

The Lesson of the Master . London: Continuum.

ISBN 0-8264-6110-7 .

Dunham, Lowell (1971).

The Cardinal Points of Borges . Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.

ISBN 0-8061-0983-1 .

Fishburn, Evelyn (2002).

Borges and Europe Revisited . City: Univ of London.

ISBN 1-900039-21-4 .

Frisch, Mark (2004).

You Might Be Able to Get There from Here . Madison: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.

ISBN 0-8386-4044-3 .

Kristal, Efraín (2002).

Invisible Work . Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.

ISBN 0-585-40803-3 .

Laín Corona, Guillermo. "Borges and Cervantes: Truth and Falsehood in the Narration".

Neophilologus , 93 (2009): 421–37.

Laín Corona, Guillermo. "Teoría y práctica de la metáfora en torno a Fervor de Buenos Aires , de Borges".

Cuadernos de Aleph. Revista de literatura hispánica , 2 (2007): 79–93.

https://web.archive.org/web/20120105024915/http://cuadernosdealeph.com/revista_2007/A2007_pdf/06%20Teor%C3%ADa.pdf Lima, Robert (1993). "Borges and the Esoteric".

Crítica Hispánica . Special issue.

15 (2). Duquesne University.

ISSN 0278-7261 .

Lindstrom, Naomi (1990).

Jorge Luis Borges . Boston: Twayne Publishers.

ISBN 0-8057-8327-X .

Manguel, Alberto (2006).

With Borges . City: Telegram.

ISBN 978-1-84659-005-4 .

Manovich, Lev, New Media from Borges to HTML, 2003 Mackay, Neil, Borges and Argentina: A Relocation , in Cencrastus No. 9, Summer 1982, pp. 17–19, ISSN 0264-0856 McMurray, George (1980).

Jorge Luis Borges . New York: Ungar.

ISBN 0-8044-2608-2 .

Molloy, Sylvia (1994).

Signs of Borges . Durham: Duke University Press.

ISBN 0-8223-1406-1 .

Mualem, Shlomy (2012).

Borges and Plato: A Game with Shifting Mirrors . Madrid and Frankfurt: Iberoamericana/Vervuert.

ISBN 978-84-8489-595-4 .

Murray, Janet H., Inventing the Medium, 2003 Núñez-Faraco, Humberto (2006).

Borges and Dante . Frankfurt Am Main: P. Lang.

ISBN 978-3-03910-511-3 .

Pérez, Rolando. "Borges and Bruno Schulz on the Infinite Book of the Kabbalah."  Confluencia. Volume 31. Spring 2016.

https://www.academia.edu/25252312/Borges_and_Bruno_Schulz_on_the_Infinite_Book_of_the_Kabbalah .

Racz, Gregary (2003).

Jorge Luis Borges (1899–1986) as Writer and Social Critic .

Lewiston, New York : Edwin Mellen Press .

ISBN 0-7734-6904-4 .

Rodríguez, Monegal (1978).

Jorge Luis Borges . New York: Dutton.

ISBN 0-525-13748-3 .

Rodríguez-Luis, Julio (1991).

The Contemporary Praxis of the Fantastic . New York: Garland.

ISBN 0-8153-0101-4 .

Sarlo, Beatriz (2007).

Jorge Luis Borges: a Writer on the Edge . London: Verso.

ISBN 978-1-84467-588-3 .

Shaw, Donald (1992).

Borges' Narrative Strategy . Liverpool: Francis Cairns.

ISBN 0-905205-84-7 .

Stabb, Martin (1991).

Borges Revisited . Boston: Twayne Publishers.

ISBN 0-8057-8263-X .

Sturrock, John (1977).

Paper Tigers . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-19-815746-0 .

Todorov, Tzvetan (1970).

Introduction à la littérature fantastique . Paris: Seuil.

Toro, Alfonso (1999).

Jorge Luis Borges . Frankfurt Am Main: Vervuert.

ISBN 3-89354-217-5 .

Volek, Emil (1984).

"Aquiles y la Tortuga: Arte, imaginación y realidad según Borges". In: Cuatro claves para la modernidad. Analisis semiótico de textos hispánicos . Madrid: Gredos.

Waisman, Sergio (2005).

Borges and Translation . Lewisburg Pa.: Bucknell University Press.

ISBN 0-8387-5592-5 .

Williamson, Edwin (2004).

Borges: A Life . New York: Viking.

ISBN 0-670-88579-7 .

Wilson, Jason (2006).

Jorge Luis Borges . London: Reaktion Books.

ISBN 978-1-86189-286-7 .

Woscoboinik, Julio (1998).

The Secret of Borges . Washington: University Press of America.

ISBN 0-7618-1238-5 .

Documentaries [ edit ] Eduardo Montes-Bradley (Writer/Director) (1999).

Harto The Borges (Feature Documentary). USA: Patagonia Film Group, US.

Ricardo Wullicher (Director) (1978).

Borges para millones (Feature Documentary). Argentina.

David Wheatley (Director) (1983).

Profile of a Writer: Borges and I (Feature Documentary).

Arena .

External links [ edit ] Jorge Luis Borges at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Library resources about Jorge Luis Borges Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Jorge Luis Borges Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Works by Jorge Luis Borges at Open Library Ronald Christ (Winter–Spring 1967).

"Jorge Luis Borges, The Art of Fiction No. 39" .

Paris Review . Winter-Spring 1967 (40).

BBC Radio 4 discussion programme from In our time . (Audio 45 mins) The Garden of Forking Paths Borges site from The Modern Word.

De Peryton , a work by Dutch composer Theo Verbey for seven wind instruments inspired by Borges .

Borges Center, University of Pittsburgh .

The Friends of Jorge Luis Borges Worldwide Society & Associates International Foundation Jorge Luis Borges Jorge Luis Borges recorded at the Library of Congress for the Hispanic Division's audio literary archive on 23 April 1976.

Six Norton Lectures (1967–68; audio; 4h13m) v t e Jorge Luis Borges Bibliography Original short story collections A Universal History of Infamy " Man on Pink Corner " " On Exactitude in Science " Ficciones " Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius " " The Approach to Al-Mu'tasim " " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote " " The Circular Ruins " " The Lottery in Babylon " " An Examination of the Work of Herbert Quain " " The Library of Babel " " The Garden of Forking Paths " " Funes the Memorious " " The Form of the Sword " " Theme of the Traitor and the Hero " " Death and the Compass " " The Secret Miracle " " Three Versions of Judas " " The End " " The Sect of the Phoenix " " The South " The Aleph " The Immortal " " The Dead Man " " The Theologians " " Story of the Warrior and the Captive " " Biography of Tadeo Isidoro Cruz " " Emma Zunz " " The House of Asterion " " Deutsches Requiem " " Averroes's Search " " The Zahir " " The Writing of the God " " The Two Kings and the Two Labyrinths " " The Wait " " The Man on the Threshold " " The Aleph " Dreamtigers " Borges and I " Dr. Brodie's Report " The Encounter " " The Gospel According to Mark " The Book of Sand " The Other " " Ulrikke " " The Congress " " There Are More Things " " The Disk " " The Book of Sand " Shakespeare's Memory " Blue Tigers " " Shakespeare's Memory " Essays " Yo, Judío " " The Total Library " " The Analytical Language of John Wilkins " " A New Refutation of Time " Other works Historia de la eternidad Borges on Martín Fierro Book of Imaginary Beings Labyrinths Adrogue, con ilustraciones de Norah Borges " El Golem " Related Leonor Acevedo Suarez (mother) Jorge Guillermo Borges (father) Norah Borges (sister) Celestial Emporium of Benevolent Knowledge H. Bustos Domecq Margarita Guerrero Pedro Mata Borges and mathematics v t e World Fantasy Award — Life Achievement Robert Bloch (1975) Fritz Leiber (1976) Ray Bradbury (1977) Frank Belknap Long (1978) Jorge Luis Borges (1979) Manly Wade Wellman (1980) C. L. Moore (1981) Italo Calvino (1982) Roald Dahl (1983) L. Sprague de Camp / Richard Matheson / E. Hoffmann Price / Jack Vance / Donald Wandrei (1984) Theodore Sturgeon (1985) Avram Davidson (1986) Jack Finney (1987) Everett F. Bleiler (1988) Evangeline Walton (1989) R. A. Lafferty (1990) Ray Russell (1991) Edd Cartier (1992) Harlan Ellison (1993) Jack Williamson (1994) Ursula K. Le Guin (1995) Gene Wolfe (1996) Madeleine L'Engle (1997) Edward L. Ferman / Andre Norton (1998) Hugh B. Cave (1999) Marion Zimmer Bradley / Michael Moorcock (2000) Frank Frazetta / Philip José Farmer (2001) Forrest J Ackerman / George H. Scithers (2002) Lloyd Alexander / Donald M. Grant (2003) Stephen King / Gahan Wilson (2004) Tom Doherty / Carol Emshwiller (2005) John Crowley / Stephen Fabian (2006) Betty Ballantine / Diana Wynne Jones (2007) Leo and Diane Dillon / Patricia A. McKillip (2008) Ellen Asher / Jane Yolen (2009) Brian Lumley / Terry Pratchett / Peter Straub (2010) Peter S. Beagle / Angélica Gorodischer (2011) Alan Garner / George R. R. Martin (2012) Susan Cooper / Tanith Lee (2013) Ellen Datlow / Chelsea Quinn Yarbro (2014) Ramsey Campbell / Sheri S. Tepper (2015) David G. Hartwell / Andrzej Sapkowski (2016) Terry Brooks / Marina Warner (2017) Charles de Lint / Elizabeth Wollheim (2018) Hayao Miyazaki / Jack Zipes (2019) Karen Joy Fowler / Rowena Morrill (2020) Megan Lindholm / Howard Waldrop (2021) Samuel R. Delany / Terri Windling (2022) Peter Crowther / John Douglas (2023) Ginjer Buchanan / Jo Fletcher (2024) Juliet Marillier / Michael Whelan (2025) v t e Laureates of the Miguel de Cervantes Prize 1976: Jorge Guillén 1977: Alejo Carpentier 1978: Dámaso Alonso 1979: Jorge Luis Borges / Gerardo Diego 1980: Juan Carlos Onetti 1981: Octavio Paz 1982: Luis Rosales 1983: Rafael Alberti 1984: Ernesto Sabato 1985: Gonzalo Torrente Ballester 1986: Antonio Buero Vallejo 1987: Carlos Fuentes 1988: María Zambrano 1989: Augusto Roa Bastos 1990: Adolfo Bioy Casares 1991: Francisco Ayala 1992: Dulce María Loynaz 1993: Miguel Delibes 1994: Mario Vargas Llosa 1995: Camilo José Cela 1996: José García Nieto 1997: Guillermo Cabrera Infante 1998: José Hierro 1999: Jorge Edwards 2000: Francisco Umbral 2001: Álvaro Mutis 2002: José Jiménez Lozano 2003: Gonzalo Rojas 2004: Rafael Sánchez Ferlosio 2005: Sergio Pitol 2006: Antonio Gamoneda 2007: Juan Gelman 2008: Juan Marsé 2009: José Emilio Pacheco 2010: Ana María Matute 2011: Nicanor Parra 2012: José Manuel Caballero Bonald 2013: Elena Poniatowska 2014: Juan Goytisolo 2015: Fernando del Paso 2016: Eduardo Mendoza 2017: Sergio Ramírez 2018: Ida Vitale 2019: Joan Margarit 2020: Francisco Brines 2021: Cristina Peri Rossi 2022: Rafael Cadenas 2023: Luis Mateo Díez 2024: Álvaro Pombo Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists ULAN MusicBrainz Museum of Modern Art FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM ELMCIP Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐24lbp
Cached time: 20250817043926
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.940 seconds
Real time usage: 2.232 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11789/1000000
Revision size: 122398/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 293200/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14637/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 478541/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.248/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21964303/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1919.047      1 -total
 30.34%  582.226      2 Template:Reflist
 18.89%  362.469     60 Template:Cite_book
 10.19%  195.473      1 Template:Infobox_writer
  9.96%  191.115      1 Template:Infobox
  8.18%  156.888     26 Template:Cite_web
  7.28%  139.768      1 Template:IPA
  5.49%  105.279      3 Template:Br_separated_entries
  5.46%  104.714     18 Template:Sfn
  4.51%   86.520      1 Template:Birth_date Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15781:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043926 and revision id 1306214607. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jorge_Luis_Borges&oldid=1306214607 " Categories : Jorge Luis Borges 1899 births 1986 deaths 20th-century Argentine male writers 20th-century Argentine philosophers 20th-century Argentine poets 20th-century Argentine screenwriters 20th-century Argentine short story writers 20th-century Argentine essayists 20th-century mystics 20th-century non-fiction writers 20th-century Argentine translators Anthologists Anti-Peronism Aphorists Argentine agnostics Argentine anti-communists Argentine anti-fascists Argentine blind poets Argentine emigrants to Switzerland Argentine folklorists Argentine librarians Argentine literary critics Argentine male poets Argentine male screenwriters Argentine male short story writers Argentine non-fiction writers Argentine people of British descent Argentine people of English descent Argentine people of Portuguese descent Argentine people of Spanish descent Argentine people of Uruguayan descent Argentine science fiction writers Argentine speculative fiction writers Argentine writers in French Blind writers Burials at Cimetière des Rois Commanders Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Deaths from liver cancer in Switzerland Edgar Award winners English–Spanish translators Argentine fantasy writers French–Spanish translators Germanophilia German–Spanish translators Go (game) writers Haiku poets Honorary Knights Commander of the Order of the British Empire Hyperreality theorists Individualist anarchists Jerusalem Prize recipients Argentine lecturers Literacy and society theorists Literary theorists Magic realism writers Argentine male essayists Metaphor theorists Metaphysics writers Philosophers of art Philosophers of culture Philosophers of identity Philosophers of literature Philosophers of mathematics Philosophers of mind Philosophers of time Postmodern writers Premio Cervantes winners Recipients of the Legion of Honour Scholars and academics with disabilities Sonneteers Spanish-language poets Surrealist writers Swiss blind people Translators from Old English Translators from Old Norse Translators of Edgar Allan Poe Translators of Franz Kafka Translators of James Joyce Translators to Spanish Trope theorists Weird fiction writers National Book Critics Circle Award winners World Fantasy Award–winning writers Writers from Buenos Aires Writers of pessimistic fiction Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles with Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from February 2021 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages with Spanish IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Open Library links CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 15:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jorge Luis Borges 144 languages Add topic

