Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mathematics 2 Astronomy 3 Geography 4 Meteorology 5 Notable publications 6 Honours 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Johannes Werner 16 languages العربية বাংলা Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى 日本語 Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mathematician Johannes Werner Johann(es) Werner ( Latin : Ioannes Vernerus ; February 14, 1468 – May 1522) was a German mathematician . He was born in Nuremberg , Germany , where he became a parish priest .  His primary work was in astronomy , mathematics , and geography , although he was also considered a skilled instrument maker .

[ 1 ] Mathematics [ edit ] His mathematical works were in the areas of spherical trigonometry , as well as conic sections .  He published an original work on conic sections in 1522 and is one of several mathematicians sometimes credited with the invention of prosthaphaeresis , which simplifies tedious computations by the use of trigonometric formulas, sometimes called Werner's formulas.

[ 2 ] Astronomy [ edit ] In 1500 he observed a comet , and kept observations of its movements from June 1 until the 24th.

[ 1 ] This work further developed the suggestion of Regiomontanus that the occurrences of eclipses and cometary orbits could be used to find longitude , giving a practical approach for this method by means of the cross-staff.

[ 1 ] (The approach did not actually solve the problem as the instrument was not sufficiently accurate.) His trepidations method to describe precession of the equinoxes De motu octauæ Sphær was posthumously challenged in 1524 by Nicolaus Copernicus in The Letter against Werner .

[ 3 ] Geography [ edit ] He is most noted for his work, In Hoc Opere Haec Continentur Nova Translatio Primi Libri Geographicae Cl Ptolomaei , published in Nuremberg in 1514, a translation of Claudius Ptolemy 's Geography . In it, he refined and promoted the Werner map projection , a cordiform (heart-shape) projection map that had been developed by Johannes Stabius (Stab) of Vienna around 1500. This projection would be used for world maps and some continental maps through the 16th century and into the 17th century. It was used by Mercator , Oronce Fine , and Ortelius in the late 16th century for maps of Asia and Africa . By the 18th century, it was replaced by the Bonne projection for continental maps. The Werner projection is only used today for instructional purposes and as a novelty.

In this work, Werner also proposed an astronomical method to determine longitude , by measuring the position of the moon relative to the background stars.  The idea was later discussed in detail by Petrus Apianus in his Cosmographicus liber (Landshut 1524) and became known as the lunar distance method .

Meteorology [ edit ] Many consider Werner as a pioneer of modern meteorology and weather forecasting.
Between 1513 and 1520, Johann Werner made the first regular observations of the weather conditions in Germany.

Notable publications [ edit ] In hoc opere haec continentur Nova translatio primi libri geographiae Cl. Ptolomaei: quae quidem translatio verbum: habet e verbo fideliter expressum. Libellus de quattuor terrarum orbis in plano figurationibus.: In idem Georgii Amirucii opusculaum. Appendices , Nürnberg 1514 In hoc opere haec continentur. Libellvs Ioannis Verneri Nvrembergen. Svper Vigintidvobvs Elementis Conicis. Comentarius seu paraphrastica enarratio in vndecim modos conficiendi eius Problematis quod Cubi duplicatio dicitur. Eivsdem. Comentatio in Dionysodori problema, quo data sphæra plano sub data secat ratione, Alivs modus idem problema coficiendi ab eodem Ioanne Vernero nouissime copertus demostratusq; de motu octauæ Sphæræ, Tractatus duo. Summaria enarratio Theoricæ motus octau Sphæræ.

, Nürnberg, Petrejus 1522 De Triangulis sphaericis libri quatuor; De meteoroscopiis libri sex , Leibzig, B.G. Teubner 1907 [written early 16th century].

Canones sicut breuissimi, ita etiam doctissimi, complectentes praecepta & obseruationes de mutatione aurae , 1546 Compendiosa institvtio in vniversam dialecticam, ex Aristot., Riuio, aliisque auctoribus recentioribus collecta, nuperrime scholiis philosophicis illustrata Honours [ edit ] Werner Crater on the moon The crater Werner on the Moon is named after him.

Some of the trigonometric identities used in prosthaphaeresis , an early method for rapid computation of products, were named Werner formulas in honor of Werner's role in development of the algorithm .

See also [ edit ] History of longitude Werner projection Bonne projection References [ edit ] ^ a b c O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F.

"Werner biography" .

www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2025-06-02 .

^ Howard Eves, An Introduction to the History of Mathematics , Sixth Edition, p. 309, Thompson, 1990, ISBN 978-0-03-029558-4 .

^ Edward Rosen , Three Copernican Treatises: The Commentariolus of Copernicus, The Letter against Werner , The Narratio Prima of Rheticus , Columbia University Press, 1939 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Johannes Werner .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Poland Vatican Israel Finland Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johannes_Werner&oldid=1293626542 " Categories : 1468 births 1528 deaths Scientists from Nuremberg German cartographers Medieval German mathematicians 15th-century German astronomers German scientific instrument makers 16th-century German mathematicians 16th-century German astronomers 16th-century cartographers 16th-century geographers 16th-century writers in Latin 16th-century German writers 16th-century German male writers 15th-century German mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 20:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Johannes Werner 16 languages Add topic

