Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Pre-Islamic poetry 1.1.1 Poets 1.1.2 Prose 1.2 The Qur'an 1.3 Rashidi 1.4 Umayyad 1.5 Abbasid 1.6 Andalusi 1.7 Maghrebi 1.8 Mamluk 1.9 Ottoman 1.10 Nahda 1.10.1 Poetry 1.10.2 Prose 1.11 Modern literature 1.11.1 Poetry 1.11.2 Novels 1.11.3 Plays 2 Classical Arabic literature Toggle Classical Arabic literature subsection 2.1 Poetry 2.2 Religious scholarship 2.3 Culinary 2.4 Non-fiction literature 2.4.1 Compilations and manuals 2.4.2 Biography, history, and geography 2.4.3 Diaries 2.4.4 Literary theory and criticism 2.5 Fiction literature 2.5.1 Epic literature 2.5.2 Maqama 2.5.3 Love literature 2.5.4 Murder mystery 2.5.5 Satire and comedy 2.5.6 Theatre 2.5.7 Philosophical novels 2.5.8 Science fiction 2.5.9 Arabic literature for young readers and children 3 Women in Arabic literature Toggle Women in Arabic literature subsection 3.1 The Medieval Period 3.2 Al-Nahda 3.3 Late 20th century to early 21st century 3.4 Contemporary Arabic literature by women writers 4 Literary criticism 5 Outside views of Arabic literature 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Arabic literature 62 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Banjar Башҡортса Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Latina Magyar Македонски Malti მარგალური Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் ತುಳು Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia History of literature by era Ancient ( corpora ) Bronze Age Ancient Egyptian Akkadian Elamite Hattic Hittite Hurro-Urartian Luwian Lydian Sumerian Ugarit Classical Ancient Greek Ancient Hebrew Ancient Prakrit Aramaic Classical Chinese Classical Latin Parthian Phrygian Old Persian Old Tamil Sanskrit Syriac Early medieval Arabic Armenian Bactrian Byzantine Greek Coptic Gandhari Prakrit Geʽez Georgian Japanese Kannada Korean Maharashtri Prakrit Pre-Proto-Mongolic Old Church Slavonic Old English Old German Old Khmer Old Malay Old Turkic Norse Pali Sabaic Saka Sogdian Tibetan Tocharian Welsh Irish Medieval by century 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th Early modern by century 15th 16th 17th Modern by century 18th 19th Contemporary by century 20th 21st Literature portal v t e Medieval and Renaissance literature Early medieval Matter of Rome Matter of France Matter of Britain Byzantine Medieval Hebrew Persian Arabic By century 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th European Renaissance 15th century Literature portal v t e Arabic literature ( Arabic : الأدب العربي / ALA-LC : al-Adab al-‘Arabī ) is the writing, both as prose and poetry , produced by writers in the Arabic language . The Arabic word used for literature is Adab , which comes from a meaning of etiquette , and which implies politeness, culture and enrichment.

[ 1 ] Arabic literature, primarily transmitted orally, began to be documented in written form in the 7th century, with only fragments of written Arabic appearing before then.

The Qur'an [ 2 ] would have the greatest lasting effect on Arab culture and its literature. Arabic literature flourished during the Islamic Golden Age , but has remained vibrant to the present day, with poets and prose-writers across the Arab world , as well as in the Arab diaspora , achieving increasing success.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Pre-Islamic poetry [ edit ] Main article: Pre-Islamic Arabic poetry Pre-Islamic Arabic poetry is referred to in traditional Arabic literature as al-shiʿr al-Jāhilī , "poetry from the Jahiliyyah ".

[ 4 ] In pre-Islamic Arabia , markets such as Souq Okaz , in addition to Souq Majanna [ ar ] and Souq Dhi al-Majāz [ ar ] , were destinations for caravans from throughout the peninsula.

[ 5 ] At these markets poetry was recited, and the dialect of the Quraysh , the tribe in control of Souq Okaz of Mecca, became predominant.

[ 5 ] Days of the Arabs , tales in both meter and prose , contains the oldest extant Arabic narratives, focusing on battles and raids.

[ 6 ] Poets [ edit ] Portrayal of the Jahili period poet-knight Antarah ibn Shaddad .

Notable poets of the pre-Islamic period were Abu Layla al-Muhalhel and Al-Shanfara .

[ 5 ] There were also the poets of the Mu'allaqat , or "the suspended ones", a group of poems said to have been on display in Mecca .

[ 5 ] These poets are Imru' al-Qais , Tarafah ibn al-‘Abd , 'Abid ibn al-Abras , Harith ibn Hilliza , Amr ibn Kulthum , Zuhayr ibn Abi Sulma , Al-Nabigha al-Dhubiyānī , Antara Ibn Shaddad , al-A'sha al-Akbar , and Labīd ibn Rabī'ah .

[ 5 ] Al-Khansa stood out in her poetry of rithā' or elegy .

[ 5 ] al-Hutay'ah was prominent for his madīh , or " panegyric ", as well as his hijā' [ ar ] , or " invective ".

[ 5 ] Prose [ edit ] As literature was transmitted orally and not written, prose represents little of what has been passed down.

[ 5 ] The main forms were parables ( المَثَل al-mathal ), speeches ( الخطابة al-khitāba ), and stories ( القِصَص al-qisas ).

[ 5 ] Quss Ibn Sa'ida al-Iyadi was a notable Arab ruler, writer, and orator .

[ 5 ] Aktham ibn Sayfi was also one of the most famous rulers of the Arabs, as well as one of their most renowned speech-givers.

[ 5 ] The Qur'an [ edit ] The Qur'an is one of the most influential examples of Arabic literature The Qur'an , the main holy book of Islam , had a significant influence on the Arabic language, and marked the beginning of Islamic literature . Muslims believe it was transcribed in the Arabic dialect of the Quraysh , the tribe of Muhammad .

[ 5 ] [ 7 ] As Islam spread, the Quran had the effect of unifying and standardizing Arabic.

[ 5 ] Not only is the Qur'an the first work of any significant length written in the language but it also has a far more complicated structure than the earlier literary works with its 114 surah (chapters) which contain 6,236 ayat (verses). It contains injunctions , narratives , homilies , parables , direct addresses from God, instructions and even comments on how the Qu'ran will be received and understood. It is also admired for its layers of metaphor as well as its clarity, a feature which is mentioned in An-Nahl , the 16th surah.

The 92 Meccan suras , believed to have been revealed to Muhammad in Mecca before the Hijra , deal primarily with ' usul ad-din Twelver theology , or "the principles of religion", whereas the 22 Medinan suras , believed to have been revealed to him after the Hijra, deal primarily with Sharia and prescriptions of Islamic life.

[ 5 ] The word qur'an comes from the Arabic root qaraʼa (قرأ), meaning "he read" or "he recited"; in early times the text was transmitted orally. The various tablets and scraps on which its suras were written were compiled under Abu Bakr (573-634), and first transcribed in unified masahif , or copies of the Qur'an, under Uthman (576–656).

[ 5 ] Although it contains elements of both prose and poetry, and therefore is closest to Saj or rhymed prose , the Qur'an is regarded as entirely apart from these classifications. The text is believed to be divine revelation and is seen by Muslims as being eternal or 'uncreated'. This leads to the doctrine of i'jaz or inimitability of the Qur'an which implies that nobody can copy the work's style.

Or do they say, “He has fabricated this ˹Quran˺!”? Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Produce ten fabricated sûrahs like it and seek help from whoever you can—other than Allah—if what you say is true!” — 11:13 And if you are in doubt about what We have revealed to Our servant, then produce a sûrah like it and call your helpers other than Allah, if what you say is true.

But if you do not - and you will never be able to - then fear the Fire, whose fuel is people and stones, prepared for the disbelievers.

— 2:23-24 Say, "If mankind and the jinn gathered in order to produce the like of this Qur’ān, they could not produce the like of it, even if they were to each other assistants." — 17:88 This doctrine of i'jaz possibly had a slight limiting effect on Arabic literature; proscribing exactly what could be written. Whilst Islam allows Muslims to write, read and recite poetry, the Qur'an states in the 26th sura ( Ash-Shu'ara or The Poets) that poetry which is blasphemous, obscene, praiseworthy of sinful acts, or attempts to challenge the Qu'ran's content and form, is forbidden for Muslims.

And as to the poets, those who go astray follow them Do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley?
 And that they say that which they do not do Except those who believe and do good works and remember Allah much and defend themselves after they are oppressed; and they who act unjustly shall know to what final place of turning they shall turn back.

— 26:224-227 This may have exerted dominance over the pre-Islamic poets of the 6th century whose popularity may have vied with the Qur'an amongst the people. There was a marked lack of significant poets until the 8th century. One notable exception was Hassan ibn Thabit who wrote poems in praise of Muhammad and was known as the "prophet's poet". Just as the Bible has held an important place in the literature of other languages, The Qur'an is important to Arabic. It is the source of many ideas, allusions and quotes and its moral message informs many works.

Aside from the Qur'an the hadith or tradition of what Muhammed is supposed to have said and done are important literature. The entire body of these acts and words are called sunnah or way and the ones regarded as sahih or genuine of them are collected into hadith. Some of the most significant collections of hadith include those by Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj and Muhammad ibn Isma'il al-Bukhari .

The other important genre of work in Qur'anic study is the tafsir or commentaries Arab writings relating to religion also includes many sermons and devotional pieces as well as the sayings of Ali which were collected in the 10th century as Nahj al-Balaghah or The Peak of Eloquence .

Rashidi [ edit ] Under the Rashidun , or the "rightly guided caliphs," literary centers developed in the Hijaz , in cities such as Mecca and Medina ; in the Levant, in Damascus ; and in Iraq, in Kufa and Basra .

[ 5 ] Literary production—and poetry in particular—in this period served the spread of Islam.

[ 5 ] There was also poetry to praise brave warriors, to inspire soldiers in jihad , and rithā ' to mourn those who fell in battle.

[ 5 ] Notable poets of this rite include Ka'b ibn Zuhayr , Hasan ibn Thabit , Abu Dhu'ayb al-Hudhali [ ar ] , and Nābigha al-Ja‘dī .

[ 5 ] There was also poetry for entertainment often in the form of ghazal .

[ 5 ] Notables of this movement were Jamil ibn Ma'mar , Layla al-Akhyaliyya , and Umar Ibn Abi Rabi'ah .

[ 5 ] Umayyad [ edit ] The First Fitna , which created the Shia–Sunni split over the rightful caliph , had a great impact on Arabic literature.

[ 5 ] Whereas Arabic literature—along with Arab society—was greatly centralized in the time of Muhammad and the Rashidun , it became fractured at the beginning of the period of the Umayyad Caliphate , as power struggles led to tribalism.

[ 5 ] Arabic literature at this time reverted to its state in al-Jahiliyyah , with markets such as Kinasa near Kufa and Mirbad [ ar ] near Basra , where poetry in praise and admonishment of political parties and tribes was recited.

[ 5 ] Poets and scholars found support and patronage under the Umayyads, but the literature of this period was limited in that it served the interests of parties and individuals, and as such was not a free art form.

[ 5 ] Notable writers of this political poetry include Al-Akhtal al-Taghlibi , Jarir ibn Atiyah , Al-Farazdaq , Al-Kumayt ibn Zayd al-Asadi , Tirimmah ibn Hakim [ ar ] , and Ubayd Allah ibn Qays al-Ruqayyat [ ar ] .

[ 5 ] There were also poetic forms of rajaz —mastered by al-Ajjaj [ ar ] and Ru'ba ibn al-Ajjaj [ ar ] —and ar-Rā'uwīyyāt, or " pastoral poetry "—mastered by al-Ra'i al-Numayri [ ar ] and Dhu ar-Rumma .

[ 5 ] Abbasid [ edit ] An illustration of the House of Wisdom by Yahya ibn Mahmud al-Wasiti in a manuscript of the Maqama of Al-Hariri .

The Abbasid period is generally recognized as the beginning of the Islamic Golden Age , and was a time of significant literary production. The House of Wisdom in Baghdad hosted numerous scholars and writers such as Al-Jahiz and Omar Khayyam .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] A number of stories in the One Thousand and One Nights feature the Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid .

[ 10 ] Al-Hariri of Basra was a notable literary figure of this period.

Some of the important poets in Abbasid literature [ ar ] were: Bashshar ibn Burd , Abu Nuwas , Abu-l-'Atahiya , Muslim ibn al-Walid , Abbas Ibn al-Ahnaf , and al-Husayn ibn al-Dahhak [ ar ] .

[ 5 ] Andalusi [ edit ] Main article: Literature of al-Andalus An image from the manuscript of Hadith Bayad wa Riyad (13th century).

Andalusi literature was produced in Al-Andalus , or Islamic Iberia, from its Muslim conquest in 711 to either the Catholic conquest of Granada in 1492 or the Expulsion of the Moors ending in 1614.

Ibn Abd Rabbih's Al-ʿIqd al-Farīd (The Unique Necklace) and Ibn Tufail's Hayy ibn Yaqdhan were influential works of literature from this tradition. Notable literary figures of this period include Ibn Hazm , Ziryab , Ibn Zaydun , Wallada bint al-Mustakfi , Al-Mu'tamid ibn Abbad , Ibn Bajja , Al-Bakri , Ibn Rushd , Hafsa bint al-Hajj al-Rukuniyya , Ibn Tufail , Ibn Arabi , Ibn Quzman , Abu al-Baqa ar-Rundi , and Ibn al-Khatib . The muwashshah and zajal were important literary forms in al-Andalus.

The rise of Arabic literature in al-Andalus occurred in dialogue with the golden age of Jewish culture in Iberia . Most Jewish writers in al-Andalus—while incorporating elements such as rhyme, meter, and themes of classical Arabic poetry—created poetry in Hebrew, but Samuel ibn Naghrillah , Joseph ibn Naghrela , and Ibn Sahl al-Isra'ili wrote poetry in Arabic.

[ 11 ] Maimonides wrote his landmark Dalãlat al-Hā'irīn ( The Guide for the Perplexed ) in Arabic using the Hebrew alphabet .

[ 12 ] Maghrebi [ edit ] Fatima al-Fihri founded al-Qarawiyiin University in Fes in 859, recognised as the first university in the world. Particularly from the beginning of the 12th century, with sponsorship from the Almoravid dynasty , the university played an important role in the development of literature in the region, welcoming scholars and writers from throughout the Maghreb, al-Andalus, and the Mediterranean Basin .

[ 13 ] Among the scholars who studied and taught there were Ibn Khaldoun , al-Bitruji , Ibn Hirzihim ( Sidi Harazim ), Ibn al-Khatib , and Al-Wazzan ( Leo Africanus ) as well as the Jewish theologian Maimonides .

[ 13 ] Sufi literature played an important role in literary and intellectual life in the region from this early period, such as Muhammad al-Jazuli's book of prayers Dala'il al-Khayrat .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The Zaydani Library , the library of the Saadi Sultan Zidan Abu Maali , was stolen by Spanish privateers in the 16th century and kept at the El Escorial Monastery .

[ 16 ] Mamluk [ edit ] During the Mamluk Sultanate , Ibn Abd al-Zahir and Ibn Kathir were notable writers of history.

[ 17 ] Ottoman [ edit ] Significant poets of Arabic literature in the time of the Ottoman Empire included ash-Shab adh-Dharif [ ar ] , Al-Busiri author of " Al-Burda ", Ibn al-Wardi (died 1349), Safi al-Din al-Hilli , and Ibn Nubata .

[ 5 ] Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi wrote on various topics including theology and travel.

Nahda [ edit ] Main article: Nahda Rifa'a at-Tahtawi oversaw an unprecedented translation program in Khedivate Egypt During the 19th century, a revival took place in Arabic literature, along with much of Arabic culture, and is referred to in Arabic as " al-Nahda ", which means "the renaissance".

[ 18 ] There was a strand of neoclassicism in the Nahda, particularly among writers such as Tahtawi , Shidyaq , Yaziji , and Muwaylihi , who believed in the iḥyāʾ "reanimation" of Arabic literary heritage and tradition.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The translation of foreign literature was a major element of the Nahda period. An important translator of the 19th century was Rifa'a al-Tahtawi , who founded the School of Languages (also knowns as School of Translators ) in 1835 in Cairo. In the 20th century, Jabra Ibrahim Jabra , a Palestinian - Iraqi intellectual living mostly in Bagdad, translated works by William Shakespeare , Oscar Wilde , Samuel Beckett or William Faulkner , among many others.

This resurgence of new writing in Arabic was confined mainly to cities in Syria , Egypt and Lebanon until the 20th century, when it spread to other countries in the region. This cultural renaissance was not only felt within the Arab world, but also beyond, with a growing interest in translating of Arabic works into European languages. Although the use of the Arabic language was revived, particularly in poetry, many of the tropes of the previous literature, which served to make it so ornate and complicated, were dropped.

Just as in the 8th century, when a movement to translate ancient Greek and other literature had helped vitalise Arabic literature, another translation movement during this period would offer new ideas and material for Arabic literature. An early popular success was The Count of Monte Cristo , which spurred a host of historical novels on similar Arabic subjects.

Jurji Zaydan and Niqula Haddad were important writers of this genre.

[ 20 ] Poetry [ edit ] May Ziadeh , a Palestinian - Lebanese poet, essayist, translator, and literary salon host.

During the Nahda , poets like Francis Marrash , Ahmad Shawqi and Hafiz Ibrahim began to explore the possibility of developing the classical poetic forms.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Some of these neoclassical poets were acquainted with Western literature but mostly continued to write in classical forms, while others, denouncing blind imitation of classical poetry and its recurring themes, [ 23 ] sought inspiration from French or English romanticism .

The next generation of poets, the so-called Romantic poets, began to absorb the impact of developments in Western poetry to a far greater extent, and felt constrained by Neoclassical traditions which the previous generation had tried to uphold. The Mahjari poets were emigrants who mostly wrote in the Americas, but were similarly beginning to experiment further with the possibilities of Arabic poetry. This experimentation continued in the Middle East throughout the first half of the 20th century.

[ 24 ] Prominent poets of the Nahda , or "Renaissance," were Nasif al-Yaziji ; [ 5 ] Mahmoud Sami el-Baroudi , Ḥifnī Nāṣif [ ar ] , Ismāʻīl Ṣabrī [ ar ] , and Hafez Ibrahim ; [ 5 ] Ahmed Shawqi ; [ 5 ] Jamil Sidqi al-Zahawi , Maruf al Rusafi , Fawzi al-Ma'luf [ ar ] , and Khalil Mutran .

[ 5 ] Prose [ edit ] Rifa'a at-Tahtawi , who lived in Paris from 1826 to 1831, wrote A Paris Profile [ ar ] about his experiences and observations and published it in 1834.

[ 25 ] Butrus al-Bustani founded the journal Al-Jinan in 1870 and started writing the first encyclopedia in Arabic: Da'irat ul-Ma'arif in 1875.

[ 5 ] Ahmad Faris al-Shidyaq published a number of influential books and was the editor-in-chief of ar-Ra'id at-Tunisi [ ar ] in Tunis and founder of Al-Jawa'ib [ ar ] in Istanbul .

[ 5 ] Adib Ishaq spent his career in journalism and theater, working for the expansion of the press and the rights of the people.

[ 5 ] Jamāl ad-Dīn al-Afghānī and Muhammad Abduh founded the revolutionary anti-colonial pan-Islamic journal Al-Urwah al-Wuthqa , [ 5 ] Abd al-Rahman al-Kawakibi , Qasim Amin , and Mustafa Kamil were reformers who influenced public opinion with their writing.

[ 5 ] Saad Zaghloul was a revolutionary leader and a renowned orator appreciated for his eloquence and reason.

[ 5 ] Ibrahim al-Yaziji founded the newspaper an-Najah ( النجاح "Achievement") in 1872, the magazine At-Tabib , the magazine Al-Bayan , and the magazine Ad-Diya and translated the Bible into Arabic.

[ 5 ] Walī ad-Dīn Yakan [ ar ] launched a newspaper called al-Istiqama ( الاستقامة , " Righteousness") to challenge Ottoman authorities and push for social reforms, but they shut it down in the same year.

[ 5 ] Mustafa Lutfi al-Manfaluti , who studied under Muhammad Abduh at Al-Azhar University , was a prolific essayist and published many articles encouraging the people to reawaken and liberate themselves.

[ 5 ] Suleyman al-Boustani translated the Iliad into Arabic and commented on it.

[ 5 ] Khalil Gibran and Ameen Rihani were two major figures of the Mahjar movement within the Nahda.

[ 5 ] Jurji Zaydan founded Al-Hilal magazine in 1892, Yacoub Sarrouf founded Al-Muqtataf in 1876, Louis Cheikho founded the journal Al-Machriq in 1898.

[ 5 ] Other notable figures of the Nahda were Mostafa Saadeq Al-Rafe'ie and May Ziadeh .

[ 5 ] Muhammad al-Kattani , founder of one of the first arabophone newspapers in Morocco, called At-Tā'ūn , and author of several poetry collections, was a leader of the Nahda in the Maghreb.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Modern literature [ edit ] Main article: Modern Arabic literature Taha Hussein , referred to as the "Dean of Arabic Literature" ( Arabic : عميد الأدب العربي).

Beginning in the late 19th century, the Arabic novel became one of the most important forms of expression in Arabic literature.

[ 28 ] The rise of an efendiyya , an elite, secularist urban class with a Western education, gave way to new forms of literary expression: modern Arabic fiction.

[ 20 ] This new bourgeois class of literati used theater from the 1850s, starting in Lebanon, and the private press from the 1860s and 1870s to spread its ideas, challenge traditionalists, and establish its position in a rapidly transforming society.

[ 20 ] The modern Arabic novel, particularly as a means of social critique and reform, has its roots in a deliberate departure from the traditionalist language and aesthetics of classical adab for "less embellished but more entertaining narratives." [ 20 ] This direction began with translations from French and English, followed by  social romances by Salīm al-Bustānī [ ar ] and other writers—particularly Christians.

[ 20 ] Khalil al-Khuri's narrative Way, Idhan Lastu bi-Ifranjī!

(1859–1860) was an early example.

[ 20 ] The emotionalism of early 20th century writers such as Mustafa Lutfi al-Manfaluti and Kahlil Gibran , who wrote with heavy moralism and sentimentality , equated the novel as a literary form with imported Western ideas and "shallow sentimentalism." [ 20 ] Writers such as Muhammad Taimur [ ar ] of Al-Madrasa al-Ḥadītha "the Modern School," calling for an adab qawmī " national literature," largely avoided the novel and experimented with short stories instead.

[ 20 ] [ 29 ] Mohammed Hussein Heikal's 1913 novel Zaynab was a compromise, as it included heavy sentimentality but portrayed local personality and characters.

[ 20 ] Throughout the 20th century, Arabic writers in poetry, prose and theatre plays have reflected the changing political and social climate of the Arab world.

Anti-colonial themes were prominent early in the 20th century, with writers continuing to explore the region's relationship with the West. Internal political upheaval has also been a challenge, with writers suffering censorship or persecution.

The interwar period featured writers such as Taha Hussein , author of Al-Ayyām , Ibrahim al-Mazini , Abbas Mahmoud al-Aqqad , and Tawfiq al-Hakim .

[ 20 ] The acceptance of suffering in al-Hakim's 1934 Awdat ar-rūḥ [ ar ] , is exemplary of the disappointment that prevailed over the idealism of the new middle class.

[ 20 ] As a result of increasing industrialization and urbanization , binary struggles such as the "materialism of the West" against the "spiritualism of the East," "progressive individuals and a backward, ignorant society," and "a city-versus-countryside divide" were common themes in the literature of this period and since.

[ 20 ] There are many contemporary Arabic writers, such as Mahmoud Saeed (Iraq) who wrote Bin Barka Ally , and I Am The One Who Saw (Saddam City) . Other contemporary writers include Sonallah Ibrahim and Abdul Rahman Munif , who were imprisoned by the government for their critical opinions. At the same time, others who had written works supporting or praising governments, were promoted to positions of authority within cultural bodies.

Nonfiction writers and academics have also produced political polemics and criticisms aiming to re-shape Arabic politics. Some of the best known are Taha Hussein 's The Future of Culture in Egypt , which was an important work of Egyptian nationalism , and the works of Nawal el-Saadawi , who campaigned for women's rights . Tayeb Salih from Sudan and Ghassan Kanafani from Palestine are two other writers who explored identity in relationship to foreign and domestic powers, the former writing about colonial/post-colonial relationships, and the latter on the repercussions of the Palestinian struggle.

Poetry [ edit ] Main article: Modern Arabic poetry Mention no longer the driver on his night journey and the wide striding camels, and give up talk of morning dew and ruins.

I no longer have any taste for love songs on dwellings which already went down in seas of [too many] odes.

So, too, the ghada , whose fire, fanned by the sighs of those enamored of it, cries out to the poets: "Alas for my burning!" If a steamer leaves with my friends on sea or land, why should I direct my complaints to the camels?

—Excerpt from Francis Marrash 's Mashhad al-ahwal (1870), translated by Shmuel Moreh .

[ 23 ] After World War II , there was a largely unsuccessful movement by several poets to write poems in free verse ( shi'r hurr ). Iraqi poets Badr Shakir al-Sayyab and Nazik Al-Malaika (1923–2007) are considered to be the originators of free verse in Arabic poetry. Most of these experiments were abandoned in favour of prose poetry , of which the first examples in modern Arabic literature are to be found in the writings of Francis Marrash , [ 30 ] and of which two of the most influential proponents were Nazik al-Malaika and Iman Mersal . The development of modernist poetry also influenced poetry in Arabic. More recently, poets such as Adunis have pushed the boundaries of stylistic experimentation even further.

Aziz Pasha Abaza , poet from the aristocratic literary Egyptian family the House of Abaza of Circassian Abazin origin An example of modern poetry in classical Arabic style with themes of Pan-Arabism is the work of Aziz Pasha Abaza . He came from Abaza family which produced notable Arabic literary figures including Ismail Pasha Abaza, Fekry Pasha Abaza , novelist Tharwat Abaza , Ismail Pasha Abaza and Desouky Pasha Abaza, among others.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Poetry retains a very important status in the Arab world.

Mahmoud Darwish was regarded as the Palestinian national poet, and his funeral was attended by thousands of mourners. Syrian poet Nizar Qabbani addressed less political themes, but was regarded as a cultural icon, and his poems provide the lyrics for many popular songs.

Novels [ edit ] Two distinct trends can be found in the nahda period of revival. The first was a neo-classical movement which sought to rediscover the literary traditions of the past, and was influenced by traditional literary genres—such as the maqama —and works like One Thousand and One Nights . In contrast, a modernist movement began by translating Western modernist works—primarily novels—into Arabic.

In the 19th century, individual authors in Syria , Lebanon and Egypt created original works by imitating classical narrative genres: Ahmad Faris Shidyaq with Leg upon Leg (1855), Khalil Khoury with Yes... so I am not a Frank (1859), Francis Marrash with The Forest of Truth (1865), Salim al-Bustani with At a Loss in the Levantine Gardens (1870), and Muhammad al-Muwaylihi with Isa ibn Hisham's Tale (1907).

[ 33 ] This trend was furthered by Jurji Zaydan (author of many historical novels), Khalil Gibran , Mikha'il Na'ima and Muhammad Husayn Haykal (author of Zaynab ). Meanwhile, female writer Zaynab Fawwaz 's first novel Ḥusn al-'Awāqib aw Ghādah al-Zāhirah ( The Happy Ending , 1899) was also influential.

[ 34 ] According to the authors of the Encyclopedia of the Novel : Almost each of the above [works] have been claimed as the first Arabic novel, which goes to suggest that the Arabic novel emerged from several rehearsals and multiple beginnings rather than from one single origin. Given that the very Arabic word " riwaya ", which is now used exclusively in reference to the "novel", has traditionally conjured up a tangle of narrative genres [...], it might not be unfair to contend that the Arabic novel owes its early formation not only to the appropriation of the novel genre from Europe [...] but also, and more importantly, to the revival and transformation of traditional narrative genres in the wake of Napoleon 's 1798 expedition into Egypt and the Arab world's firsthand encounter with industrialized imperial Europe.

[ 33 ] A common theme in the modern Arabic novel is the study of family life with obvious resonances of the wider family of the Arabic world.

[ according to whom?

] Many of the novels have been unable to avoid the politics and conflicts of the region with war often acting as background to intimate family dramas. The works of Naguib Mahfuz depict life in Cairo , and his Cairo Trilogy , describing the struggles of a modern Cairene family across three generations, won him a Nobel prize for literature in 1988. He was the first Arabic writer to win the prize.

Plays [ edit ] The musical plays of Lebanese Maroun Naccache from the mid-1800s are considered the birth of not only theatre in Lebanon , but also modern Arab theatre.

[ 35 ] Modern Arabic drama began to be written in the 19th century chiefly in Egypt and mainly influenced and in imitation of French works. It was not until the 20th century that it began to develop a distinctly Arab flavour and be seen elsewhere. The most important Arab playwright was Tawfiq al-Hakim whose first play was a re-telling of the Qur'anic story of the Seven Sleepers and the second an epilogue for the Thousand and One Nights . Other important dramatists of the region include Yusuf al-Ani from Iraq and Saadallah Wannous from Syria .

Classical Arabic literature [ edit ] Poetry [ edit ] Main article: Arabic poetry Part of a series on Arabic culture Architecture Styles Islamic Yemeni Nabataean Umayyad Abbasid Fatimid Moorish Mamluk Features Ablaq Alfiz Arabesque Arabic dome Banna'i Gardens Girih Horseshoe arch Howz Hypostyle Islamic calligraphy Islamic geometric patterns Islamic ornament Iwan Liwan Mashrabiya Riad Mosaic Multifoil arch Muqarnas Nagash painting Qadad Reflecting pool Riwaq Sahn Socarrat Stucco decoration Tadelakt Vaulting Voussoir Windcatcher Zellij Types Albarrana tower Alcázar Bazaar Caravanserai Bimaristan Hammam Kasbah Madrasa Maqam Mazar Mosque Medina quarter Qalat Ribat Sabil Shadirvan Tekyeh Well house Zawiya Art Styles Ancient South Arabian art Nabataean art Islamic art Fatimid art Mamluk art Types Arabic calligraphy Arabic graffiti Arab carpet Arabic miniature Arabic pottery Palestinian wood carving Islamic embroidery Islamic hardstone carving Islamic garden Islamic glass Islamic ivory carving Islamic Metalwork Features Arabesque Arabic geometric patterns Banna'i Damascus steel Damask Girih tiles Hedwig glass Kiswah Muqarnas Pseudo-Arabic Zellij Cuisine Khalij (Arabian Peninsula) Arab Mashriq (Levant) Mashriq (Mesopotamia) Mawset (Egypt) Mawset (Sudan) Arab Maghreb (North Africa) Dress Headwear Agal Battoulah Haik Keffiyeh Litham Madhalla Sidara Taqiyah Tantour Tarboush (fez) Turban Clothing Abaya Bisht Burnous Djellaba Durra'ah Fouta towel Izaar Jellabiya Kaftan Macawis Robe of honour Sirwal Takchita Thawb Tiraz Music Theory Arabic maqam Arab tone system Algerian scale Jins Lazma Quarter tone Rhythm in Arabic music Tarab Teslim Arabic musical instruments Great Book of Music Kitab al-Aghani Genres Arabic pop Arabic hip hop Arabic rock Arabic jazz Classical Arab music Opera Al Jeel Khaliji Raï Art music Andalusian classical music Andalusi nubah Bashraf Dawr Dulab Layali Malhun Iraqi maqam Mawwal Muwashshah Qasidah Qudud Halabiya Sama'i Tahmilah Taqsim Waslah Folk Ataaba Algerian Raï Bedouin Chaabi (Algeria) Chaabi (Morocco) Egyptian folk Fann at-Tanbura Fijiri Gnawa (North Africa) Liwa Mawwal Mezwed Samri Sawt Shaabi Zajal Dance Ardah Belly dance Dabke Deheyeh Guedra Hagallah Khaleegy Liwa Mizmar Ouled Nail Raqs Sharqi Samri Shamadan Schikhatt Tahtib Tanoura Yowlah Zār Scripts Old Arabic Nabataean Arabic Paleo-Arabic Classical Arabic Modern Standard Arabic Literature Prose Epic literature Saj (ryhmed prose) Maqama Love in Arabic literature Arabic erotic literature Arabic grimoires Literary_criticism Arabic short story Tabaqat Tezkire Rihla Mirrors for princes Islamic Quran Tafsir Hadith Sīra Fiqh Aqidah Poetry Anthologies Poets Pre-Islamic Arabic poetry Modern Arabic poetry Genres Madih Hija Rithā' Waṣf Ghazal Khamriyyah Tardiyyah Khawal Fakhr Hamasah Forms Diwan Qasida Muwashshah Urjūza Mathnawi Ruba'i Nasīb Riddles Kharja Zajal Mawwal Nabati Ghinnawa Humayni Arabic prosody Bayt Ṭawīl Madīd Basīṭ Kamil Wāfir Hazaj Rajaz Ramal Munsariħ Khafīf Muqtaḍab Mujtathth Muḍāriʿ Sarīʿ Mutaqārib Mutadārik National literatures of Arab States Algeria Bahrain Comoros Djibouti Egypt Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco Oman Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Somalia Sudan Syria Tunisia U.A.E.

Yemen Science Arabic chemistry Arabic astrology Arabic astronomy Arabic geography Arabic Golden Age Arabic mathematics Arabic medicine Arabic psychology Arabic technology Philosophy Early Arabic Philosophy Islamic Aristotelianism Islamic  Platonism Islamic Logic Kalam Sufi metaphysics Sufi philosophy Farabism Avicennism Averroism Concepts Al-aql al-faal Aql bi-l-fi'l Al-Insān al-Kāmil Dhati Peace Arcs of Descent and Ascent Asabiyyah Hal Irfan Nafs Qadar Qalb Texts Liber de Causis The Theology of Aristotle Al-isharat The Book of the Apple Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity The Incoherence of the Philosophers The Incoherence of the Incoherence Hayy ibn Yaqdhan Theologus Autodidactus On the Harmony of Religions and Philosophy Muqaddimah Sicilian Questions Fusus al-Hikam Mythology Ababil Atlantis of the Sands Bahamut Beast of the Earth Book of Idols Book of Wonders Buraq Dandan Falak Ghoul Hinn Houri Ifrit Iram of the Pillars Jinn Karkadann Kujata Luqman Magic carpet Marid Mount Qaf Nasnas One Thousand and One Nights Qareen Qutrub Roc Shaddad Shadhavar Shams al-Ma'arif She-Camel of God Wāḳwāḳ Zulfiqar Zarqa al Yamama Fictional Arab people Aladdin Abdul Alhazred Ali Baba Altaïr Ibn-La'Ahad Battal Gazi Hayy ibn Yaqdhan Kara Ben Nemsi King Marsile Layla and Majnun Othello Palamedes Princess Jasmine Ra's al Ghul Sindbad Talia al Ghul Spirituality North Arabian deities Allah Al-‘Uzzá Al-Lat Manāt Dushara Chaabou Manaf Nuha Al-Kutbay Asira Awal Azizos Bajir Quzah Manāt Manāt A'ra Abgal Aglibol Al-Qaum Atarsamain Baalshamin Bēl Hubal Suwa' Theandrios Wadd Malakbel Orotalt Ruda Sa'd Yarhibol Isāf and Nā'ila South Arabian  deities Almaqah Amm Anbay Athtar Dhat-Badan Haubas Ta'lab Qaynan Basamum Dhul Khalasa Haukim Nasr Sīn Ya'uq Yaghūth Yatha v t e A large proportion of Arabic literature before the 20th century is in the form of poetry, and even prose from this period is either filled with snippets of poetry or is in the form of saj' or rhymed prose. The themes of the poetry range from high-flown hymns of praise to bitter personal attacks and from religious and mystical ideas to poems on women and wine. An important feature of the poetry which would be applied to all of the literature was the idea that it must be pleasing to the ear. The poetry and much of the prose was written with the design that it would be spoken aloud and great care was taken to make all writing as mellifluous as possible.

Religious scholarship [ edit ] The research into the life and times of Muhammad , and determining the genuine parts of the sunnah , was an important early reason for scholarship in or about the Arabic language. It was also the reason for the collecting of pre-Islamic poetry; as some of these poets were close to the prophet— Labid meeting Muhammad and converting to Islam—and their writings illuminated the times when these events occurred. Muhammad also inspired the first Arabic biographies , known as A l-Sirah Al-Nabawiyyah ; the earliest was by Wahb ibn Munabbih , but Muhammad ibn Ishaq wrote the best known. Whilst covering the life of the prophet they also told of the battles and events of early Islam and have numerous digressions on older biblical traditions.

Some of the earliest works studying the Arabic language were started in the name of Islam. Tradition has it that the caliph Ali , after reading a copy of the Qur'an with errors in it, asked Abu al-Aswad al-Du'ali to write a work codifying Arabic grammar .

Khalil ibn Ahmad would later write Kitab al-Ayn , the first dictionary of Arabic, along with works on prosody and music , and his pupil Sibawayh would produce the most respected work of Arabic grammar known simply as al-Kitab or The Book .

Other caliphs followed after 'Abd al-Malik made Arabic the official language for the administration of the new empire, such as al-Ma'mun who set up the Bayt al-Hikma in Baghdad for research and translations.

Basrah and Kufah were two other important seats of learning in the early Arab world, between which there was a strong rivalry.

The institutions set up mainly to investigate more fully the Islamic religion were invaluable in studying many other subjects. Caliph Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik was instrumental in enriching the literature by instructing scholars to translate works into Arabic. The first was probably Aristotle 's correspondence with Alexander the Great translated by Salm Abu al-'Ala'. From the east, and in a very different literary genre, the scholar Abdullah Ibn al-Muqaffa translated the animal fables of the Panchatantra . These translations would keep alive scholarship and learning, particularly that of ancient Greece , during the Dark Ages in Europe and the works would often be first re-introduced to Europe from the Arabic versions.

Culinary [ edit ] Further information: Arab cuisine More medieval cookbooks have survived into the present day written in Arabic than in any other language. Classical Arabic culinary literature is comprised not only of cookbooks, there are also many works of scholarship, and descriptions of contemporary foods can be found in fictional and legendary tales like The Thousand and One Nights .

[ 36 ] Some of these texts predate Ibn Sayyar al-Warraq 's Kitab al-Tabikh , the earliest known book of medieval Arabic cuisine. The Persian language Ḵusraw ī Kawādān ud rēdak-ēw , translated into Arabic after the conquest of the Sasanian Empire by Arab armies in the 7th century, was a guide to the sophisticated culinary and court culture of the time, written as a fictionalized narrative about an orphan descended from priestly roots who learns the ways of Khosrow I 's court.

[ 37 ] Early authors appear to have been familiar with the earlier works of Hippocrates , Rufus of Ephesus and Galen of Pergamum . Galen's On the Properties of Foodstuffs was translated into Arabic as Kitab al-aghdiya and was cited by all contemporary medical writers in the Caliphate during the reign of Abu Bakr al-Razi . Al-Razi was himself the author of an early text on food Manafi al-Aghdhiya wa Daf Madarriha (Book of the Benefits of Food, and Remedies against Its Harmful Effects). Interest in Galen's work was not limited only to Muslim scholars; Jewish scholar Abu Ya'qub Ishaḳ ibn Sulayman al-Isra'ili wrote Book on Foods (also in Arabic) in the same period. Rufus' original Greek language work has not survived into the present day, and it is only known to us from its Arabic translation.

[ 36 ] Non-fiction literature [ edit ] Compilations and manuals [ edit ] In the late 9th century Ibn al-Nadim , a Baghdadi bookseller, compiled a crucial work in the study of Arabic literature. The Kitab al-Fihrist is a catalogue of all books available for sale in Baghdad, and it gives an overview of the state of the literature at that time. Considering the growing importance of literature, in the following centeries such compilations of authors and their works would become a tradition, an important work in the 17th century being Tadhkar al-Jami lil-Athar by Husayn ibn Muhammad al- Abbasi al-Nabhani al-Halabi which contains the names of some 24,000 writers.

[ 38 ] One of the most common forms of literature during the Abbasid period was the compilation. These were collections of facts, ideas, instructive stories and poems on a single topic, and covers subjects as diverse as house and garden, women, gate-crashers, blind people, envy, animals and misers. These last three compilations were written by al-Jahiz , the acknowledged master of the form. These collections were important for any nadim , a companion to a ruler or noble whose role was often involved regaling the ruler with stories and information to entertain or advise.

A type of work closely allied to the collection was the manual in which writers like ibn Qutaybah offered instruction in subjects like etiquette, how to rule, how to be a bureaucrat and even how to write. Ibn Qutaybah also wrote one of the earliest histories of the Arabs, drawing together biblical stories, Arabic folk tales and more historical events.

The subject of sex was frequently investigated in Arabic literature. The ghazal or love poem had a long history, being at times tender and chaste and at other times rather explicit. In the Sufi tradition, the love poem would take on wider, mystical and religious importance. Sex manuals were also written such as The Perfumed Garden , Ṭawq al-Ḥamāmah or The Dove's Neckring by ibn Hazm and Nuzhat al-albab fi-ma la yujad fi kitab or Delight of Hearts Concerning What will Never Be Found in a Book by Ahmad al-Tifashi . Countering such works are one like Rawdat al-muhibbin wa-nuzhat al-mushtaqin or Meadow of Lovers and Diversion of the Infatuated by ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah who advises on how to separate love and lust and avoid sin.

Biography, history, and geography [ edit ] Further information: Sīrah and Biographical dictionary Aside from the early biographies of Muhammad, the first major biographer to weigh character rather than just producing a hymn of praise was al-Baladhuri with his Kitab ansab al-ashraf or Book of the Genealogies of the Noble , a collection of biographies. Another important biographical dictionary was begun by ibn Khallikan and expanded by al-Safadi and one of the first significant autobiographies was Kitab al-I'tibar which told of Usamah ibn Munqidh and his experiences in fighting in the Crusades . This time period saw the emergence of the genre of tabaqat (biographical dictionaries or biographical compendia).

[ 39 ] Ibn Khurdadhbih , an official in the postal service wrote one of the first travel books and the form remained a popular one in Arabic literature with books by ibn Hawqal , ibn Fadlan , al-Istakhri, al-Muqaddasi , al-Idrisi and most famously the travels of ibn Battutah . These give a view of the many cultures of the wider Islamic world and also offer Muslim perspectives on the non-Muslim peoples on the edges of the empire. They also indicated just how great a trading power the Muslim peoples had become. These were often sprawling accounts that included details of both geography and history .

Some writers concentrated solely on history like al-Ya'qubi and al-Tabari , whilst others focused on a small portion of history such as ibn al-Azraq , with a history of Mecca , and ibn Abi Tahir Tayfur , writing a history of Baghdad . The historian regarded as the greatest of all Arabic historians though is ibn Khaldun whose history Muqaddimah focuses on society and is a founding text in sociology and economics .

Diaries [ edit ] In the medieval Near East , Arabic diaries were first being written from before the 10th century, though the medieval diary which most resembles the modern diary was that of Abu Ali ibn al-Banna in the 11th century. His diary was the earliest to be arranged in order of date ( ta'rikh in Arabic), very much like modern diaries.

[ 40 ] Literary theory and criticism [ edit ] Literary criticism in Arabic literature often focused on religious texts, and the several long religious traditions of hermeneutics and textual exegesis have had a profound influence on the study of secular texts. This was particularly the case for the literary traditions of Islamic literature .

Literary criticism was also employed in other forms of medieval Arabic poetry and literature from the 9th century, notably by Al-Jahiz in his al-Bayan wa-'l-tabyin and al-Hayawan , and by Abdullah ibn al-Mu'tazz in his Kitab al-Badi .

[ 41 ] Fiction literature [ edit ] A 14th century Arabic manuscript of One Thousand and One Nights [ 42 ] Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih 's book Al-ʿIqd al-Farīd is considered one of the seminal texts of Arabic fiction.

[ 43 ] In the Arab world , there was a great distinction between al-fus'ha (quality language) and al-ammiyyah (language of the common people). Not many writers would write works in this al-ammiyyah or common language and it was felt that literature had to be improving, educational and with purpose rather than just entertainment. This did not stop the common role of the hakawati or story-teller who would retell the entertaining parts of more educational works or one of the many Arabic fables or folk-tales , which were often not written down in many cases. Nevertheless, some of the earliest novels , including the first philosophical novels , were written by Arabic authors.

Epic literature [ edit ] Main article: Arabic epic literature The most famous example of Arabic fiction is the One Thousand and One Nights ( Arabian Nights ). It is easily the best-known work of all Arabic literature, and still affects many of the ideas non-Arabs have about Arabic culture . A good example of the lack of popular Arabic prose fiction is that the stories of Aladdin and Ali Baba , usually regarded as part of the Tales from One Thousand and One Nights , were not actually part of the Tales . They were first included in French translation of the Tales by Antoine Galland who heard them being told by Maronite Hanna Dyab and only existed in incomplete Arabic manuscripts before that. The other great character from Arabic literature, Sinbad , is from the Tales .

The One Thousand and One Nights is usually placed in the genre of Arabic epic literature along with several other works. They are usually collections of short stories or episodes strung together into a long tale. The extant versions were mostly written down relatively late, after the 14th century, although many were undoubtedly collected earlier and many of the original stories are probably pre-Islamic. Types of stories in these collections include animal fables , proverbs , stories of jihad or propagation of the faith, humorous tales, moral tales, tales about the wily con-man Ali Zaybaq, and tales about the prankster Juha .

Maqama [ edit ] Maqama not only straddles the divide between prose and poetry , being instead a form of rhymed prose , it is also part-way between fiction and non-fiction. Over a series of short narratives, which are fictionalised versions of real-life situations, different ideas are contemplated. A good example of this is a maqama on musk, which purports to compare the feature of different perfumes but is in fact a work of political satire comparing several competing rulers.

Maqama also makes use of the doctrine of badi or deliberately adding complexity to display the writer's dexterity with language.

Al-Hamadhani is regarded as the originator of maqama ; his work was taken up by Abu Muhammad al-Qasim al-Hariri , one of al-Hariri's maqama being a study of al-Hamadhani's own work.

Maqama was an exceptionally popular form of Arabic literature, one of the few forms which continued to be written during the decline of Arabic in the 17th and 18th centuries.

Love literature [ edit ] A famous example of romantic Arabic poetry is Layla and Majnun , dating back to the Umayyad era in the 7th century. It is a tragic story of undying love .

Layla and Majnun is considered part of the platonic Love (Arabic: حب عذري) genre, so-called because the couple never marry or consummate their relationship, that is prominent in Arabic literature, though the literary motif is found throughout the world. Other famous Virgin Love stories include Qays and Lubna , Kuthair and Azza , Marwa and al-Majnun al-Faransi and Antara and Abla .

The 10th-century Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity features a fictional anecdote of a "prince who strays from his palace during his wedding feast and, drunk, spends the night in a cemetery, confusing a corpse with his bride. The story is used as a gnostic parable of the soul's pre-existence and return from its terrestrial sojourn ".

[ 44 ] Another medieval Arabic love story was Hadith Bayad wa Riyad ( The Story of Bayad and Riyad ), a 13th-century Arabic love story. The main characters of the tale are Bayad, a merchant's son and a foreigner from Damascus , and Riyad, a well-educated girl in the court of an unnamed Hajib (vizier or minister) of 'Iraq which is referred to as the lady. The Hadith Bayad wa Riyad manuscript is believed to be the only illustrated manuscript known to have survived from more than eight centuries of Muslim and Arab presence in Spain.

Many of the tales in the One Thousand and One Nights are also love stories or involve romantic love as a central theme. This includes the frame story of Scheherazade herself, and many of the stories she narrates , including " Aladdin ", " The Ebony Horse ", " The Three Apples ", "Tale of Tàj al-Mulúk and the Princess Dunyà: The Lover and the Loved", "Adi bin Zayd and the Princess Hind", "Di'ibil al-Khuza'i With the Lady and Muslim bin al-Walid", "The Three Unfortunate Lovers", and others.

Several elements of courtly love were developed in Arabic literature, namely the notions of "love for love's sake" and "exaltation of the beloved lady" which have been traced back to Arabic literature of the 9th and 10th centuries. The notion of the "ennobling power" of love was developed in the early 11th century by the Persian psychologist and philosopher , Ibn Sina (known as "Avicenna" in Europe), in his Arabic treatise Risala fi'l-Ishq ( A Treatise on Love ). The final element of courtly love, the concept of "love as desire never to be fulfilled", was also at times implicit in Arabic poetry .

[ 45 ] Murder mystery [ edit ] The earliest known example of a whodunit murder mystery was " The Three Apples ", one of the tales narrated by Scheherazade in the One Thousand and One Nights ( Arabian Nights ). In this tale, a fisherman discovers a heavy locked chest along the Tigris river and he sells it to the Abbasid Caliph , Harun al-Rashid , who then has the chest broken open only to find inside it the dead body of a young woman who was cut into pieces. Harun orders his vizier , Ja'far ibn Yahya , to solve the crime and find the murderer within three days, or be executed if he fails his assignment.

[ 46 ] Suspense is generated through multiple plot twists that occur as the story progresses.

[ 47 ] This may thus be considered an archetype for detective fiction .

[ 48 ] Satire and comedy [ edit ] In Arabic poetry , the genre of satirical poetry was known as hija . Satire was introduced into prose literature by the author al-Jahiz in the 9th century. While dealing with serious topics in what are now known as anthropology , sociology and psychology , he introduced a satirical approach, "based on the premise that, however serious the subject under review, it could be made more interesting and thus achieve greater effect, if only one leavened the lump of solemnity by the insertion of a few amusing anecdotes or by the throwing out of some witty or paradoxical observations." [ 49 ] He was well aware that, in treating of new themes in his prose works, he would have to employ a vocabulary of a nature more familiar in hija , satirical poetry. For example, in one of his zoological works, he satirized the preference for longer human penis size , writing: "If the length of the penis were a sign of honor, then the mule would belong to the (honorable tribe of) Quraysh ". Another satirical story based on this preference was an Arabian Nights tale called "Ali with the Large Member".

[ 50 ] In the 10th century, the writer Tha'alibi recorded satirical poetry written by the poets As-Salami and Abu Dulaf, with As-Salami praising Abu Dulaf's wide breadth of knowledge and then mocking his ability in all these subjects, and with Abu Dulaf responding back and satirizing As-Salami in return.

[ 51 ] An example of Arabic political satire included another 10th-century poet Jarir satirizing Farazdaq as "a transgressor of the Sharia " and later Arabic poets in turn using the term "Farazdaq-like" as a form of political satire.

[ 52 ] The terms " comedy " and "satire" became synonymous after Aristotle 's Poetics was translated into Arabic in the medieval Islamic world , where it was elaborated upon by Arabic writers and Islamic philosophers , such as Abu Bischr, his pupil al-Farabi , Avicenna , and Averroes . Due to cultural differences, they disassociated comedy from Greek dramatic representation and instead identified it with Arabic poetic themes and forms, such as hija (satirical poetry). They viewed comedy as simply the "art of reprehension", and made no reference to light and cheerful events, or troublous beginnings and happy endings, associated with classical Greek comedy. After the Latin translations of the 12th century , the term "comedy" thus gained a new semantic meaning in Medieval literature .

[ 53 ] Theatre [ edit ] While puppet theatre and passion plays were popular in the medieval Islamic world , [ 54 ] live theatre and drama has only been a visible part of Arabic literature in the modern era. There may have been a much longer theatrical tradition but it was probably not regarded as legitimate literature and mostly went unrecorded. There is an ancient tradition of public performance amongst Shi'i Muslims of a play depicting the life and death of al-Husayn at the battle of Karbala in 680 CE. There are also several plays composed by Shams al-din Muhammad ibn Daniyal in the 13th century when he mentions that older plays are getting stale and offers his new works as fresh material.

The most popular forms of theater in the medieval Islamic world were puppet theatre (which included hand puppets, shadow plays and marionette productions) and live passion plays known as ta'ziya , where actors re-enact episodes from Muslim history . In particular, Shia Islamic plays revolved around the shaheed (martyrdom) of Ali 's sons Hasan ibn Ali and Husayn ibn Ali . Live secular plays were known as akhraja , recorded in medieval adab literature, though they were less common than puppetry and ta'ziya theater.

[ 54 ] The Moors had a noticeable influence on the works of George Peele and William Shakespeare . Some of their works featured Moorish characters, such as Peele's The Battle of Alcazar and Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice , Titus Andronicus and Othello , which featured a Moorish Othello as its title character. These works are said to have been inspired by several Moorish delegations from Morocco to Elizabethan England at the beginning of the 17th century, ignoring the fact that The Merchant of Venice and Titus Andronicus were both penned in the 16th century. In 2016, opera singer and actor David Serero performed Othello in a Moroccan adaptation in New York.

[ 55 ] Philosophical novels [ edit ] The Arab Islamic philosophers , Ibn Tufail (Abubacer) [ 56 ] and Ibn al-Nafis , were pioneers of the philosophical novel as they wrote the earliest novels dealing with philosophical fiction . Ibn Tufail wrote the first Arabic novel Hayy ibn Yaqdhan ( Philosophus Autodidactus ) as a response to Al-Ghazali 's The Incoherence of the Philosophers . This was followed by Ibn al-Nafis who wrote a fictional narrative Theologus Autodidactus as a response to Ibn Tufail's Philosophus Autodidactus . Both of these narratives had protagonists (Hayy in Philosophus Autodidactus and Kamil in Theologus Autodidactus ) who were autodidactic individuals spontaneously generated in a cave and living in seclusion on a desert island , both being the earliest examples of a desert island story. However, while Hayy lives alone on the desert island for most of the story in Philosophus Autodidactus (until he meets a castaway named Absal), the story of Kamil extends beyond the desert island setting in Theologus Autodidactus (when castaways take him back to civilization with them), developing into the earliest known coming of age plot and eventually becoming the first example of a science fiction novel.

Ibn al-Nafis described his book Theologus Autodidactus as a defense of "the system of Islam and the Muslims' doctrines on the missions of Prophets, the religious laws, the resurrection of the body, and the transitoriness of the world." He presents rational arguments for bodily resurrection and the immortality of the human soul , using both demonstrative reasoning and material from the hadith corpus to prove his case. Later Islamic scholars viewed this work as a response to the metaphysical claim of Avicenna and Ibn Tufail that bodily resurrection cannot be proven through reason, a view that was earlier criticized by al-Ghazali. Ibn al-Nafis' work was later translated into Latin and English as Theologus Autodidactus in the early 20th century.

A Latin translation of Ibn Tufail's work, entitled Philosophus Autodidactus , first appeared in 1671, prepared by Edward Pococke the Younger. The first English translation by Simon Ockley was published in 1708, and German and Dutch translations were also published at the time. These translations later inspired Daniel Defoe to write Robinson Crusoe , which also featured a desert island narrative and was regarded as the first novel in English .

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] Philosophus Autodidactus also inspired Robert Boyle , an acquaintance of Pococke, to write his own philosophical novel set on an island, The Aspiring Naturalist , in the late 17th century.

[ 60 ] The story also anticipated Rousseau 's Émile in some ways, and is also similar to the later story of Mowgli in Rudyard Kipling 's The Jungle Book as well the character of Tarzan , in that a baby is abandoned in a deserted tropical island where he is taken care of and fed by a mother wolf . Other European writers influenced by Philosophus Autodidactus include John Locke , [ 61 ] Gottfried Leibniz , [ 59 ] Melchisédech Thévenot , John Wallis , Christiaan Huygens , [ 62 ] George Keith , Robert Barclay , the Quakers , [ 63 ] and Samuel Hartlib .

[ 60 ] Science fiction [ edit ] Al-Risalah al-Kamiliyyah fil Sira al-Nabawiyyah ( The Treatise of Kamil on the Prophet's Biography ), known in English as Theologus Autodidactus (which is a phonetic transliteration of the Greek name Θεολόγος Αὐτοδίδακτος, meaning self-taught theologian), written by the Arab polymath Ibn al-Nafis (1213–1288), is the earliest known science fiction novel. While also being an early desert island story and coming of age story, the novel deals with various science fiction elements such as spontaneous generation , futurology , apocalyptic themes , the end of the world and doomsday , resurrection and the afterlife . Rather than giving supernatural or mythological explanations for these events, Ibn al-Nafis attempted to explain these plot elements using his own extensive scientific knowledge in anatomy, biology, physiology , astronomy, cosmology and geology . His main purpose behind this science fiction work was to explain Islamic religious teachings in terms of science and philosophy . For example, it was through this novel that Ibn al-Nafis introduces his scientific theory of metabolism , and he makes references to his own scientific discovery of the pulmonary circulation in order to explain bodily resurrection. The novel was later translated into English as Theologus Autodidactus in the early 20th century.

A number of stories within the One Thousand and One Nights ( Arabian Nights ) also feature science fiction elements. One example is "The Adventures of Bulukiya", where the protagonist Bulukiya's quest for the herb of immortality leads him to explore the seas, journey to the Garden of Eden and to Jahannam , and travel across the cosmos to different worlds much larger than his own world, anticipating elements of galactic science fiction; [ 64 ] along the way, he encounters societies of jinns , [ 65 ] mermaids , talking serpents , talking trees , and other forms of life.

[ 64 ] In another Arabian Nights tale, the protagonist Abdullah the Fisherman gains the ability to breathe underwater and discovers an underwater submarine society that is portrayed as an inverted reflection of society on land, in that the underwater society follows a form of primitive communism where concepts like money and clothing do not exist. Other Arabian Nights tales deal with lost ancient technologies, advanced ancient civilizations that went astray, and catastrophes which overwhelmed them.

[ 66 ] " The City of Brass " features a group of travellers on an archaeological expedition [ 67 ] across the Sahara to find an ancient lost city and attempt to recover a brass vessel that Solomon once used to trap a jinn , [ 68 ] and, along the way, encounter a mummified queen, petrified inhabitants, [ 69 ] lifelike humanoid robots and automata , seductive marionettes dancing without strings, [ 70 ] and a brass horseman robot who directs the party towards the ancient city. " The Ebony Horse " features a robot [ 71 ] in the form of a flying mechanical horse controlled using keys that could fly into outer space and towards the Sun, while the "Third Qalandar's Tale" also features a robot in the form of an uncanny boatman .

[ 71 ] "The City of Brass" and "The Ebony Horse" can be considered early examples of proto-science fiction.

Other examples of early Arabic proto-science fiction include al-Farabi 's Opinions of the residents of a splendid city about a utopian society, and elements such as the flying carpet .

Arabic literature for young readers and children [ edit ] As in other languages, there is a growing number of literary works written in Arabic for young readers .

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] With this group of readers in mind, the Young Readers series of the New York University Press 's Library of Arabic Literature (LAL) offers contemporary and even classical texts in its Weaving Words collection, like the tenth-century anthology of stories and anecdotes Al-Faraj Ba'd al-Shiddah (Deliverance Follows Adversity ) by medieval writer Al-Muḥassin ibn ʿAlī al-Tanūkhī (327–84/939–94).

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] In her 2011 essay  "Arabic Children's Literature Today: Determining Factors and Tendencies" author and translator from Arabic to German Petra Dünges gave an overview of fiction written for Arab children since its beginnings in Egypt during the late 19th century, focussing on books published between 1990 and 2010. Judging from several modern illustrated books and mangas such as Gold Ring (الذهب سوار) by Emirati writer Qays Sidqiyy ( Sheikh Zayed Book Award 2010), she noted an increase in the variety of children's literature in the changing modern Arab society. Further, she noticed a growing demand for stories and adequate illustrations that take children as readers seriously. Finally, she ascertained that Arabic children's literature is an important contribution the development of Arab society, crucial to keeping Arab culture and the Arabic language alive.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] Marcia Lynx Qualey, editor-in-chief of ArabLit online magazine, has translated Arabic novels for young readers, such as Thunderbirds by Palestinian writer Sonia Nimr.

[ 78 ] Further, she has written on Arabic books for teens [ 79 ] and participated in academic forums.

[ 80 ] She and other literary translators and consultants publish the website ArabKidLitNow!, promoting translated Arabic literature for children and young readers.

[ 81 ] Women in Arabic literature [ edit ] See also: Women's literary salons and societies in the Arab world Part of a series on Islamic culture Architecture Abbasid Anatolian Seljuk Chinese Fatimid Indo-Islamic Indonesian Iranian Mamluk Moorish Ottoman Somali Sudano-Sahelian Tatar Swahili Umayyad Yemeni Art Calligraphy Carpets Embroidery Glassware Miniature Pottery Clothing Abaya Agal Boubou Burqa Chador Hijab Headscarf Jilbab Jellabiya Kaftan Kameez Keffiyeh Kupiah Niqāb Salwar Songkok Taqiya Thawb Holidays Arba'een al-Ghadir Chaand Raat al-Fitr al-Adha Imamat Day New Year al-Qadr Mawlid Ramadan Bara’at Raghaib Literature Arabic Azerbaijani Balochi Bengali Crimean Tatar Gambian Hausa Indonesian Kashmiri Kazakh Kurdish Kyrgyz Malaysian Malian Nigerian Pashto Persian Punjabi Sindhi Somali South Asian Tajik Tatar Turkish Turkmen Urdu Uyghur Uzbek Music Ashik Daf Dastgah Gamelan Gendang beleq Ghazal Haḍra Hamd Jari Madih nabawi Mappilappattu Maqam Mugam Naʽat Nasheed Noha Qawwali Sufi Talempong Theatre Bangsawan Cem Karagöz and Hacivat Sama Ta'zieh Wayang Islam portal v t e In the words of Clarissa Burt, Despite the historical and social conditions that contributed to an almost total eclipse of women's poetic expression in the literary record as maintained in Arabic culture from the pre-Islamic era through the nineteenth century, with a few significant exceptions, women poets writing in Arabic have made tremendous strides since the dawn of the twentieth century in presenting their poetic offerings in mainstream cultural forums, and contributing to a plethora of new and modern poetic currents in literary cultural throughout the Arab world.

[ 82 ] Whilst not playing a major attested part in Arabic literature for much of its history, women have had a continuing role. Women's literature in Arabic has been relatively little researched, and features relatively little in most Arabic-language education systems, meaning that its prominence and importance is probably generally underrated.

[ 83 ] The Medieval Period [ edit ] See also: Medieval Arabic female poets In the estimation of Tahera Qutbuddin , the citation of women's poetry in the general medieval anthologies is sparse. The earliest anthologists either ignored women poets or made disparaging remarks about them ... In his introduction to the Nuzhat al-Julasa , al-Suyuti refers to a large (at least six-volume) anthology--now lost--of 'ancient' women's poetry ... It would seem from this that women poets may have formed a more dynamic part of the poetic landscape, at least in the earliest classical period, than is generally believed.

[ 84 ] (The main modern anthology of medieval Arabic women's writing in English translation is that of Abdullah al-Udhari.) [ 85 ] Pre-Islamic women's literature seems to have been limited to the genre of marathiya ('elegy').

[ 86 ] The earliest poetesses were al-Khansa and Layla al-Akhyaliyyah of the 7th century. Their concentration on the ritha' or elegy suggests that this was a form deemed acceptable for women to work with. However, the love lyric was also an important genre of women's poetry. The Umayyad and 'Abbasid periods saw professional singing slave girls ( qiyan , sing.

quayna ) who sang love songs and accompanied these with music; alongside panegyric and competitive verse-capping, qiyan also sang love-poetry ( ghazal ). In his Risalat al-Qiyan ( Epistle of the Singing-Girls ), al-Jahiz (d. 255/868×69) reckoned that an accomplished singer might have a repertoire of 4,000 songs. Pre-eminent 'Abbasid singing-girls included: 'Inan (paramour of Harun al-Rashid , r. 786–809); Arib al-Ma'muniyya (concubine of Al-Ma'mun , r. 813–17); and Fadl Ashsha'ira (d. 871; concubine of Al-Mutawakkil , r. 847–61). Meanwhile, Harun al-Rashid's half-sister ‘Ulayya bint al-Mahdī (777-825) was also known for her poetic skills, as was the mystic and poet of Basra Rabi'a al-'Adawiyya (d. 801).

[ 87 ] Women also had an important role in pre-modern periods as patrons of the arts.

[ 88 ] Writings from medieval moorish Spain attest to several important female writers, pre-eminently Wallada bint al-Mustakfi (1001–1091), an Umawi princess of al-Andulus, who wrote Sufi poetry and was the lover of fellow poet ibn Zaydun ; the Granadan poet Hafsa Bint al-Hajj al-Rukuniyya (d. 1190/91); and Nazhun al-Garnatiya bint al-Qulai’iya (d. 1100). These and other women writers suggest a hidden world of literature by women.

Despite their lack of prominence among the literary elite, women still played an important part as characters in Arabic literature.

Sirat al-amirah Dhat al-Himmah , for example, is an Arabic epic with a female warrior, Fatima Dhat al-Himma, as protagonist, [ 89 ] and Scheherazade is famous for cunningly telling stories in the One Thousand and One Nights to save her life.

The Mamluk period saw the flourishing of the Sufi master and poet 'A'isha al-Ba'uniyya (d. 1517), who was probably the Arabic-speaking world's most prolific female author before the twentieth century. Living in what is now Egypt and Syria, she came from the al-Ba'uni family, noted for its judges and scholars, and belonged to the 'Urmawi branch of the Qadiriyya order. 'A'isha composed at least twelve books in prose and verse, which included over three hundred long mystical and religious poems.

[ 87 ] Al-Nahda [ edit ] The earliest prominent female writer of the modern period during which the Arab cultural renaissance ( Al-Nahda ) took place is Táhirih (1820–52), from what is now Iran. She wrote fine Arabic and Persian poetry.

[ citation needed ] Women's literary salons and societies in the Arab world were also pioneered during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, initially by Christian Arab women, who tended to have more freedom and access to education than their female Muslim contemporaries in the Ottoman Empire.

Maryana Marrash (1848−1919) started what is now believed to have been the first literary salon including women in Aleppo . In 1912, May Ziadeh (1886–1941) also started a literary salon in Cairo and in 1922, Mary 'Ajami (1888−1965) did the same in Damascus . These salons supported the emergence of women's literary and journalistic writing and publishing by growing exchange in the male-dominated world of Arabic literature.

[ 90 ] Late 20th century to early 21st century [ edit ] A quote by Clarissa Burt on modern Arabic poetry by female Arab authors: Unlocked from the constraints of the traditional ode, several of these and other women have had long careers of poetry writing, entering into areas of expression of women's experience that had not been presented in print before. In many ways, this poetic work has gone hand in hand with the growth of critical discourse about women's role, status, and experience, and women's desires to be fully participating members of public society. [...] With few exceptions, critical reception in the Arab world of these and other women poets has been lukewarm at best, for the most part, often filled with criticism of their adherence or lack thereof to poetic principles that have been held as prescriptive in many schools of Arabic literary criticism.

[ 91 ] Alongside Maryana Marrash , May Ziadeh, and Mary 'Ajami , pioneering figures in women's writing in Arabic during this period are Zaynab Fawwaz (modern Lebanon/Egypt, 1846–1914), who arguably wrote the first novel in Arabic and was the first woman to write a play in that language as well; [ citation needed ] Aisha Taymur (modern Turkey/Egypt, 1840–1902); Malak Hifni Nasif (under the pseudonym Bahithat al-Badiyya, Egypt 1886–1918); Anbara Salam Khalidy (modern Palestine/Lebanon, 1897–1988) Anbara Salam Khalidy (modern Palestine/Lebanon, 1897–1986) and Salma al-Malaika (Iraq, 1908–1953, under the pseudonym Umm Nizar).

Since the Second World War, Arabic women's poetry has become markedly more prominent.

[ 91 ] Nazik Al-Malaika (Iraq/Egypt, 1923–2007) was the daughter of Salma al-Kadhimiyya , who in her own right was a poet and a vanguard of the early nationalist movement. Al-Malaika, alongside Badr Shakir al-Sayyab , can be considered the initiator of the Free Verse Movement in Arabic poetry. Al-Malaika's poetry is characterised by thematic variations and the use of imagery. She also wrote The Case of Contemporary Poets which is considered a major contribution to Arab literary criticism.

[ 92 ] Other major post-war poetic voices include Fadwa Touqan (Palestine, 1917–2003), Rabāb al-Kāẓimī (Iraq, b. 1920), Jalīla Riḍa (Egypt, 1920–2001), Salma Khadra Jayyusi (Palestine, 1926-), Lami'a 'Abbas 'Amara (Iraq, b. 1927).

The poetry of Saniya Salih (Syria, 1935–85) appeared in many well-known magazines of her time, particularly Shi’r and Mawaqif , but remained in the shadow of work by her husband, the poet Muhammad al-Maghout . Her later poems often address her relationship with her two daughters, and many were written during her illness, as she died of cancer.

[ 93 ] Other Arab post-war poetesses include Zubayda Bashīr (Tunis, b. 1938); Ghada al-Samman (Syria, b. 1942), known not only for poetry, but also for short stories and novels, Su'ad al-Sabah (Kuwait, b.1942) and Hamda Khamis (Bahrain, b. 1946), who is regarded as Bahrain's first female free-verse poet.

More recent Arabic literature has seen a growing number of female writers' works published: Suhayr al-Qalamawi , Ulfat Idlibi , Layla Ba'albakki , Zuhrabi Mattummal , Hoda Barakat , Alifa Rifaat , Salwa Bakr and Samiha Khrais are some of these novelists and prose writers. There has also been a number of significant female authors who wrote non-fiction , often exploring the female condition in Muslim societies, including Zaynab al-Ghazali , Nawal el-Saadawi and Fatema Mernissi .

[ 94 ] Women writers in the Arab world have unavoidably courted controversy.

Layla Ba'albakki , for instance, was charged with obscenity and "endangering public morality" a few months after she published her collection of short stories titled Tenderness to the Moon (1963). The Lebanese vice squad actually traveled to every bookstore, where the book was sold, to confiscate all remaining copies because of its erotic content.

[ citation needed ] In Algeria , women's oral literature used in ceremonies called Būqālah , also meaning ceramic pitcher, became a symbol of national identity and anti-colonialism during the War of Independence in the 1950s and early 60s. These poems are usually four to ten lines in Algerian Arabic , and cover topics ranging from everyday life, like love and work, to the political, like the struggle for independence. Since using Algerian Arabic as poetic language was considered an act of cultural resistance in itself at the time, these poems took on a revolutionary implication.

[ 95 ] Contemporary Arabic literature by women writers [ edit ] Suffice to say although female Arab authors still risk controversy by discussing explicit themes or taboo topic in their works, it is a theme explored more explicitly and with more vigour due to greater outreach thanks to social media and more international awareness of Arab literature. More current Arab female writers include Hanan al-Shaykh , Salwa al-Neimi (writer, poet and journalist), Joumanna Haddad (journalist and poet), Assia Djebar .

Ahdaf Soueif and Yasmine El-Rashidi amongst others who confront less-talked about topics such as sex, prostitution, homosexuality and political censorship and prosecution within the Arab diaspora and also internationally in relation to Arab emigration.

Contemporary female Arab writers/poets/journalists alongside producing literature and non-fiction works often take on an activist role in their careers in order to highlight and improve the female condition in Arab society. This concept is embodied in female figures such as Mona Eltahawy , who is an Egyptian columnist and international public speaker. She is best known for her unconventional comments on Arab and Muslim issues and her involvement in global feminism. In 2015, she released her book Headscarves and Hymens in which she argues the need for a sexual revolution in the Middle East.

[ 96 ] Another writer from Egypt is Basma Abdel Aziz , who has published dystopian novels called The Queue or Here is a Body, as well as nonfiction based on her studies of oppression, torture and authoritarian language of the government in Egypt.

[ 97 ] Contemporary Arab women's literature has been strongly influenced by the diaspora of Arabic-speakers , who have produced writing not only in Arabic, but also in other languages, prominently English, French, Dutch and German. The Internet is also important in furthering the reach of literature produced in Arabic or Arabic-speaking regions: It is among the younger generation of poets that the Internet has become a platform for mounting collections and sharing poetry. Some of these poets have their own websites, while others are included on ever growing web anthologies being posted by young Arab computer geeks dedicated to the construction of web archives for Arabic poetry and poetic history. Similarly, critical treatment of these women's poetry, while now well established in on-line resources and web-based sites for major paper publications throughout the Arab world, has yet to produce clearly defined critical means of articulating emerging values for poetry, for measuring the critical worth of some of these new productions, and for encouraging the production of Arab women's poetry which will have weight, depth, and acclaim comparable to the work of some of the major Arab male poets of our day.

[ 98 ] Literary criticism [ edit ] For multiple centuries, there has been a vibrant culture of literary criticism in the Arabic speaking world. The poetry festivals of the pre-Islamic period often pitched two poets against each other in a war of verse, in which one would be decided to be winner by the audience. Literary criticism also relates to theology, and gained official status with Islamic studíes of the Qur'an. Although nothing which might be termed 'literary criticism' in the modern sense, was applied to a work held to be i'jaz or inimitable and divinely inspired, textual analysis, called ijtihad and referring to independent reasoning, was permitted. This study allowed for a better understanding of the message and facilitated interpretation for practical use, all of which helped the development of a critical method important for later work on other literature. A clear distinction regularly drawn between works in literary language and popular works has meant that only part of the literature in Arabic was usually considered worthy of study and criticism.

Some of the first Arabic poetry analysis are Qawa'id al-shi'r or The Foundations of Poetry by Kufan grammarian Tha'lab (d. 904) [ 99 ] and Naqd al-shi'r or Poetic Criticism by Qudamah ibn Ja'far . Other works continued the tradition of contrasting two poets in order to determine which one best follows the rule of classical poetic structure. Plagiarism also became a significant topic, exercising the critics' concerns. The works of al-Mutanabbi were particularly studied with this concern. He was considered by many the greatest of all Arab poets, but his own arrogant self-regard for his abilities did not endear him to other writers and they looked for a source for his verse.

[ 100 ] Just as there were collections of facts written about many different subjects, numerous collections detailing every possible rhetorical figure used in literature emerged, as well as how to write guides.

Modern criticism first compared new works unfavourably with the classical ideals of the past, but these standards were soon rejected as too artificial. The adoption of the forms of European romantic poetry dictated the introduction of corresponding critical standards.

Taha Hussayn , himself well versed in European thought, would even dare to examine the Qur'an with modern critical analysis, in which he pointed out ideas and stories borrowed from pre-Islamic poetry.

An outstanding Sudanese scholar and literary critic with a long list of publications on poetry or other genres, and on Arabic language in general, was Abdallah al-Tayyib (1921–2003). Arguably his most notable work is A Guide to Understanding Arabic Poetry , written over thirty-five years and published in four volumes of several thousand pages.

[ 101 ] Outside views of Arabic literature [ edit ] In al-Andalus , Arabic literary culture had a massive impact on Jewish literary culture in the tenth to thirteenth centuries; this included the assimilation of features, genres, and stylistic devices of Arabic poetry as well as—influenced by the classicizing Quranic language of classical Arabic poetry—the decision to write poetry in Hebrew and in a register rooted in Biblical Hebrew .

[ 102 ] Literature in Arabic has been influential outside the Islamic world . One of the first important translations of Arabic literature was Robert of Ketton 's translation of the Qur'an in the twelfth century, but it would not be until the early eighteenth century that much of the diverse Arabic literature would be recognised in the West. This was mostly due to Arabists , like Forster Fitzgerald Arbuthnot and his books such as Arabic Authors: A Manual of Arabian History and Literature . The 1996 Panizzi Lectures were on the "Introduction of Arabic Learning into England." [ 103 ] [ 104 ] Antoine Galland 's French translation of the Thousand and One Nights was the first major work in Arabic which found great success outside the Muslim world. Other significant translators were Friedrich Rückert and Richard Burton , along with others working at Fort William, India . Since at least the 19th century, Arabic and many works in other Western Asian languages fuelled a fascination in Orientalist thinking and artistic production in the West. Works of dubious 'foreign' morals were particularly popular, but even these were censored for content, such as homosexual references, which were not permitted in Victorian society . Most of the works chosen for translation helped reinforced the stereotypes of the audiences.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Compared to the variety and scope of literature written in Arabic, relatively few historical or modern Arabic works have been translated into other languages.

Since the mid-20th century, there has been an increase of translations of Arabic books into other languages, and Arabic authors began to receive a certain amount of acclaim. Egyptian writer Naguib Mahfouz had most of his works translated after he won the 1988 Nobel Prize for Literature . Other writers, including Abdul Rahman Munif and Tayeb Salih have found critical acclaim by Western scholars, and both Alaa Al Aswany 's The Yacoubian Building and Rajaa al-Sanea 's Girls of Riyadh attracted significant Western media attention in the first decade of the 21st century.

See also [ edit ] Modern Arabic literature Copto-Arabic literature Arabic short story Riddles (Arabic) Arabic music Arabian mythology Literary Arabic Islamic Golden Age List of countries and territories where Arabic is an official language Arabic miniature References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Firmage, Edwin Brown and Wiess, Bernard G. and Welch, John W.

Religion and Law . 1990, page 202-3 ^ Jones, p. ix.

^ Allen 2005 .

^ Miller, Nathaniel A. (2024).

The emergence of Arabic poetry: from regional identities to Islamic canonization . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.

3– 4, 30– 31.

ISBN 978-1-5128-2530-5 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao ap aq ar as at الفاخوري, حنا (1 January 2014).

تاريخ الأدب العربي (in Arabic). DMC.

^ Jones, Alan (1 December 2007), "Ayyām al-ʿArab" , Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE , Brill , retrieved 19 February 2024 ^ "الوثائقية تفتح ملف "اللغة العربية" " .

الجزيرة الوثائقية (in Arabic). 8 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 18 June 2020 .

^ Guardian Staff (23 September 2004).

"Centuries in the House of Wisdom" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ Al-Khalili, Jim (31 March 2011).

The House of Wisdom: How Arabic Science Saved Ancient Knowledge and Gave Us the Renaissance . Penguin.

ISBN 978-1-101-47623-9 .

^ "Hārūn al-Rashīd | ʿAbbāsid caliph" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ Zohar, Zion (June 2005).

Sephardic and Mizrahi Jewry: From the Golden Age of Spain to Modern Times . NYU Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-9706-8 .

^ Maimonides, Moses (1919).

The guide for the perplexed (2d ed., rev. throughout (3rd impression). ed.). London.

hdl : 2027/uva.x030589251 .

^ a b Tazi, Abdelhadi (1972).

Jami' al-Qarawiyyin: al-Masjid wa'l-Jami'ah bi Madinat Fas (Mausu'ah li-Tarikhiha al-Mi'mari wa'l-Fikri). Al Qaraouiyyine: la Mosquée-Université de Fès (histoire architecturale et intellectuelle) . Beirut: Dar al Kitab ab Lubnani.

^ "دلائل الخيرات" .

www.wdl.org . 1885.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2017 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ "دلائل الخيرات" .

www.wdl.org . 1885.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2017 . Retrieved 24 January 2020 .

^ "قراصنة المتوسط الذين نقلوا كنوز العربية لأوروبا.. رحلة مكتبة مولاي زيدان المغربي إلى الإسكوريال الإسباني" .

www.aljazeera.net (in Arabic).

Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ Robert, Irwin (2003).

"Mamluk Literature (MSR VII.1, 2003)" .

Mamlūk Studies Review .

doi : 10.6082/M1542KRD .

ISSN 1947-2404 .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2021 . Retrieved 16 March 2021 .

^ Starkey 2006 , p. 23.

^ Starkey 2006 , Ch. 3.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Novel, Arabic" .

Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE . 2014.

doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_com_27115 . Retrieved 22 September 2022 .

^ Moreh (1976), p. 44.

^ Somekh, pp. 36–82.

^ a b Moreh (1988), p. 34.

^ Jayyusi (1992), pp. 132—180.

^ "Rifa'a Rafi' al-Tahtawi: France as a Role Model - Qantara.de" .

Qantara.de - Dialogue with the Islamic World . 15 September 2009.

Archived from the original on 30 September 2020 . Retrieved 5 August 2020 .

^ Spadola, Emilio (25 June 2018).

"The Call of Communication: Mass Media and Reform in Interwar Morocco" .

Middle Eastern and North African Societies in the Interwar Period : 97– 122.

doi : 10.1163/9789004369498_006 .

ISBN 9789004369498 .

S2CID 201339014 .

Archived from the original on 24 October 2021 . Retrieved 5 August 2020 .

^ كافى/-/-, أحمد (1 January 2013).

مشاريع الإصلاح السياسي في المغرب في القرنين التاسع عشر (in Arabic). ktab INC.

^ Allen 1995.

^ "مجلة الكلمة - المدرسة الحديثة.. جيل ما بعد الريادة" .

www.alkalimah.net .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2022 . Retrieved 22 September 2022 .

^ Jayyusi (1977), p. 23.

^ "مكتبة البوابة: أهم 10 كتب للأديب المصري ثروت أباظة | البوابة" .

article.albawaba.net (in Arabic) . Retrieved 14 May 2024 .

^ سمير, رانيا (3 January 2024).

"عائلة أباظة: تاريخ طويل وأثر عميق في مصر" .

صوت القبائل العربية والعائلات المصرية (in Arabic) . Retrieved 14 May 2024 .

^ a b Logan, ed., p. 573.

^ Joseph T. Zeidan, Arab Women Novelists: the Formative Years and Beyond (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1995), p. 66.

^ Stone, p. 50.

^ a b Zaouali, Lilia (2007).

Medieval Cuisine of the Islamic World . University of California Press.

^ "Ḵusraw ī Kawādān ud rēdak-ēw" .

Iranica Online .

Archived from the original on 26 May 2020 . Retrieved 1 June 2020 .

^ Gacek, Adam (2009).

Arabic Manuscripts: A Vademecum for Readers . Handbook of Oriental Studies. Leiden Boston: Brill . p. 154.

ISBN 978-90-04-17036-0 .

^ Auchterlonie.

^ Makdisi, pp.173–185.

^ Van Gelder, pp. 1–2.

^ "L'art du Livre arabe" .

expositions.bnf.fr .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2022 . Retrieved 22 September 2022 .

^ Hefter, Thomas (1 April 2011). "The Unique Necklace (Al-ʿIqd al-Farīd), Vol. 1, by Ibn ʿAbd Rabbih and Roger M. A. Allen".

Journal of Near Eastern Studies .

70 (1): 167– 168.

doi : 10.1086/659081 .

ISSN 0022-2968 .

^ Hamori, p. 18.

^ Von Grunebaum, pp. 233–234.

^ Pinault, pp. 86–91.

^ Pinault, pp. 93, 95 & 97.

^ Pinault, p. 91.

^ Bosworth, p. 32.

^ Marzolph, van Leeuwen & Wassouf, pp. 97–98.

^ Bosworth, pp. 77–78.

^ Bosworth, p. 70.

^ Webber.

^ a b Moreh (1986).

^ "Othello: Seen Through a Moroccan Lens" .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2019 . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

^ McGinnis & Reisman, p. 284.

^ Hassan.

^ Glassé, p. 202.

^ a b Wainwright.

^ a b Toomer, p. 222.

^ Russell, ed., pp. 224–239.

^ Russell, ed., p. 227.

^ Russell, ed., p. 247.

^ a b Irwin, p. 209.

^ Irwin, p. 204.

^ Irwin, pp. 211–212.

^ Hamori, p. 9.

^ Pinault, pp. 148–149 & 217–219.

^ Irwin, p. 213.

^ Hamori, pp. 12–13.

^ a b Pinault, pp. 10–11.

^ Lynx Qualey, Marcia (16 January 2017).

"Arab teens and Young Adult literature: The new wave - Qantara.de" .

Qantara.de - Dialogue with the Islamic World .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ Lynx Qualey, Marcia (5 November 2020).

"YA" .

ArabLit & ArabLit Quarterly . Archived from the original on 1 December 2020 . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ "Young Readers" .

Library of Arabic Literature (in Arabic).

Archived from the original on 30 September 2022 . Retrieved 30 September 2022 .

^ Lynx Qualey, Marcia (16 October 2020).

"Series Brings Alive Classical Arabic Texts for Young Readers" .

Al-Fanar Media .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ Dünges, Petra (2011).

"Arabic Children's Literature Today: Determining Factors and Tendencies" .

Publications of the Modern Language Association of America .

126 (1): 170– 181.

doi : 10.1632/pmla.2011.126.1.170 .

ISSN 0030-8129 .

S2CID 162200447 .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 30 September 2022 .

^ See also El Kholy, Nadia. “Arab World.” The Oxford Encyclopedia of Children's Literature. Ed. Jack Zipes. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2006.

^ Nimr, Sonia (25 October 2022).

Thunderbird Book One By Sonia Nimr, translated by M. Lynx Qualey . University of Texas Press.

ISBN 978-1-4773-2581-0 .

Archived from the original on 10 February 2023 . Retrieved 30 September 2022 .

^ Qualey, M. Lynx. (2014) "Arabic Books for Teens." World Literature Today 88, no. 1: 6-6. doi:10.1353/wlt.2014.0127.

^ Corbett, Emily; Phillips, Leah (12 November 2021).

"Ploughing the Field: YA in Translation" .

The International Journal of Young Adult Literature .

2 (1): 1– 15.

doi : 10.24877/IJYAL.64 .

ISSN 2634-5277 .

S2CID 245751051 .

^ "ArabKidLitNow!" .

ArabKidLitNow!

.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 2 August 2022 .

^ Clarissa Burt, 'Arts: Poets and Poetry: Arab States', in Encyclopedia of Women and Islamic Cultures, ed. by Suad Joseph (Leiden: Brill, 2003-2007), V: 77-80 (pp. 77-78).

^ Hoda Thabet, Pioneering Female Authors in Egypt and the Levant: An Introduction into the Origins of the Arabic Novel (Reykjavík: Háskólaprent, 2013) ISBN 978-9979-72-479-7 ; cf.

Tahera Qutbuddin , 'Women Poets', in Medieval Islamic Civilisation: An Encyclopedia , ed. by Josef W. Meri, 2 vols (New York: Routledge, 2006), II 867, "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2014 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) .

^ Tahera Qutbuddin, 'Women Poets', in Medieval Islamic Civilisation: An Encyclopedia , ed. by Josef W. Meri, 2 vols (New York: Routledge, 2006), II 865-67 (p. 867), "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2014 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) .

^ Classical Poems by Arab Women: A Bilingual Anthology , ed. and trans. by Abdullah al-Udhari (London: Saqi Books, 1999) ISBN 086356-047-4 ; books.google.co.uk/books/about/Classical_poems_by_Arab_women.html?id=WniBAAAAIAAJ&.

^ Tahera Qutbuddin, 'Women Poets', in Medieval Islamic Civilisation: An Encyclopedia , ed. by Josef W. Meri, 2 vols (New York: Routledge, 2006), II 865, "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2014 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) .

^ a b Tahera Qutbuddin, 'Women Poets', in Medieval Islamic Civilisation: An Encyclopedia , ed. by Josef W. Meri, 2 vols (New York: Routledge, 2006), II 866, "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2014 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) .

^ D. Fairchild Ruggles , 'Women, Patrons', ed. by Josef W. Meri, 2 vols (New York: Routledge, 2006), II 863-65 ^ Remke Kruk, The Warrior Women of Islam: Female Empowerment in Arabic Popular Literature , Library of Middle East History, 54 (London: Tauris, 2014).

^ Cooke, Miriam (14 January 1993), Badawi, M. M. (ed.), "Arab women writers" , Modern Arabic Literature (1 ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp.

443– 462, doi : 10.1017/chol9780521331975.014 , ISBN 978-0-521-33197-5 , archived from the original on 4 January 2024 , retrieved 14 August 2023 ^ a b Clarissa Burt, 'Arts: Poets and Poetry: Arab States', in Encyclopedia of Women and Islamic Cultures , ed. by Suad Joseph (Leiden: Brill, 2003-2007), V: 77-80 (p. 78).

^ Ghareeb, Edmund A.; Dougherty, Beth (18 March 2004).

Historical Dictionary of Iraq . Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 9780810865686 .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 24 October 2020 .

^ "Friday Finds: The Poetry of Underappreciated Saniyah Saleh" .

ArabLit . 23 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 26 November 2017 . Retrieved 4 June 2018 .

^ Oesterreicher, Zachary.

"Gender and identity reflected in the works of Nawāl Al-Sa'adāwī and Samīḥah Khrais" .

Archived from the original on 15 August 2023 . Retrieved 15 August 2023 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Slyomovics, S. (2014). Algerian Women's Buqalah Poetry: Oral Literature, Cultural Politics, and Anti-Colonial Resistance. Journal Of Arabic Literature, 45(2-3), 145-168.

^ Aspden, Rachel (12 June 2015).

"Headscarves and Hymens: Why the Middle East Needs a Sexual Revolution by Mona Eltahawy – review" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2017 . Retrieved 4 June 2018 .

^ Daum, Rachael (29 December 2015).

"Basma Abdel Aziz: 'The Worst Thing Is That Publishers Are Scared, Too' " .

ArabLit & ArabLit Quarterly .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2018 . Retrieved 20 August 2021 .

^ Clarissa Burt, 'Arts: Poets and Poetry: Arab States', in Encyclopedia of Women and Islamic Cultures , ed. by Suad Joseph (Leiden: Brill, 2003-2007), V: 77-80 (p. 80).

^ Heinrichs & Allen 2012 , p. 62.

^ "Al Mutanabbi and the Arrogance Within: The Life of a Great Arabic Poet" .

Inside Arabia . 12 September 2020.

Archived from the original on 14 August 2022 . Retrieved 14 June 2022 .

^ "King Faisal Prize | Professor Abd Allah Al-Tayyeb" .

Archived from the original on 30 July 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2021 .

^ Morillas, Consuelo López (31 August 2000), Menocal, María Rosa; Scheindlin, Raymond P.; Sells, Michael (eds.), "Language" , The Literature of Al-Andalus (1 ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp.

31– 59, doi : 10.1017/chol9780521471596.004 , ISBN 978-0-521-47159-6 , archived from the original on 4 January 2024 , retrieved 25 December 2023 ^ Burnett, Charles. 1997.

The Introduction of Arabic Learning into England.

London: British Library.

^ The Introduction of Arabic Learning into England, (1998) review.

The Book Collector 47 (no4) Winter: 553-554.

^ Hamdah Al Sharid (13 February 2019).

"Lost in Translation: Orientalism and the Origin of Islamophobia – Sail Magazine" .

sailemagazine.com . Retrieved 8 July 2025 .

^ Jennifer Case.

"Bias in Arabic-English Translation: The Legacy of Orientalism" .

Arabizi Translations . Retrieved 8 July 2025 .

Sources [ edit ] Allen, Roger (1995).

The Arabic Novel: an Historical and Critical Introduction (2nd ed.). Syracuse University Press.

ISBN 978-0815626411 .

Allen, Roger (2005) [1998].

The Arabic Literary Heritage: The Development of its Genres and Criticism . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-48525-8 .

Archived from the original on 15 May 2023 . Retrieved 15 May 2023 .

Ashtiany, Julia; Johnstone, T. M.; Latham, J. D.; Serjeant, R. B.; Smith, G. Rex, ed. (1990).

Abbasid Belles-lettres . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521240161 .

Auchterlonie, Paul (1986).

Arabic Biographical Dictionaries: a Summary Guide and Bibliography . Middle East Libraries Committee.

ISBN 0-948889-01-2 .

Beeston, A. F. L.; Johnstone T. M.; Serjeant, R. B.; Smith, G. R., ed. (1983).

Arabic Literature to the End of the Umayyad Period . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-24015-8 .

Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (1976).

The Mediaeval Islamic Underworld: the Banū Sāsān in Arabic Society and Literature . Brill.

ISBN 90-04-04392-6 .

El-Enany, Rasheed (1993).

Naguib Mahfouz: the Pursuit of Meaning . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-07395-2 .

Glassé, Cyril (2001).

The New Encyclopedia of Islam . AltaMira Press.

ISBN 9780759101906 .

Hamori, Andras (1971). "An Allegory from the Arabian Nights: the City of Brass".

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies . Volume XXXIV.

Hashmi, Alamgir, ed. (1986).

The Worlds of Muslim Imagination . Gulmohar.

Hassan, Nawal Muhammad (1980).

Hayy Bin Yaqzan and Robinson Crusoe: a Study of an Early Arabic Impact on English Literature . Al-Rashid House for Publication.

Heinrichs, W. P.

; Allen, R.M.A.

(2012).

"Arabic poetics" . In Greene, Roland ; et al. (eds.).

The Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics (4th rev. ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. pp.

62– 65.

ISBN 978-0-691-15491-6 .

Irwin, Robert (2005).

The Arabian Nights: a Companion . Tauris Parke Paperbacks.

ISBN 9781860649837 .

Jayyusi, Salma Khadra (1977).

Trends and Movements in Modern Arabic Poetry . Vol.

1– 2. Leiden: E. J. Brill.

ISBN 90-04-04920-7 .

Jayyusi, Salma Khadra (1992). "The Romantic Poets". In Badawi, Mohammed Mustafa (ed.).

Modern Arabic Literature . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-33197-5 .

Jones, Alan (2003). "Foreword". In Rodwell, J. M.

The Koran . Phoenix.

ISBN 978-1842126097 .

Logan, Peter Melville, ed. (2011).

The Encyclopedia of the Novel . Volume I. Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1405161848 .

Makdisi, George (May 1, 1986). "The Diary in Islamic Historiography: Some Notes".

History and Theory . Volume XV.

Marzolph, Ulrich; van Leeuwen, Richard; Wassouf, Hassan (2004).

The Arabian Nights Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 1-57607-204-5 .

McGinnis, Jon; Reisman, David C. (2007).

Classical Arabic Philosophy: an Anthology of Sources . Hackett Publishing Company.

ISBN 9780872208711 .

Menocal, María Rosa; Scheindlin, Raymond P.; Sells, Michael, ed. (2000).

The Literature of al-Andalus . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-47159-1 .

Moreh, S.

(1976).

Modern Arabic Poetry 1800–1970: The Development of its Forms and Themes under the Influence of Western Literature . Leiden: E. J. Brill.

ISBN 90-04-04795-6 .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 18 May 2023 .

Moreh, Shmuel (1986). "Live Theater in Medieval Islam". In Sharon, Moshe.

Studies in Islamic History and Civilization: in Honour of Professor David Ayalon . Brill.

Moreh, Shmuel (1988).

Studies in Modern Arabic Prose and Poetry . Leiden: E. J. Brill.

ISBN 90-04-08359-6 .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 June 2023 .

Pinault, David (1992).

Story-Telling Techniques in the Arabian Nights . Brill Publishers.

ISBN 90-04-09530-6 .

Russell, G. A., ed. (1994).

The 'Arabick' Interest of the Natural Philosophers in Seventeenth-century England . Brill.

ISBN 9789004098886 .

Somekh, Sasson (1992). "The Neo-classical Arabic poets". In Badawi, Mohammed Mustafa (ed.).

Modern Arabic Literature . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-33197-5 .

Starkey, Paul (2006).

Modern Arabic Literature . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 0-7486-1291-2 .

Stone, Christopher (2008).

Popular Culture and Nationalism in Lebanon: the Fairouz and Rahbani Nation . Routledge.

ISBN 9780203939321 .

Toomer, G. J. (1996).

Eastern Wisedome and Learning: the Study of Arabic in Seventeenth-century England . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198202912 .

van Gelder, G. J. H. (1982).

Beyond the Line: Classical Arabic Literary Critics on the Coherence and Unity of the Poem . Brill.

ISBN 90-04-06854-6 .

von Grunebaum, G. E. (1952). "Avicenna's Risâla fî 'l-'išq and Courtly Love", Journal of Near Eastern Studies .

Wainwright, Martin (March 22, 2003).

"Desert island scripts" Archived 24 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine .

The Guardian .

Young, M. J. L.; Latham, J. D.; Serjeant, R. B., ed. (1990).

Religion, Learning and Science in the Abbasid Period . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-32763-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] A Literary History of the Arabs by Reynold Alleyne Nicholson Badawi, M. M.

(1975).

A Critical Introduction to Modern Arabic Poetry . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-20699-5 .

Badawi, Muhammad Mustafa (1993).

A Short History of Modern Arabic Literature . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Cachia, Pierre (2002).

Arabic literature: an overview . London: RoutledgeCurzon.

ISBN 9780700717255 .

OCLC 252908467 .

Eglash, Ruth. "Arabic manuscripts from J'lem libraries to go online" Arabic manuscripts from J'lem libraries to go online Goeje, Michael Jan de ; Thatcher, Griffithes Wheeler (1911).

"Arabia § Literature" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

271– 276.

Johnson-Davies, Denys (ed.) 2006, The Anchor book of modern Arabic fiction , New York: Anchor Books.

Kaaki, Lisa (2019).

A history of Arab women in literature .

Meisami, Julie Scott; Starkey, Paul , eds. (1998).

Encyclopedia of Arabic Literature . Vol. 1. London; New York: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780203020425 .

ISBN 0-415-18571-8 .

Meisami, Julie Scott; Starkey, Paul , eds. (1998).

Encyclopedia of Arabic Literature . Vol. 2. London; New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-18572-6 .

External links [ edit ] Arabic Ontology Lexicographic Search Engine Wikisource has the text of a 1905 New International Encyclopedia article about " Arabic literature ".

Cornell University link to Arabic Literature The original Arabic manuscript of Tawq Alhamama v t e Arabic manuscripts Manuscripts 7th century PERF 558 Letters by Muhammad 9th century Earliest known illuminated Qur'ans 10th century Maqama 11th century Maqama The Book of Fixed Stars ( Marsh 144 ) Timbuktu Manuscripts The Speech of Wild Animals 12th century Maqamat al-Hariri ( Arabe 3924 ) Kitāb al-Diryāq ( Arabe 2964 ) De materia medica Kitāb-al-Daraj The Book of Fixed Stars ( TSMK, A. 3493 ) Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye MS Huntington 264 13th century Maqamat al-Hariri ( Arabe 3929 , Arabe 6094 , Arabe 5847 , Esad Efendi 2961 , Or. 9718 , S.23 ) Kitāb al-Diryāq Kitāb naʿt al-ḥayawān De materia medica Kitāb al-bayṭara Kitab al-Aghani Kalīla wa-Dimna ( Arabe 3465 , BRR 3655) Risālat al-Ṣūfī fī al-kawākib Hadith Bayad wa Riyad ( Vat. Arabo 368 ) MS 5229 Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity ( Esad Efendi 3636 ) Dīwān Lughāt al-Turk 14th century Maqamat al-Hariri ( Or. Add. 22114 , Or. 7293 , ÖNB AF9 , Marsh 458 ) The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries ( Or Ms 161 ) The Wonders of Creatures and the Marvels of Creation Jami' al-tawarikh ( Or Ms 20 , MSS 77 ) 15th century Bijapur Collection Galland Manuscript 17th century The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries ( Arabe 1489 ) Concepts Arabic calligraphy Arabic miniature Baghdad School Sharbūsh Lists List of Islamic Manuscript Locations [ ar ] v t e Arabic literature Old Namara inscription Pre-Islamic Arabic inscriptions Pre-Islamic Abu Layla al-Muhalhel Adi ibn Zayd Afira bint 'Abbad Al-Fāriʿah bint Shaddād Al-Hujayjah Al-Ḥurqah Al-Khirniq bint Badr Al-Shanfara Al-Nu'man ibn Humaydah 'Alqama ibn 'Abada 'Amir ibn al-Tufayl Amr ibn Kulthum Antarah ibn Shaddad Al-A'sha Harith ibn Hilliza Al-Yashkuri Hatim al-Tai Labīd Laila bint Lukaiz Mahd al-Aadiyya Mu'aqqir Al-Nabigha Imru' al-Qais Samaw'al ibn 'Adiya Tarafa Uthman ibn al-Huwayrith Zuhayr bin Abi Sulma Zuhayr ibn Janab Aktham ibn Saifi Al-Munakhal Classical Early Islamic Al-Akhtal al-Taghlibi Al-Farazdaq Abd al-Hamid al-Katib Fadl Ashsha'ira Hassan ibn Thabit Ibn Abi Hasina Maysun bint Bahdal Jamil ibn Ma'mar Suraqa bin Malik Jarir ibn Atiyah Ka'b bin Zuhayr Al-Khansa Kuthayyir Layla al-Akhyaliyya Suraqah al-Bariqi Qutayla ukht al-Nadr Waddah al-Yaman Yunus al-Katib al-Mughanni Zufar ibn al-Harith al-Kilabi Dhu Jadan al-Himyari Dorayd bin Al Soma Qatari ibn al-Fuja'a al-Mufaddal Abbasid era Bint al-Mahdī Ibn al-Ahnaf Ibn al-Mu'tazz Abu Firas al-Hamdani Abu Tammam Al-Mudabbir Abu'l-Qasimbal-Maghribi Arib al-Ma'muniyya Al-Asma'i Ahmad al-Tifashi Abu al-Atahiya ibn al-'Amid Al-Hamadani Baha' al-din Zuhair Bashshar ibn Burd Buhturi Al-Busiri Al-Isfahani Al-Fath ibn Khaqan Al-Hariri of Basra Ibn al-Farid Ibn al-Rumi Ibn Duraid al-Zajjaj Abu Mansur al-Azhari ibn al-Mahdi ibn al-Mudabbir Al-Ma'arri Marwan ibn Abi Hafsa Marwan ibn Abi al-Janub Al-Mutanabbi Abu Nuwas Al-Jahiz Shāriyah Al-Armanazi Aban al-Lahiqi Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani Rabia of Basra Yunus ibn Habib Abu Nasr al-Jawhari Al-Farahidi Al-Shafi'i Ibn al-Muqaffa' Al-Mubarrad Ibn Abi Tahir Tayfur Safiyya al-Baghdadiyya Al-Zahiri Abu Muhammad al-Anbari Ibn al-Anbari Al-Qasabani Ibn Qutaybah Dik al-Jinn ‘Inān Abu Ahmad Monajjem Ibn Bakkar Al-Sarī al-Raffā’ Al-Suli Niftawayh Al-Tughrai Laylā bint Ṭarīf Al-Tha'alibi Al-Daylami al-Tawhīdī Al-Sharif al-Radi Ibn Hayyus Al-Raghib al-Isfahani Sharif al-Murtaza Al Uyuni Yaqut al-Hamawi Al Suhrawardi Al-Hallaj Usama ibn Munqidh Ibn al-Qatta' al-Siqilli Ibn al-Shajari Ibn al-Nafis Ibn 'Adlan Al-Andalus and Maghreb Abu Ja'far Al-Rumaikiyya Maria Alphaizuli Ibn Ammar Buthaina Al-Rukuniyya Hamda bint Ziyad al-Muaddib Ibn Hamdis Ibn Abd Rabbih Ibn al-Abbar Ibn al-Zaqqaq Ibn Amira Ibn Baqi Ibn Bassam Ibn Juzayy Ibn Khafaja Ibn al-Khatib Ibn Quzman Ibn Sahl Ibn Zamrak Ibn Zaydún Lubna of Córdoba Al-Mu'tamid ibn Abbad ibn Hani al-Azdi Muhya Nazhun Qasmuna Al-Tutili Umm Al-Kiram Yusuf III Yusuf III Ibn Hazm Ibn Arabi al-Shushtari Abu Madyan al-Rundi Ibn al-Arif Ibn Wahbun Ibn Abdun Avempace al-Baji al-Fazazi Ibn al-Yayyab Ibn Jubayr Ibn al-Kattani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Abi al-Khisal Mamluk era Ahmad ibn Arabshah Al-Busiri Ibn Manzur Ibn Battuta 'A'isha al-Ba'uniyya Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Nubata al-Nafzawi Ibn Khaldun Al-Qalqashandi Ottoman era Al-Nabulsi Fuzûlî Abdul Qadir al-Baghdadi Hanna Diyab Ibn al-Wannan Ahmed Ben Triki Modern Nahda El Baroudy Maruf al Rusafi Nasif al-Yaziji Ibrahim al-Yaziji Jamil Sidqi al-Zahawi Ahmad Faris Shidyaq Naoum Mokarzel Ahmad Rida Ameen Rihani Qustaki al-Himsi al-Kawakibi Suleyman al-Boustani Butrus al-Bustani Ahmad Zaki Pasha Rifa'a al-Tahtawi Abdallah Marrash Francis Marrash Maryana Marrash Hafez Ibrahim Ahmed Shawqi Mikhail Naimy Kahlil Gibran Farah Antun Jurji Zaydan May Ziadeh Taha Hussein Tawfiq al-Hakim Contemporary Nawal El Saadawi Naguib Mahfouz Yusuf Idris Sonallah Ibrahim Ahlam Mosteghanemi Mahmoud Darwish Adunis Ahmad Abd al-Ghafur Attar Abdur Rahman Kashgari Muhammad al-Maghut Nizar Qabbani Abbās al-Aqqād Mustafa Wahbi al-Tal Said Akl Fayeq Abdul-Jaleel Sinan Antoon Ibrahim Tuqan Emile Habibi Ghassan Kanafani Ghada al-Samman Abdul Rahman Munif al-Gosaibi Echebbi Hanna Mina Colette Khoury Saadallah Wannous Zakaria Tamer Tayeb Salih Leila Aboulela Ihsan Abdel Quddous al-Aswany Mohamed Choukri Leila Abouzeid Mohammed Bennis Abdellatif Laabi Mohamed Said Raihani Waciny Laredj Tahar Djaout Alifa Rifaat Ali Douagi Youssef Rzouga Salah Jahin Amal Donqol Ahmed Zaki Abu Shadi Hasan Tawfiq al-Mazini al-Jawahiri Safa Khulusi Nazik Al-Malaika Ahmed Matar Al-Bayati al-Sayyab Saadi Yousef Ibrahim Nasrallah Elia Abu Madi Omar Abu Risha Yusuf al-Khal Mourid Barghouti Jabra Ibrahim Jabra al-Qasim Fadwa Tuqan Nuri Ayyub National literatures of Arab states Algeria Bahrain Comoros Djibouti Egypt Copto-Arabic Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco Oman Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Somalia Sudan Syria Tunisia U.A.E.

Yemen v t e Arabic language Overviews Language Alphabet History Romanization Numerology Influence on other languages Scripts Nabataean script Arabic script Ancient North Arabian Ancient South Arabian script Arabic numerals Eastern numerals Arabic Braille Algerian Braille Maltese Braille Diacritics i‘jām Tashkil Harakat Nunation (tanwin) Shaddah Hamza Dagger alif Maltese alphabet Letters ʾAlif Bāʾ Tāʾ Ṯāʾ Ǧīm Ḥāʾ Ḫāʾ Dāl Ḏāl Rāʾ Zāy Sīn Šīn Ṣād Ḍād Ṭāʾ Ẓāʾ ʿAyn Ġayn Fāʾ Qāf Kāf Lām Mīm Nūn Hāʾ Wāw Yāʾ Varieties Pre-Islamic Proto-Arabic Nabataean Arabic Old Arabic Old Hijazi Arabic Pre-classical Arabic Literary Classical Modern Standard Modern spoken Maghrebi Pre-Hilalian Andalusi Sicilian Maltese Australian Cottenera Gozitan Qormi Żejtun Żurrieqi Urban Tunis (North-Eastern Tunisian) Village Eastern Sahili (Sahel) Sfaxian Jijel (Lesser Kabylia) Western Traras-Msirda Jebli (Mountain) Judeo-Maghrebi Judeo-Moroccan Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Hilalian Central Hilal Algerian koiné Judeo-Algerian Algerian Saharan Eastern Algerian Eastern Hilal Tunisian koiné Maqil Fessi Hassaniya Nemadi Moroccan koiné Eastern Western Western Algerian Sulaym Libyan koiné Western Egyptian Bedawi Nile Valley Egyptian Saʽidi Sudanese Levantine North Cilician Lebanese Syrian Aleppine Damascene South Jordanian Palestinian Mesopotamian Gilit Baghdadi Khuzestani Shawi South North (Qeltu) Anatolian Cypriot Judeo-Iraqi Baghdadi Peninsular Bahrani Bareqi Bedawi Dhofari Gulf Bahraini Emirati Kuwaiti Khamseh Hejazi Najdi Omani Shihhi Yemeni Hadhrami Sanʽani Taʽizzi-Adeni Tihami Judeo-Yemeni Others Central Asian Bakhtiari Bukhara Kashkadarya Khorasani Shirvani Chadian Nigerian Sociological Bedouin Arabic Judeo-Arabic Judeo-Algerian Judeo-Egyptian Judeo-Iraqi Baghdadi Judeo-Moroccan Kjal Wqal Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Tunisene Judeo-Yemeni Adeni Beda Habban Sanʽani Creoles and pidgins Bimbashi Bongor Gulf Pidgin Jordanian Bengali Pidgin Juba Maridi Nubi Pidgin Madam Turku Academic Literature Names Linguistics Standard Arabic phonology Sun and moon letters Tajwid Imāla ʾIʿrāb (case) Grammar Triliteral root Mater lectionis IPA Quranic Arabic Corpus Calligraphy · Script Ajami script Diwani Hijazi script Jawi script Jeli Thuluth Kairouani Kufic Maghrebi Mashq Muhaqqaq Naskh (script) Nastaliq Rasm Ruqʿah script Shahmukhi Sini (script) Taliq script Tawqi Thuluth Technical Arabic keyboard Arabic script in Unicode ISO/IEC 8859-6 Windows-1256 MS-DOS codepages 708 709 710 711 720 864 MacArabic encoding Other Islam and Arabic language Italics indicate extinct languages Languages between parentheses are varieties of the language on their left.

Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5c8z5
Cached time: 20250817220941
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.507 seconds
Real time usage: 1.810 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13375/1000000
Revision size: 119183/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 498246/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 39656/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 43/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 456957/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.758/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18293512/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1248.712      1 -total
 29.82%  372.391      1 Template:Reflist
 13.98%  174.566     21 Template:Cite_book
 10.17%  126.985     28 Template:Cite_web
  8.60%  107.439     10 Template:Navbox
  6.77%   84.588      2 Template:Sidebar
  6.67%   83.245      1 Template:History_of_literature_by_era
  6.12%   76.403      1 Template:Langx
  5.04%   62.978      1 Template:Short_description
  4.94%   61.644      4 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:462469:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817220941 and revision id 1306464287. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arabic_literature&oldid=1306464287 " Categories : Arabic literature Islamic culture Arab culture Literature by ethnicity Hidden categories: CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 22:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arabic literature 62 languages Add topic

