Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 2.1 Origins, rules, and customs 2.2 Historical development 2.3 Organization in Athens 2.4 Construction 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Gymnasium (ancient Greece) 42 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek training facility "Greek Gymnasium" redirects here. For modern Greek use, see Education in Greece § Gymnasium .

Gymnasium, Sardis The gymnasium ( Ancient Greek : γυμνάσιον , romanized : gymnásion ) in Ancient Greece functioned as a training facility for competitors in public games. It was also a place for socializing and engaging in intellectual pursuits. The name comes from the Ancient Greek term gymnós , meaning "naked" or "nude". Only adult male citizens were allowed to use the gymnasia.

Athletes competed nude, a practice which was said to encourage aesthetic appreciation of the male body, and to be a tribute to the gods. Gymnasia and palaestrae (wrestling schools) were under the protection and patronage of Heracles , Hermes and, in Athens, Theseus .

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word gymnasium is the latinisation of the Greek noun γυμνάσιον ( gymnasion ), "public place for physical exercises; exercise area", in pl. "bodily exercises" and generally "school", [ 2 ] which in turn is derived from the common Greek adjective γυμνός ( gymnos ) meaning "naked" or "nude", [ 3 ] by way of the related verb γυμνάζω ( gymnazo ), whose meaning is "to train naked", "train in gymnastic exercise", generally "to train, to exercise".

[ 4 ] The verb had this meaning because the athletes undressed in changing rooms called Apodyteriums and trained naked, rubbing their bodies with olive oil and then cleaning with the strigil . Historically, the gymnasium was used for exercise, communal bathing ( Thermae ), and later scholarly and philosophical pursuits. The English noun gymnast , first recorded in 1594, [ 5 ] is formed from the Greek γυμναστής ( gymnastēs ), [ 6 ] but in Greek this word means " trainer " not " athlete ". The palaestra was the part of the gymnasium devoted to wrestling , boxing , and ball games . From the word "gymnasion" came also the term " gymnastics ".

Pompeii gymnasium, from the top of the stadium wall Organization [ edit ] The gymnasium was formed as a public institution where young men received training in physical exercises.

[ 7 ] The supervision of the gymnasia was entrusted to gymnasiarchs, who were public officials responsible for the conduct of sports and games at public festivals and who directed the schools and supervised the competitors. The gymnastai were the teachers, coaches, and trainers of the athletes. The Greek gymnasia also held lectures and discussions on philosophy, literature, and music, and there were public libraries nearby.

Origins, rules, and customs [ edit ] A hermaic sculpture of an old man, thought to be the master of a gymnasium. He held a long stick in his right hand.

Ai Khanoum , Afghanistan , 2nd century BC.

The regulation of the Athenian gymnasium is attributed by Pausanias (i. 39. 3) to Theseus .

Solon made several laws on the subject; according to Galen these were reduced to a workable system of management in the time of Cleisthenes (late 6th century and early 5th century BC). While the origins of physical exercise regimes was thought to be Sparta of Lacaedemon, or Knossos of Crete, the practice of exercising in the nude had its beginnings in the 7th century BC.

[ according to whom?

] The same purpose is frequently attributed to the tradition of oiling the body, a custom so costly that it required significant public and private subsidies (the practice was the largest expense in gymnasia).

Cleinias of Crete describes the origin of the tradition of Cretan gymnasia and common meals in Book I of Plato's Laws , and ascribes them to the mythological lawgiver Rhadamanthus .

The original iterations of gymnasia were large open areas at city outskirts, not enclosed structures.

[ 8 ] The athletic contests for which the gymnasium supplied the means of training and competition formed part of the social and spiritual life of the Greeks from very early on. The contests took place in honour of heroes and gods, sometimes forming part of a periodic festival or the funeral rites of a deceased chief. The free and active Greek lifestyle (spent to a great extent in the open air) reinforced the attachment to such sports and after a period of time the contests became a prominent element in Greek culture. The victor in religious athletic contests, though he gained no material prize other than a wreath, was rewarded with the honour and respect of his fellow citizens. Training of competitors for the greater contests was a huge matter of public concern and special buildings were provided by the state for such use, with management entrusted to public officials. A victory in the great religious festivals was counted an honour for the whole state.

[ 9 ] Historical development [ edit ] The ancient Greek gymnasium soon became a place for more than exercise and training. This development arose through recognition by the Greeks of the strong relation between athletics, education and health. Accordingly, the gymnasium became connected with education on the one hand and medicine on the other. Physical training and maintenance of health and strength were the chief parts of children's earlier education. Except for time devoted to letters and music, the education of young men was solely conducted in the gymnasium, where provisions were made not only for physical pedagogy but for instruction in morals and ethics.

[ citation needed ] As pupils grew older, informal conversation and other forms of social activity took the place of institutional, systematic discipline. Since the gymnasia were favorite resorts of youth, they were frequented by teachers, especially philosophers.

[ 10 ] Philosophers and sophists frequently assembled to hold talks and lectures in the gymnasia; thus the institution became a resort for those interested in less structured intellectual pursuits in addition to those using the place for training in physical exercises.

In Athens there were three great public gymnasia: the Academy , the Lyceum and the Cynosarges , [ 10 ] [ 11 ] each of which was dedicated to a deity whose statue adorned the structure. Each of the three was rendered famous by association with a celebrated school of philosophy.

[ 9 ] [ 12 ] Antisthenes founded a school at the Cynosarges, from which some say the name Cynic derives; [ 13 ] Plato founded a school that gathered at the Academy, after which the school was named, making the gymnasium famous for hundreds of years; [ 14 ] and at the Lyceum, [ 15 ] Aristotle founded the Peripatetic school .

Plato considered gymnastics to be an important part of education (see Republic iii. and parts of Laws ) and according to him it was the sophist Prodicus who first pointed out the connection between gymnastics and health. Having found gymnastic exercises beneficial to his own weak constitution, Prodicus formulated a method that became generally accepted and was subsequently improved by Hippocrates .

Galen also put great stress on the proper and frequent use of gymnastics. Throughout other ancient Greek medical writings special exercises are prescribed as cures for specific diseases, [ 9 ] showing the extent to which the Greeks considered health and fitness connected. The same connection is commonly suggested by experts today.

[ 16 ] Organization in Athens [ edit ] In Athens ten gymnasiarchs were appointed annually, one from each tribe. These officials rotated through a series of jobs, each with unique duties. They were responsible for looking after and compensating persons training for public contests, conducting the games at the great Athenian festivals , exercising general supervision over competitor morale, and decorating and maintaining the gymnasium. Beneath them in the organisational structure were ten sophronistae responsible for observing the conduct of the youths and (especially) for attending all their games.

[ 9 ] Paedotribae and gymnastae were responsible for teaching the methods involved in the various exercises, as well as choosing suitable athletics for the youths. The gymnastae were also responsible for monitoring the constitution of the pupils and prescribing remedies for them if they became unwell. The aleiptae oiled and dusted the bodies of the youths, acted as surgeons, and administered any drugs prescribed. According to Galen, there also existed a teacher specifically devoted to instruction in ball games.

[ 9 ] Construction [ edit ] Gymnasia were typically large structures containing spaces for each type of exercise as well as a stadium , palaestra , baths, outer porticos for practice in bad weather, and covered porticos where philosophers and other "men of letters" gave public lectures and held disputations .

[ 9 ] Most Athenian gymnasia were located in suburban areas due to the large amount of level space required for construction. Additionally, these areas tended to be cooler and closer to a good water supply than similar areas in central Athens.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Gymnopaedia Gymnasium at Delphi For modern uses of the term "gymnasium", see Gymnasium (school) and gym .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Pausanias (geographer) , Guide to Greece, 4.32.1 ^ γυμνάσιον , 
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus project ^ γυμνός , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus project ^ γυμνάζω , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus project ^ Oxford English Dictionary ^ γυμναστής , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus project ^ Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920).

"Gymnasium" .

Encyclopedia Americana .

^ Kyle, Donald G. (2015).

Sports and Spectacle In the Ancient World . Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK: Wiley Blackwell. p. 81.

ISBN 978-1-118-61356-6 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ a b c d e f McNeill 1911 , p. 752.

^ a b Reynolds, Francis J., ed. (1921).

"Gymnasium" .

Collier's New Encyclopedia . New York: P. F. Collier & Son Company.

^ J. Burnet , Plato's Euthyphro, Apology of Socrates, and Crito , p. 7.

^ The Oxford Companion to Classical Literature , 2nd edition, p. 257.

^ The Oxford Companion to Classical Literature , pp. 164, 165.

^ p. 179, T. Martin, Ancient Greece , Yale University 2000.

^ J. Lynch, "Gymnasium", in D. Zeyl (ed.), Encyclopedia of Classical Philosophy , Greenwood Press 1997.

^ 1996 Surgeon General's Report on Physical Activity and Health .

NCCDPHP . 1996. S/N 017-023-00196-5 . Retrieved September 16, 2012 .

Fact Sheet: The Link Between Physical Activity and Morbidity and Mortality ^ Pomeroy, Sarah B.

; Burstein, Stanley Mayer; Donlan, Walter; Roberts, Jennifer Tolbert; Tandy, David W. (2014).

A brief history of Ancient Greece : politics, society, and culture (Third ed.). New York. p. 193.

ISBN 9780199981557 .

OCLC 843228593 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gymnasia .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : McNeill, Ronald John (1911). " Gymnastics and Gymnasium ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

752– 753.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gymnasium_(ancient_Greece)&oldid=1302320005 " Categories : Ancient Greek leisure Sport in ancient Greece Education in ancient Greece History of gymnastics Nude recreation Gymnasiums (ancient Greece) Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference CS1 maint: location Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014 Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 17:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gymnasium (ancient Greece) 42 languages Add topic

