Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Scientistic versus dramatistic 3 Social constructionism 4 Examples 5 Importance 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Terministic screen Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term in the theory and criticism of rhetoric Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Terministic screen is a term in the theory and criticism of rhetoric . It involves the acknowledgment of a language system that determines an individual's perception and symbolic action in the world.

Overview [ edit ] Kenneth Burke develops the terministic screen in his book of essays called Language as Symbolic Action in 1966. He defines the concept as "a screen composed of terms through which humans perceive the world, and that direct attention away from some interpretations and toward others".

[ 1 ] Burke offers the metaphor to explain why people interpret messages differently, based on the construction of symbols, meanings, and, therefore, reality.

[ 2 ] Words convey a particular meaning, conjuring images and ideas that induce support toward beliefs or opinions. Receivers interpret the intended message through a metaphorical screen of their own vocabulary and perspective to the world.

[ 3 ] Certain terms may grab attention and lead to a particular conclusion.

[ 4 ] "Language reflects, selects, and deflects as a way of shaping the symbol systems that allow us to cope with the world".

[ 5 ] Scientistic versus dramatistic [ edit ] Burke describes two different types of terministic screens: scientistic and dramatistic. Scientistic begins with a definition of a term; it describes the term as what it is or what it is not, putting the term in black and white. When defining, the essential function is either attitudinal or hortatory. In other words, the focus is on expressions or commands. When terms are treated as hortatory, they are developed. Burke comments on why he uses developed rather than another word. "I say 'developed'; I do not say 'originating'. The ultimate origins of language seem to me as mysterious as the origins of the universe itself. One must view it, I feel, simply as the 'given' ".

[ 6 ] The dramatistic approach concerns action: thou shalt or thou shalt not.

[ 7 ] This screen directs the audience toward action based on interpretation of a term. Via terministic screens, the audience will be able to associate with the term or dissociate from it.

[ 8 ] Social constructionism [ edit ] " Social constructionism is a metaphor that attempts to capture the way Burke viewed the nature of the world and the function of language therein." Symbols, terms, and language build our view of life. Social constructionism allows us to look at Burke's theory in terms we recognize and are comfortable with.

[ 9 ] Examples [ edit ] When a person says gender, most people, based on their individual beliefs, normally think of male or female. However, some could think of intersex individuals. If someone says they think of male, female, and intersex, more would be reflected about the person based on their terminology. Still others would recognize gender as different from biological sex, and say they think of man, woman, and other genders. Another example occurs within the abortion controversy. A pro-choice advocate would most likely use the word "fetus" but opponents of legal abortion would use the word "baby", because the term stirs more realistic and relatable images and has a bearing on the legal status. Using the word "baby" versus "fetus" defines reality differently (scientistic) and guides people to act in a certain way (dramatistic) solely based on term selection that may be unconscious.

[ 10 ] Importance [ edit ] Words are absolute for thought and action. In other words, language is needed to perform thought and action. One can not think without language, and therefore can not act without language and thought.

[ citation needed ] In his "Definition of Man" Burke refers to man as the "symbol using animal" because of man's capacity  to use a complex web of symbol systems (language) for meaning making.

[ 11 ] [ clarification needed ] [ 12 ] According to Burke, individuals create terministic screens consciously and unconsciously, as they perceive the world and share perspectives.  Burke contends these screens set up a network of beliefs through which all ideas will be interpreted. Communication scholar Paul Stob contends that the language we use is thus not just a direct reflection of our intelligence, but also of perception and culture.  David Blakesley posits that the terministic screen enables the further understanding of rhetorical perspectives. In each of these ways, the terministic screen allows for concepts to be interpreted in different ways by different people and contribute to the complexity of meaning.

See also [ edit ] Framing – Effect of how information is presented on perception Frame analysis – Multi-disciplinary social science research method Linguistic relativity , also known as Sapir-Whorf hypothesis – Hypothesis of language influencing thought References [ edit ] ^ Stob, Paul. " 'Terministic Screens', Social Constructionism, and the Language of Experience: Kenneth Burke's Utilization of William James". Philosophy and Rhetoric 42, no. 2 (May 1, 2008): 131.

^ Burke, Kenneth. "Terministic Screens". In Language as Symbolic Action, 45. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1966.

^ Blakesley, David, ed. The Terministic Screen: Rhetorical Perspectives on Film. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 2003.

^ Palczewski, Catherine Helen, Richard Ice, and John Fritch. "Terministic Screen." In Rhetoric in Civic Life, 39. State College, PA: Strata Publishing, 2012.

^ Stob , p. 139.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFStob ( help ) ^ Burke , p. 44.

^ Burke , p. 45.

^ Burke , p. 49.

^ Stob , p. 131.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFStob ( help ) ^ Hill, Ian. " 'The Human Barnyard' and Kenneth Burke's Philosophy of Technology". KB Journal 5, no. 2 (Spring 2009).

^ Burke, Kenneth.

Language as Symbolic Action . The University of California Press. pp.

3– 20.

^ Palczewski, Ice, and Fritch , p. 39.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFPalczewski,_Ice,_and_Fritch ( help ) v t e Kenneth Burke Works The Rhetoric of Hitler's "Battle" (1939) A Grammar of Motives (1945) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) Concepts Definition of man Dramatism Dramatistic pentad Identification Modern rhetoric Terministic screen Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Terministic_screen&oldid=1259365950 " Categories : Rhetoric Ideologies Language Social constructionism Hidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2019 This page was last edited on 24 November 2024, at 20:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Terministic screen Add languages Add topic

