Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Consciousness 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Cognitive closure (philosophy) 5 languages Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Proposition in philosophy of mind "Transcendental naturalism" redirects here; not to be confused with Transcendental idealism .

Not to be confused with Epistemic closure .

Cognitive closure refers to the concept in the philosophy of mind and philosophy of science that suggests human cognitive faculties are fundamentally incapable of solving certain philosophical problems.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] These problems, which have persisted throughout the history of philosophy, are considered beyond the reach of human understanding, not because of insufficient data or research, but due to inherent limits in the structure or capabilities of the mind.

Philosopher Colin McGinn , a proponent of cognitive closure, argues that certain philosophical problems, such as the mind–body problem , personal identity , the foundations of meaning , knowledge , both a priori and empirical , and free will , may be fundamentally unknowable by humans. He refers to this viewpoint as transcendental naturalism . Philosopher Owen Flanagan has referred to this stance as "anti-constructive naturalism" or "new mysterianism," and like McGinn, he posits that the limitations are intrinsic to the human brain’s design.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] History [ edit ] Immanuel Kant argued in the Critique of Pure Reason that human thinking is unavoidably structured by categories of the understanding : Quantity – Unity, Plurality, Totality.

Quality – Reality , Negation, Limitation.

Relation – Inherence and Subsistence, Causality and Dependence, Community.

Modality – Possibility or Impossibility, Existence or Non-Existence, Necessity or Contingence.

Kant argued that these are ideas that impose a limit to thinking. What can be known through the categories is called "things for us" and what is outside the categories is unthinkable, called "things in themselves".

John Tyndall , in the 19th century, observed that even if we were able to map the precise molecular activities in the brain, the connection between physical brain states and conscious experiences might remain intellectually impassable. This suggests that, despite advanced scientific understanding, some problems -- especially those relating to consciousness -- would evade explanation.

[ 6 ] In the early 20th century, Friedrich Hayek argued that "the whole idea of the mind explaining itself is a logical contradiction", likening it to a generalized case of Gödel's incompleteness theorem . Hayek was not a naturalistic agnostic, that is, the view that science currently cannot offer an explanation of the mind–body relationship, but in principle it could." [ 2 ] Consciousness [ edit ] The problem of consciousness is often cited as one of the central issues of cognitive closure. Philosopher Thomas Nagel , in his essay "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" explored the idea that the subjective nature of experience might be inherently beyond the reach of scientific explanation. Nagel’s argument underscores the difficulty in explaining how physical processes in the brain give rise to conscious experience.

Noam Chomsky suggests that a species with a different cognitive structure might find some problems trivial to solve, highlighting that certain philosophical issues may be beyond human comprehension because of the biological constraints of our minds.

[ 7 ] Owen Flanagan noted in his 1991 book Science of the Mind that some modern thinkers have suggested that consciousness will never be completely explained. Flanagan called them "the new mysterians" after the rock group Question Mark and the Mysterians .

[ 8 ] According to Colin McGinn, the solution to the mind–body problem cannot be grasped, despite the fact that the solution is "written in our genes".

Emergent materialism is a similar but different claim that humans are not yet smart enough to determine the relationship between mind and matter .

[ citation needed ] [ dubious – discuss ] See also [ edit ] Epistemological nihilism Dialetheism Inquiry Mystical experience Münchhausen trilemma Pyrrhonism Reductionism Strong agnosticism is a religious application of a similar position.

Uncertainty Vertiginous question References [ edit ] ^ Leslie Marsh (ed.), Hayek in Mind: Hayek's Philosophical Psychology , Emerald Group Publishing, 2011, p. xv.

^ a b Butos, W.N. (2010).

The Social Science of Hayek's The Sensory Order . Advances in Austrian Economics . Emerald. pp.

127– 128.

ISBN 978-1-84950975-6 .

1.

Explanation is delimited by the apparatus of classification (the mind)... 2. An apparatus of classification cannot explain anything more complex than itself... 3. Therefore, the mind cannot fully explain itself...

^ Harris, Errol E (2006), Reflections on the Problem of Consciousness , p. 51, McGinn's stance, while he denies the possibility of ever understanding the causal connection, may be regarded as "naturalistic" in the sense that he does not reject the validity of neuro-physiological theory, and does not doubt that brain activity accompanies conscious states.

.

^ Ross Wilson (ed.), The Meaning of "Life" in Romantic Poetry and Poetics , Routledge, 2009, p. 88: "[McGinn] calls his stance "transcendental naturalism..." ^ McGinn, Colin (1994).

"The Problem of Philosophy" .

Philosophical Studies .

76 ( 2– 3): 133– 56.

doi : 10.1007/bf00989821 .

S2CID 170454227 .

It combines deep epistemic transcendence with the denial that what thus transcends is thereby non-natural.

^ Tyndall, John (1871), Fragments of Science , Adegi Graphics LLC, pp.

86– 87, ISBN 9781402171277 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) .

^ Chomsky, Noam (1988), Language and problems of knowledge , p. 152 .

^ Flanagan, Owen (1991).

The Science of the Mind .

MIT Press . p.

313 .

ISBN 978-0-262-56056-6 .

v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cognitive_closure_(philosophy)&oldid=1294288610 " Categories : Concepts in epistemology Knowledge Naturalism (philosophy) Concepts in the philosophy of mind Concepts in the philosophy of science Problem solving Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from November 2018 This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 20:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cognitive closure (philosophy) 5 languages Add topic

