Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 English usage 2 Singulare tantum 3 Usage in other languages 4 See also 5 Notes and references Toggle the table of contents Plurale tantum 24 languages Boarisch Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Հայերեն Íslenska Italiano Kaszëbsczi Nederlands Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Noun that appears only in the plural form This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Plurale tantum" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Even a single item is called scissors (the singular form scissor is sometimes used in India).

A plurale tantum ( Latin for 'plural only'; pl.

pluralia tantum ) is a noun that appears only in the plural form and does not have a singular variant for referring to a single object. In a less strict usage of the term, it can also refer to nouns whose singular form is rarely used.

'Putting on pants' is correct, but 'putting on a pant' may sound odd.

In English, pluralia tantum are often words that denote objects that occur or function as pairs or sets, such as spectacles, trousers, pants, scissors, clothes, or genitals. Other examples are for collections that, like alms , cannot conceivably be singular. Other examples include suds , jeans , outskirts, odds , riches, goods, news, gallows (although later treated as singular), surroundings, thanks, and heroics.

In some languages, pluralia tantum refer to points or periods of time (for example, Latin kalendae 'calends, the first day of the month', German Ferien 'vacation, holiday'), or to events (for example, Finnish häät 'wedding'), or to liquids (for example, Hebrew מַיִם ( mayim ) and Chichewa madzí , both 'water').

A bilingual example is the Latin word fasces that was brought into English; when referring to the symbol of authority, it is a plurale tantum noun in both languages.

[ 1 ] English usage [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In English, some plurale tantum nouns have a singular form used only attributively . Phrases such as "trouser press" and "scissor kick" contain the singular form, but it is considered nonstandard to say "a trouser" or "a scissor" on its own (though in the fashion and tailoring industries use of "trouser" in the singular to refer to a particular style occurs [ 2 ] ). That accords with the strong preference for singular nouns in attributive positions in English, but some words are used in the plural form even as attributive nouns, such as "clothes peg", "glasses case" – notwithstanding "spectacle case" and "eyeglass case".

In English, a word may have many definitions only some of which are pluralia tantum . The word "glasses" (a set of corrective lenses to improve eyesight) is plurale tantum . In contrast, the word "glass"—either a container for drinks (a count noun ) or a vitreous substance (a mass noun )—may be singular or plural. Some words, such as "brain" and "intestine", can be used as either plurale tantum nouns or count nouns.

Singulare tantum [ edit ] The term for a noun that appears only in the singular form is singulare tantum ( pl.

singularia tantum ), such as the English words: information, dust, and wealth.

Singulare tantum is defined by the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary as " Gram.

A word having only a singular form; esp.

a non-count noun." [ 3 ] Such nouns may refer to a unique singular object (essentially a proper noun), but more often than not, they refer to uncountable nouns, either mass nouns (referring to a substance that cannot be counted as distinct objects, such as 'milk') or collective nouns (referring to objects that may in principle be counted but are referred to as one, such as 'popcorn' or Arabic تُوت , tut , ' mulberry '). Given that they do not have a number distinction, they may appear as singulare tantum in one language but as plurale tantum in another. Compare English water to the Hebrew plurale tantum , מַיִם ( mayim ).

In English, such words are almost always mass nouns . Some uncountable nouns can be alternatively used as count nouns when meaning "a type of", and the plural means "more than one type of". For example, strength is uncountable in Strength is power , but it can be used as a countable noun to mean an instance of [a kind of] strength, as in My strengths are in physics and chemistry.

Some words, especially proper nouns such as the name of an individual, are nearly always in the singular form because there is only one example of what that noun means. Others like "nothingness" or "emptiness" refer to logical states of absence that can't sensibly be quantified at all, hence are not usefully "mass nouns" but are still singulare tantum .

Usage in other languages [ edit ] Pluralia tantum vary arbitrarily between languages. For example, in Swedish , a pair of scissors is just en sax ( lit.

' one scissor ' ), not a plurale tantum . Similarly, in French , a pair of trousers is un pantalon , while in Spanish un pantalón (singular) and unos pantalones (plural) are both valid ways to refer to a single garment. Additionally, in German , the term "Jeans" which is borrowed from the English, is rendered singular feminine as die Jeans in accordance with the singular feminine word die Hose meaning "trousers".

In some other languages, rather than quantifying a plurale tantum noun with a measure word , special numeral forms are used in such cases. In Polish , for example, "one pair of eyeglasses" is expressed as either jedne okulary (one- plural glasses- plural ) or jedna para okularów (one- singular pair- singular glasses- genitive plural ). For larger quantities, "collective numeral" forms are available: troje drzwi (three doors), pięcioro skrzypiec (five violins). Compare them to the ordinary numeral forms found in Polish: trzy filmy/pięć filmów (three films/five films) [ 4 ] The Russian деньги ( den'gi , 'money') originally had a singular, деньга ( den'ga ), which meant a copper coin worth half a kopeck .

The Yiddish word kreplach is a well known example of a plurale tantum that is also plural only in other languages into which it is borrowed, [ clarification needed ] 'one of the kreplach' would be איינער פון די קרעפּלאַך ( eyner fun di kreplakh ).

The Welsh nefoedd , 'heaven', is the plural of nef , which is no longer part of the spoken language.

Nefoedd is now used with the singular meaning of 'heaven' and plural of 'heavens'.

In Hebrew , a few words that indicate an action establishing a new relationship between two persons, are indicated by the plural form only: אירוסין (engagement), נישואין (marriage), קידושין (religious marriage), גירושין (divorce), פיטורין (dismissal), and likewise.

See also [ edit ] The dictionary definition of plurale tantum at Wiktionary Language portal Languages portal Linguistics portal Writing portal Contents portal Classifier (linguistics) Defective verb English plurals Mass noun Singulative number Synesis Wiktionary lists of pluralia tantum Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Harper, Douglas.

"fasces" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

"1590s, from Latin fasces 'bundle of rods containing an axe with the blade projecting' (plural of fascis 'bundle' of wood, etc.).... Carried before a lictor, a superior Roman magistrate, as a symbol of power over life and limb: the sticks symbolized punishment by whipping, the axe-head execution by beheading." Retrieved 2 August 2015.

^ " "Proof that Flared Trousers are Indeed a Wardrobe Staple" " .

^ The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press. 1993. p. 2871.

^ Swan, Oscar E. (2002).

A Grammar of Contemporary Polish . Bloomington, Indiana: Slavica. pp.

200 –201.

ISBN 9780893572969 .

Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐lkkcp
Cached time: 20250814215205
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.432 seconds
Real time usage: 0.560 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1866/1000000
Revision size: 9102/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 44922/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2240/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 23198/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.299/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17036022/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  508.652      1 -total
 17.49%   88.981      1 Template:Reflist
 16.99%   86.432      1 Template:Langnf
 14.48%   73.668      1 Template:Authority_control
 12.76%   64.910      2 Template:Cite_web
 12.59%   64.055      1 Template:OEtymD
 12.44%   63.256      1 Template:Short_description
 11.26%   57.251      2 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.77%   54.759     45 Template:Lang
 10.45%   53.129      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:763517:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215205 and revision id 1289308705. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plurale_tantum&oldid=1289308705 " Categories : Grammar Latin words and phrases Grammatical number Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2015 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from April 2024 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Finnish-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Chichewa-language text Articles needing additional references from April 2024 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Yiddish-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2023 Articles containing Welsh-language text This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 20:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plurale tantum 24 languages Add topic

