Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General design criteria 2 Specific needs 3 Pull handles 4 Twist handles 5 Handles for wide-range motion 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Handle 35 languages العربية Aragonés Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego हिन्दी Ido עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kaszëbsczi Latina Lombard Nederlands Нохчийн Polski Português Русский Shqip Sicilianu کوردی తెలుగు Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Handle (grip) ) Part of device designed to be held For other uses, see Handle (disambiguation) .

A modern claw hammer with rubber - coated handle Knife handle A handle is a part of, or an attachment to, an object that allows it to be grasped and manipulated by hand .  The design of each type of handle involves substantial ergonomic issues, even where these are dealt with intuitively or by following tradition. Handles for tools are an important part of their function, enabling the user to exploit the tools to maximum effect.

Package handles allow for convenient carrying of packages.

General design criteria [ edit ] Flat-nose pliers with thermoplastic handles Spade with handle The three nearly universal requirements of are: Sufficient strength to support the object, or to otherwise transmit the force involved in the task the handle serves.

Sufficient length to permit the hand or hands gripping it to comfortably exert the force.

[ 1 ] Sufficiently small circumference to permit the hand or hands to surround it far enough to grip it as solidly as needed to exert that force.

[ 2 ] Specific needs [ edit ] Other requirements may apply to specific handles: A sheath or coating on the handle that provides friction against the hand, reducing the gripping force needed to achieve a reliable grip.

Designs such as recessed car-door handles, reducing the chance of accidental operation, or simply the inconvenience of "snagging" the handle.

Sufficient circumference to distribute the force comfortably and safely over the hand.

[ 3 ] An example where this requirement is almost the sole purpose for a handle's existence is the handle that consists of two pieces: a hollow wooden cylinder about the diameter of a finger and a bit longer than one hand-width, and a stiff wire that passes through the center of the cylinder, has two right angles, and is shaped into a hook at each end. This handle permits comfortable carrying, with otherwise bare hands, of a heavy package, suspended on a tight string that passes around the top and bottom of it: the string is strong enough to support it, but the pressure the string would exert on fingers that grasped it directly would often be unacceptable.

Design to thwart unwanted access, for example, by children or thieves. In these cases many of the other requirements may have reduced importance. For example, a child-proof doorknob can be difficult for even an adult to use.

Pull handles [ edit ] Many drawers use pull handles.

One major category of handles are pull handles, where one or more hands grip the handle or handles, and exert force to shorten the distance between the hands and their corresponding shoulders. The three criteria stated above are universal for pull handles.

Many pull handles are for lifting, mostly on objects to be carried.

Horizontal pull handles are widespread, including drawer pulls , handles on latchless doors and the outside of car doors.  The inside controls for opening car doors from inside are usually pull handles, although their function of permitting the door to be pushed open is accomplished by an internal unlatching linkage.

Pull handles are also a frequent host of common door handle bacteria such as e-coli , fungal or other viral infections.

[ 4 ] Two kinds of pull handles may involve motion in addition to the hand-focused motions described: Pulling the starting cord on a small internal-combustion engine may, besides moving the hand toward the shoulder, also exploit simultaneously pushing a wheeled vehicle away with the other hand, stepping away from the engine, and/or standing from a squat.

Some throwing motions, as in a track-and-field hammer throw , involve pulling on a handle against centrifugal force (without bringing it closer), in the course of accelerating the thrown object by forcing it into circular motion.

Twist handles [ edit ] Many doors use twist handles .

Another category of hand-operated device requires grasping (but not pulling) and rotating the hand and either the lower arm or the whole arm, about their axis.  When the grip required is a fist grip, as with a door handle that has an arm rather than a knob to twist, the term "handle" unambiguously applies.  Another clear case is a rarer device seen on mechanically complicated doors like those of airliners, where (instead of the whole hand moving down as it also rotates, on the door handles just described) the axis of rotation is between the thumb and the outermost fingers, so the thumb moves up if the outer fingers move down.

Handles for wide-range motion [ edit ] The handles of bicycle grips , club-style weapons , shovels and spades , axes , hammers , mallets and hatchets , baseball bats , rackets , golf clubs and croquet mallets involve a greater range of ergonomic issues.

See also [ edit ] Hand truck Shopping trolley (caddy) References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Handles .

^ Schoenmarklin, R W (1989), "Effects of handle angle and work orientation on hammering: II. Muscle fatigue and subjective ratings of body discomfort" (PDF) , Human Factors , 31 (4): 413– 420, doi : 10.1177/001872088903100405 , PMID 2583726 , retrieved 24 June 2023 ^ Liao, Kun-Hsi (2016), "Optimal Handle Grip Span for Maximum Hand Grip Strength and Accurate Grip Control Strength Exertion according to Individual Hand Size" , Osteoporosis & Physical Activity , 4 (2) , retrieved 24 June 2023 ^ Wang, Mao-Jiun J. (Winter 2000). "The Effect of Handle Angle on MAWL, Wrist Posture, RPE, and Heart Rate".

Human Factors .

42 (4): 553– 565.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1000.7796 .

doi : 10.1518/001872000779698079 .

PMID 11324850 .

S2CID 7243355 .

^ Door Handles Can Spread Germs Archived 2018-01-20 at the Wayback Machine retrieved November 2016 Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Handle&oldid=1300254301 " Categories : Human–machine interaction Door furniture Tools Ergonomics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 06:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Handle 35 languages Add topic

