Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geographical variation 2 Biodiversity patterns and requirements 3 Ecoregions Toggle Ecoregions subsection 3.1 Afrotropical realm 3.2 Australasian realm 3.3 Indomalayan realm 3.4 Nearctic realm 3.5 Neotropical realm 3.6 Oceanian realm 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests 26 languages العربية Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt West-Vlams 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Biome Extent of dry forest regions.

The tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forest is a habitat type defined by the World Wide Fund for Nature and is located at tropical and subtropical latitudes.

[ 1 ] Though these forests occur in climates that are warm year-round, and may receive several hundred millimeters of rain per year, they have  long dry seasons that last several months and vary with geographic location. These seasonal droughts have great impact on all living things in the forest.

Deciduous trees predominate in most of these forests, and during the drought a leafless period occurs, which varies with species type. Because trees lose moisture through their leaves, the shedding of leaves allows trees such as teak and mountain ebony to conserve water during dry periods. The newly bare trees open up the canopy layer, enabling sunlight to reach ground level and facilitate the growth of thick underbrush . Trees on moister sites and those with access to ground water tend to be evergreen . Infertile sites also tend to support evergreen trees. Three tropical dry forest ecoregions, the East Deccan dry evergreen forests , the Sri Lanka dry-zone dry evergreen forests , and the Southeastern Indochina dry evergreen forests , are characterized by evergreen trees.

[ 1 ] Though less biologically diverse than rainforests , tropical dry forests are home to a wide variety of wildlife including monkeys , deer , large cats , parrots , various rodents , and ground dwelling birds . Mammalian biomass tends to be higher in dry forests than in rain forests, especially in Asian and African dry forests. Many of these species display extraordinary adaptations to the difficult climate .

[ 1 ] This biome is alternately known as the tropical and subtropical dry forest biome or the tropical and subtropical deciduous forest biome.

Geographical variation [ edit ] See also: Global_200 § Tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests Trinidad and Tobago dry forest on Chacachacare showing the dry-season deciduous nature of the vegetation Dry forests tend to exist in the drier areas north and south of the tropical rainforest belt, south or north of the subtropical deserts, generally in two bands: one between 10° and 20°N latitude and the other between 10° and 20°S latitude . The most diverse dry forests in the world occur in western and southern Mexico and in the Bolivian lowlands.

[ 2 ] The dry forests of the Pacific Coast of northwestern South America support a wealth of unique species due to their dry climate. The Maputaland-Pondoland bushland and thickets along the east coast of South Africa are diverse and support many endemic species. The dry forests of central India and Indochina are notable for their diverse large vertebrate faunas .

Madagascar dry deciduous forests and New Caledonia dry forests are also highly distinctive (pronounced endemism and a large number of relictual taxa ) for a wide range of taxa and at higher taxonomic levels .

[ 1 ] Trees use underground water during the dry seasons.

Biodiversity patterns and requirements [ edit ] Subtropical semi-evergreen seasonal forest in Doi Inthanon National Park , Northern Thailand , at the end of the dry season.

Species tend to have wider ranges than moist forest species, although in some regions many species do display highly restricted ranges; most dry forest species are restricted to tropical dry forests, particularly in plants; beta diversity and alpha diversity high but typically lower than adjacent moist forests.

[ 1 ] Effective conservation of dry broadleaf forests requires the preservation of large and continuous areas of forest. Large natural areas are required to maintain larger predators and other vertebrates , and to buffer sensitive species from hunting pressure. The persistence of riparian forests and water sources is critical for many dry forest species. Large swathes of intact forest are required to allow species to recover from occasional large events, like forest fires.

[ 1 ] Dry forests are highly sensitive to excessive burning and deforestation ; overgrazing and invasive species can also quickly alter natural communities; restoration is possible but challenging, particularly if degradation has been intense and persistent.

[ 1 ] Ecoregions [ edit ] Afrotropical realm [ edit ] Cape Verde Islands dry forests Madagascar dry deciduous forests Zambezian cryptosepalum dry forests Australasian realm [ edit ] Lesser Sundas deciduous forests New Caledonia dry forests Sumba deciduous forests Timor and Wetar deciduous forests Indomalayan realm [ edit ] Central Deccan Plateau dry deciduous forests Central Indochina dry forests Chota Nagpur Plateau East Deccan dry evergreen forests Pai Forest Irrawaddy dry forests Khathiar–Gir dry deciduous forests Narmada Valley dry deciduous forests Northern dry deciduous forests South Deccan Plateau dry deciduous forests Southeastern Indochina dry evergreen forests Southern Vietnam lowland dry forests Sri Lanka dry-zone dry evergreen forests Nearctic realm [ edit ] Sonoran-Sinaloan transition subtropical dry forest Neotropical realm [ edit ] Apure–Villavicencio dry forests Atlantic dry forests Bahamian dry forests Bajío dry forests Balsas dry forests Bolivian montane dry forests Cayman Islands dry forests Central American dry forests Chiapas Depression dry forests Chiquitano dry forests Cuban dry forests Ecuadorian dry forests Gran Chaco Hispaniolan dry forests Jalisco dry forests Jamaican dry forests Lara–Falcón dry forests Leeward Islands dry forests Magdalena Valley dry forests Maracaibo dry forests Marañón dry forests Panamanian dry forests Patía Valley dry forests Puerto Rican dry forests Revillagigedo Islands Sierra de la Laguna dry forests Sinaloan dry forests Sinú Valley dry forests Southern Pacific dry forests Trinidad and Tobago dry forests Tumbes–Piura dry forests Veracruz dry forests Windward Islands dry forests Yucatán dry forests Oceanian realm [ edit ] Fiji tropical dry forests Hawaiian tropical dry forests Marianas tropical dry forests Yap tropical dry forests See also [ edit ] Holdridge life zones in Guatemala Seasonal tropical forest Tropical vegetation References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g This article incorporates text available under the CC BY-SA 3.0 license.

World Wide Fund for Nature.

"Tropical and Subtropical Dry Broadleaf Forest Ecoregions" . Archived from the original on 2012-04-25 . Retrieved 2012-09-25 .

^ Gentry, A (1993). "Diversity and floristic composition of Neotropical dry forests". In Mooney, H; Bullock, S; Medina, E (eds.).

Tropical deciduous forest ecosystems . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp.

146– 194.

"Deep-rooted Plants Have Much Greater Impact On Climate Than Experts Thought" .

Science Daily . 2006-01-13.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Tropical & Subtropical Dry Broadleaf Forests Biome at Wikimedia Commons The Tropical Dry Forest of Costa Rica v t e Biogeographic regions Biomes Terrestrial biomes Polar/montane Tundra Taiga Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Temperate Coniferous forests Broadleaf and mixed forests Deciduous forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Tropical and subtropical Coniferous forests Cloud forest Moist broadleaf forests list Dry broadleaf forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Dry Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Deserts and xeric shrublands Steppe Wet Flooded grasslands and savannas Riparian Wetland Mangroves Aquatic biomes Pond Littoral Intertidal Kelp forests Coral reefs Neritic zone Pelagic zone Benthic zone Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Other biomes Endolithic zone Biogeographic realms Terrestrial Afrotropical Antarctic Australasian Holarctic Nearctic Palearctic Indomalayan Neotropical Oceanian Marine Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Central Indo-Pacific Eastern Indo-Pacific Temperate Australasia Temperate Northern Atlantic Temperate Northern Pacific Temperate South America Temperate Southern Africa Tropical Atlantic Tropical Eastern Pacific Western Indo-Pacific Subdivisions Biogeographic provinces Bioregions Ecoregions Lists of ecoregions Global 200 ecoregions See also Altitudinal zonation Ecological classification Floristic kingdoms Vegetation classifications Wallace Line Zoogeography Portals : Ecology Trees Environment Earth sciences Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tropical_and_subtropical_dry_broadleaf_forests&oldid=1305672011 " Categories : Tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests Terrestrial biomes Forests Tropical flora Hidden categories: Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 12:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests 26 languages Add topic

