Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The word renaissance 2 Art 3 Architecture 4 Garden 5 Literature 6 Music 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents French Renaissance 25 languages العربية Català Čeština Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands پښتو Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the cultural movement known as the Renaissance in France. For more general historical information about France in this period (including demographics, language, and geography), see Early Modern France . For more information about the legal, administrative and religious structures of French society in this period, see Ancien Régime .

Cultural and artistic movement in France dating from the 15th century to the early 17th century Renaissance The Birth of Venus (c. 1484–1486) by Botticelli Aspects Architecture Dance Fine arts Greek scholars Humanism Literature Magic Music Philosophy Science Technology Warfare Regions England France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Spain Scotland Northern Europe Low Countries History and study Age of Discovery Continuity thesis High Renaissance v t e The French Renaissance was the cultural and artistic movement in France between the 15th and early 17th centuries. The period is associated with the pan-European [ 1 ] Renaissance , a word first used by the French historian Jules Michelet to define the artistic and cultural "rebirth" of Europe.

Notable developments during the French Renaissance include the spread of humanism , early exploration of the "New World" (as New France by Giovanni da Verrazzano and Jacques Cartier ); the development of new techniques and artistic forms in the fields of printing, architecture , painting, sculpture, music, the sciences and literature ; and the elaboration of new codes of sociability, etiquette and discourse.

The French Renaissance traditionally extends from (roughly) the 1494 French invasion of Italy during the reign of Charles VIII until the 1610 death of Henry IV , with an apex during the 1515–1559 reigns of Francis I and Henry II .

This chronology notwithstanding, certain artistic, technological or literary developments associated with the Renaissance arrived in France earlier (for example, by way of the Burgundy court or the papal court in Avignon ); however, the Black Death of the 14th century and the Hundred Years' War kept France economically and politically weak until the late 15th century.

The word renaissance [ edit ] The word renaissance is a French word, whose literal translation into English is "rebirth". The term was first used and defined [ 2 ] by French historian Jules Michelet in his 1855 work Histoire de France (History of France).

[ 1 ] Jules Michelet defined the 16th-century Renaissance in France as a period in Europe's cultural history that represented a break from the Middle Ages, creating a modern understanding of humanity and its place in the world.

[ 3 ] As a French citizen and historian, Michelet also claimed the Renaissance as a French movement.

[ 4 ] Art [ edit ] French art history Overview Categories Historical periods Prehistoric Medieval Gothic Renaissance 17th century 18th century 19th century 20th century French artists Artists (chronological) Artists – Painters Sculptors – Architects Photographers Thematic Art movements (chronological) Art movements (category) Salons and academies French art museums Movements Impressionism – Cubism Dada – Surrealism School of Paris See also France portal Visual arts portal Western art history v t e For a chronological list of French Renaissance artists, see List of French artists § Renaissance .

In the late 15th century, the French invasion of Italy and the proximity of the vibrant Burgundy court (with its Flemish connections) brought the French into contact with the goods, paintings, and the creative spirit of the Northern and Italian Renaissance , and the initial artistic changes in France were often carried out by Italian and Flemish artists, such as Jean Clouet and his son François Clouet and the Italians Rosso Fiorentino , Francesco Primaticcio and Niccolò dell'Abbate of the first School of Fontainebleau (from 1531).

In 1516, Francis I of France invited Leonardo da Vinci to the Château d'Amboise and provided him with the Château du Clos Lucé , then called Château de Cloux, as a place to stay and work.

[ 5 ] Leonardo, a famous painter and inventor, arrived with three of his paintings, namely the Mona Lisa , Sainte Anne , and Saint Jean Baptiste , today owned by the Louvre museum of Paris .

The art of the period from Francis I through Henry IV is often inspired by late Italian pictorial and sculptural developments commonly referred to as Mannerism (associated with Michelangelo and Parmigianino , among others), characterized by figures which are elongated and graceful and a reliance on visual rhetoric , including the elaborate use of allegory and mythology .

There are a number of French artists in this period including the painter Jean Fouquet of Tours (who achieved realistic portraits and remarkable illuminated manuscripts ) and the sculptors Jean Goujon and Germain Pilon .

Late Mannerism and early Baroque Henry IV invited the artists Toussaint Dubreuil , Martin Fréminet and Ambroise Dubois to work on the château of Fontainebleau and they are typically called the second School of Fontainebleau .

Marie de' Medici , Henry IV's queen, invited the Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens to France , and the artist painted a number of large-scale works for the queen's Luxembourg Palace in Paris.  Another Flemish artist working for the court was Frans Pourbus the younger .

Outside France, working for the dukes of Lorraine , one finds a very different late mannerist style in the artists Jacques Bellange , Claude Deruet and Jacques Callot .  Having little contact with the French artists of the period, they developed a heightened,  extreme, and often erotic mannerism (including night scenes and nightmare images), and excellent skill in etching .

Francis I of France , by Jean and François Clouet ( c.

1535 , oil on panel) (Louvre).

Eve, First Pandora by Jean Cousin the Elder ( c.

1550 ).

Ligier Richier , Lamentation of Christ , Church of St. Étienne, Saint-Mihiel Diane the Huntress , School of Fontainebleau (1550–60) (Louvre).

Lady in her Bath by François Clouet ( c.

1570 ) (National Gallery, Washington).

Monument containing the heart of Henry II of France by Germain Pilon .

Portrait of Gabrielle d'Estrées and Duchess of Villars , School of Fontainebleau , c.

1594 Allégorie de la Peinture et de la Sculpture , Ambroise Dubois Hyacinthe and Climène at Their Morning Toilet (detail) by Toussaint Dubreuil , a scene from Pierre de Ronsard 's Franciade ( c.

1602 ) (Louvre) Virgin and Child Surrounded by Angels , Melun Diptych by Jean Fouquet , c.

1450 Architecture [ edit ] Main article: French Renaissance architecture One of the greatest accomplishments of the French Renaissance was the construction of the Châteaux of the Loire Valley : no longer conceived of as fortresses, these pleasure palaces took advantage of the richness of the rivers and lands of the Loire region and they show remarkable architectural skill.

The old Louvre castle in Paris was also rebuilt under the direction of Pierre Lescot and would become the core of a brand new Renaissance château .  To the west of the Louvre, Catherine de' Medici had built for her the Tuileries palace with extensive gardens and a grotte .

The ascension of Henry IV of France to the throne brought a period of massive urban development in Paris , including construction on the Pont Neuf , the Place des Vosges (called the "Place Royale"), the Place Dauphine , and parts of the Louvre (amongst which the Great Gallery).

Château de Chenonceau (1515-1521), designed by Philibert de l'Orme Château d'Azay-le-Rideau (1518–1527) Château de Chambord (1519–1547) Château d'Écouen (1538–1550) The Pierre Lescot wing of the Louvre (1546–1556) Place des Vosges (1605–1612) Palais ducal de Nevers Château de Valençay Garden [ edit ] Main article: Gardens of the French Renaissance French Renaissance gardens were characterized by symmetrical and geometric planting beds or parterres ; plants in pots; paths of gravel and sand; terraces; stairways and ramps; moving water in the form of canals, cascades and monumental fountains, and extensive use of artificial grottes , labyrinths and statues of mythological figures. They became an extension of the chateaux that they surrounded, and were designed to illustrate the Renaissance ideals of measure and proportion.

Gardens of the Château de Villandry Diane de Poitiers ' garden from the Château de Chenonceau Fountain of Diana, in the gardens of the Château de Fontainebleau Aerial view of Château de Chenonceau and its gardens Jardin de la volière at Château de Chantilly Literature [ edit ] Main article: French Renaissance literature Music [ edit ] Main articles: French Renaissance music , Burgundian School , and Franco-Flemish School Guillaume Du Fay (left) and Gilles Binchois Burgundy , the mostly French -speaking area unified with the Kingdom of France in 1477. Many of the most famous musicians in Europe either came from Burgundy, or went to study with composers there; in addition there was considerable interchange between the Burgundian court musical establishment and French courts and ecclesiastical organizations in the late 15th century.  The Burgundian style gave birth to the Franco-Flemish style of polyphony which dominated European music in the late 15th and early 16th centuries.  However, by the end of the 15th century, a French national character was becoming distinct in music of the French royal and aristocratic courts, as well as the major centers of church music .  For the most part French composers of the time shunned the sombre colors of the Franco-Flemish style and strove for clarity of line and structure, and, in secular music such as the chanson , lightness, singability, and popularity.

Guillaume Du Fay and Gilles Binchois are two notable examples from the Burgundian school during the early Renaissance period.

The most renowned composer in Europe, Josquin des Prez , worked for a time in the court of Louis XII , and likely composed some of his most famous works there (his first setting of Psalm 129, De profundis , was probably written for the funeral of Louis XII in 1515).  Francis I, who became king that year, made the creation of an opulent musical establishment a priority.  His musicians went with him on his travels, and he competed with Henry VIII at the Field of the Cloth of Gold in 1520 for the most magnificent musical entertainment; likely the event was directed by Jean Mouton , one of the most famous motet composers of the early 16th century after Josquin.

By far the most significant contribution of France to music in the Renaissance period was the chanson .  The chanson was a variety of secular song, of highly varied character, and which included some of the most overwhelmingly popular music of the 16th century:  indeed many chansons were sung all over Europe.  The chanson in the early 16th century was characterised by a dactylic opening (long, short-short) and contrapuntal style which was later adopted by the Italian canzona , the predecessor of the sonata .  Typically chansons were for three or four voices, without instrumental accompaniment, but the most popular examples were inevitably made into instrumental versions as well.  Famous composers of these "Parisian" chansons included Claudin de Sermisy and Clément Janequin .  Janequin's La guerre , written to celebrate the French victory at Marignano in 1515, imitates the sounds of cannon, the cries of the wounded, and the trumpets signaling advance and retreat.  A later development of the chanson was the style of musique mesurée , as exemplified in the work of Claude Le Jeune :  in this type of chanson, based on developments by the group of poets known as the Pléiade under Jean-Antoine de Baïf , the musical rhythm exactly matched the stress accents of the verse, in an attempt to capture some of the rhetorical effect of music in Ancient Greece (a coincident, and apparently unrelated movement in Italy at the same time was known as the Florentine Camerata ).  Towards the end of the 16th century the chanson was gradually replaced by the air de cour , the most popular song type in France in the early 17th century.

The era of religious wars had a profound effect on music in France.  Influenced by Calvinism , the Protestants produced a type of sacred music much different from the elaborate Latin motets written by their Catholic counterparts.  Both Protestants and Catholics (especially the Protestant sympathizers among them) produced a variation of the chanson known as the chanson spirituelle , which was like the secular song but was fitted with a religious or moralizing text.

Claude Goudimel , a Protestant composer most noted for his Calvinist-inspired psalm settings, was murdered in Lyon during the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre .  However, not only Protestant composers were killed during the era of conflict; in 1581, Catholic Antoine de Bertrand , a prolific composer of chansons, was murdered in Toulouse by a Protestant mob.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Renaissance in France .

Renaissance architecture in France List of French Renaissance artists Catherine de' Medici's patronage of the arts Guillaume de La Perrière Georgette de Montenay Early modern France Late Renaissance Music history of France References [ edit ] ^ a b Michelet, Jules (1847).

History of France . Translated by Smith, G. H. D. Appleton & Company.

^ Murray, Peter; Murray, Linda (1963).

The Art of the Renaissance . World of Art. Thames & Hudson. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-500-20008-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Brotton, Jerry (2002).

The Renaissance Bazaar . Oxford University Press. pp.

21– 22.

^ Brotton, Jerry (2006).

The Renaissance: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-280163-5 .

.

^ Tanaka 1992 , p. 90 Tanaka, Hidemichi (1992), "Leonardo da Vinci, Architect of Chambord?", Artibus et Historiae , 13 (25): 85– 102, doi : 10.2307/1483458 , JSTOR 1483458 Further reading [ edit ] Blunt, Anthony (1993).

Art and Architecture in France 1500–1700 . Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-05314-2 .

Chastel, André.

French Art Vol II: The Renaissance .

ISBN 2-08-013583-X .

OL 8841209M .

Chastel, André (1996).

French Art Vol III: The Ancient Régime . Flammarion.

ISBN 2-08-013617-8 .

OL 8841223M .

Hampton, Timothy (2003).

Literature and Nation in the Sixteenth Century: Inventing Renaissance France .

Holt, Mack P. (2002).

Renaissance and Reformation France: 1500-1648 . The Short Oxford History of France.

OL 3562871M .

Knecht, R. J. (2002).

The Rise and Fall of Renaissance France: 1483–1610 .

OL 6797101M .

Pitts, Vincent J. (2008).

Henri IV of France: His Reign and Age .

Potter, David (2008).

Renaissance France at War: Armies, Culture and Society, c. 1480–1560 .

Robin, Diana; Larsen, Anne R.; Levin, Carole, eds. (2007).

Encyclopedia of Women in the Renaissance: Italy, France, and England .

External links [ edit ] French Renaissance Paleography v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment v t e Early modern Europe Overviews Eras Renaissance Outline High Renaissance Early modern period Early modern Europe Elizabethan era Age of Discovery Baroque Age of Enlightenment International relations (1648–1814) By country Northern Europe England Papacy France Germany Low Countries Events Political Fall of Constantinople Decline of the Byzantine Empire Technological: Printing Revolution Intellectual: Scientific Revolution Social history Concepts Absolute monarchy Journalism of Early Modern Europe The General Crisis Peasant Wars Politics Countries Holy Roman Empire Free imperial city France Germany Britain British Empire Ottoman Empire Portuguese Empire Spanish Empire Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Cossack Hetmanate Swedish Empire Dutch Republic Seventeen Provinces Economic history Habsburg monarchy Russian Empire Kingdom of Bohemia Lands of the Bohemian Crown Protestant Union Grand Duchy of Tuscany Leaders Habsburg monarchy England House of Stuart House of Tudor France House of Bourbon Absolute monarchy in France Ancien Régime Louis XIV Wars French Wars of Religion Thirty Years' War Cabinet wars Second Hundred Years' War War of the Spanish Succession Seven Years' War Diplomacy French–Habsburg rivalry Peace of Westphalia Treaties of Nijmegen Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 Religion Overviews Christianity in the modern era Proto-Protestantism Bohemian Reformation Hussites History of European Jews in the Middle Ages Haskalah Islamic world contributions to Medieval Europe Protestant Reformation Ninety-five Theses Calvinism Huguenots English Lutheranism Scottish Switzerland Radical Counter-Reformation European wars of religion Academic fields Philosophy Philosophy: Renaissance philosophy Renaissance humanism Northern Europe Greek scholars in the Renaissance Science Science in the Renaissance Works Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) Authors : Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Matteo Palmieri Leonardo da Vinci Arts General Renaissance art Painting: Italian painting Florentine painting Venetian painting Dutch and Flemish painting Early Netherlandish painting End of period Great Divergence Industrial Revolution Age of Revolution French Revolution Coalition Wars Revolutionary Napoleonic Nationalism Revolutions of 1848 See also Europe Art of Europe Genetic history of Europe History of the European Union Maritime history of Europe Military history of Europe World History of Western civilization History of Christianity History of the Mediterranean region Human history • History of philosophy • History of Europe Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐8bhvs
Cached time: 20250812000354
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.530 seconds
Real time usage: 0.671 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2083/1000000
Revision size: 18423/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 108768/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1949/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 97831/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.330/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8634408/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  555.290      1 -total
 28.28%  157.036     13 Template:Cite_book
 27.80%  154.351      1 Template:Reflist
 12.87%   71.482      2 Template:Sidebar
 12.24%   67.943      1 Template:Renaissance
  9.02%   50.085      1 Template:About
  8.19%   45.499      1 Template:Commons_category
  7.89%   43.838      1 Template:Sister_project
  7.66%   42.540      1 Template:Side_box
  7.52%   41.778     10 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1398990:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000354 and revision id 1275234494. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_Renaissance&oldid=1275234494 " Categories : French Renaissance Renaissance Northern Renaissance Renaissance architecture in France Cultural history of France Arts and culture in the Ancien Régime French art 15th century in France 16th century in France 17th century in France Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 21:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents French Renaissance 25 languages Add topic

