Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Founding and Sun Yat-sen era 1.2 Under Chiang Kai-shek in mainland China 1.3 In Taiwan: 1945–present 1.4 Current issues and challenges 1.4.1 Party assets 2 Supporter base 3 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 3.1 Leadership 3.1.1 Current Central Committee Leadership 3.1.2 Legislative Yuan leader (Caucus leader) 3.2 Party organization and structure 3.2.1 Standing committees and departments 3.3 Party charter 3.4 Factions 4 Ideology in mainland China Toggle Ideology in mainland China subsection 4.1 Chinese nationalism 4.2 Fascist influences 4.3 Ideology of the New Guangxi Clique 4.4 Socialism and anti-capitalist agitation 4.5 Confucianism and religion in its ideology 4.5.1 Education 4.6 Soviet-style military 4.7 Anti-communism 4.8 Policy on ethnic minorities 4.9 Anti-separatism 5 Ideology in Taiwan Toggle Ideology in Taiwan subsection 5.1 Anti-communism 5.2 Three Principles of the People 5.3 Chinese democracy 5.4 Cross-Strait relations 5.5 Chinese conservatism 6 Parties affiliated with the Kuomintang Toggle Parties affiliated with the Kuomintang subsection 6.1 Malaysian Chinese Association 6.2 Tibet Improvement Party 6.3 Vietnamese Nationalist Party 6.4 Ryukyu Guomindang 6.5 Hong Kong Pro-ROC camp 7 Sponsored organizations 8 Election results Toggle Election results subsection 8.1 Presidential elections 8.2 Legislative elections 8.3 Local elections 8.4 National Assembly elections 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Kuomintang 86 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 贛語 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kapampangan Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Scots Seediq Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Taiwanese political party This article is about the party in the Republic of China (Taiwan). For the political party currently active in the People's Republic of China, see Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang .

"KMT" redirects here. For other uses, see KMT (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Minkuotang or Kumintang .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Kuomintang" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kuomintang 中國國民黨 Zhōngguó Guómíndǎng Chungkuo Kuomintang Other name Nationalist Party of China [ 1 ] Chinese Nationalist Party [ 2 ] Abbreviation KMT Leader Sun Yat-sen [ a ] President Chiang Kai-shek [ b ] Chairman Eric Chu Secretary-General Justin Huang Founder Sun Yat-sen Founded 24 November 1894 ; 130 years ago ( 1894-11-24 ) Honolulu , Republic of Hawaii (original form) 10 October 1919 ; 105 years ago ( 1919-10-10 ) Shanghai French Concession (current form) Preceded by Revive China Society (1894) Tongmenghui (1905) Headquarters No. 232–234, Sec. 2, Bade Rd., Zhongshan District , Taipei City 104, Taiwan [ 3 ] Newspaper Central Daily News Think tank National Policy Foundation Youth wing Kuomintang Youth League Education wing Institute of Revolutionary Practice Military wing National Revolutionary Army (1925‍–‍1947) Paramilitary wing Blue Shirts Society (1932‍–‍1938) [ 4 ] Membership (2022) 451,174 [ 5 ] Ideology Conservatism ( Taiwanese ) Tridemism Factions: Anti-communism [ 6 ] Political position Centre-right [ 7 ] to right-wing [ 8 ] Historical: Big tent [ citation needed ] National affiliation Pan-Blue Coalition [ 9 ] Regional affiliation Asia Pacific Democracy Union International affiliation Centrist Democrat International International Democracy Union [ 10 ] Colours Blue Anthem " Three Principles of the People " Legislative Yuan 52 / 113 Municipal mayors 4 / 6 Magistrates/mayors 10 / 16 Councillors 367 / 910 Township / city mayors 83 / 204 Party flag Website kmt.org.tw Politics of the Republic of China Political parties Elections Kuomintang "Kuomintang" in traditional (top) and simplified (bottom) Chinese characters Traditional Chinese 中國國民黨 Simplified Chinese 中国国民党 Literal meaning China Nationals' Party Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōngguó Guómíndǎng Bopomofo ㄓㄨㄥ ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄇㄧㄣˊ ㄉㄤˇ Wade–Giles Chung 1 -kuo 2 Kuo 2 -min 2 -tang 3 IPA [ʈʂʊ́ŋ.kwǒ kwǒ.mǐn.tàŋ] other Mandarin Xiao'erjing ﺟْﻮ ﻗُﻮَع ﻗُﻮَع مٍ دْا Dungan Җунгуй Гуймин Дон Wu Romanization tson 平 koh 入 koh 入 min 平 taon 上 Hakka Romanization dung 24 gued 2 gued 2 min 11 dong 31 Pha̍k-fa-sṳ Dṳ̆ng-guók Guók-mìng-dōng Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Jūnggwok Gwokmàhndóng Jyutping zung1 gwok3 gwok3 man4 dong2 IPA [tsʊŋ˥ kʷɔk̚˧ kʷɔk̚˧ mɐn˩ tɔŋ˧˥] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Tiong-kok Kok-bîn-tóng Abbreviation Traditional Chinese 國民黨 Simplified Chinese 国民党 Literal meaning Nationals' Party Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Guómíndǎng Bopomofo ㄍㄨㄛˊ ㄇㄧㄣˊ ㄉㄤˇ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Gwomindaang Wade–Giles Kuo 2 -min 2 -tang 3 IPA [kwǒ.mǐn.tàŋ] Wu Romanization koh 入 min 平 taon 上 Hakka Romanization gued 2 min 11 dong 31 Pha̍k-fa-sṳ Guók-mìng-dōng Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Gwokmàhndóng Jyutping gwok3 man4 dong2 IPA [kʷɔk̚˧ mɐn˩ tɔŋ˧˥] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Kok-bîn-tóng History of the Republic of China Culture Economy Education Geography Politics 1912–1949 Mainland rule 1911 Revolution ( Sun Yat-sen ) Provisional Gov't Beiyang Government Warlord Era Northern Expedition Shanghai massacre Chinese Civil War Nationalist Government Second Sino-Japanese War ( Nanjing Massacre ) Second Kuomintang-Communist Civil War Constitutional government 1945–present Taiwan rule Retrocession of Taiwan February 28 incident White Terror Exodus to Taiwan Korean War First Taiwan Strait Crisis Vietnam War Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Project National Glory Three Noes Lieyu massacre Wild Lily student movement Third Taiwan Strait Crisis Anti-Secession Law 100th anniversary Sunflower Student Movement 2015 Ma–Xi meeting 2017 Summer Universiade History of China the PRC (1949–present) Taiwan (geographical) Taipei Kaohsiung Beijing the Kuomintang the Taiwan issue Taiwan portal v t e The Kuomintang ( KMT ) [ I ] [ c ] is a major political party in the Republic of China (Taiwan). It was the sole ruling party of the country during its rule from 1927 to 1949 in Mainland China until its relocation to Taiwan , and in Taiwan ruled under martial law until 1987. The KMT is a centre-right to right-wing party and the largest in the Pan-Blue Coalition , one of the two main political groups in Taiwan. Its primary rival is the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), the largest party in the Pan-Green Coalition . As of 2025, the KMT is the largest single party in the Legislative Yuan and is chaired by Eric Chu .

The party was founded by Sun Yat-sen in 1894 in Honolulu , Hawaii , as the Revive China Society . He reformed the party in 1919 in the Shanghai French Concession under its current name. From 1926 to 1928, the KMT under Chiang Kai-shek successfully unified China in the Northern Expedition against regional warlords , leading to the fall of the Beiyang government . After initially allying with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in the First United Front , the party under Chiang purged communist members. It was the sole ruling party of China from 1928 to 1949 but gradually lost control while fighting the Empire of Japan in the Second Sino-Japanese War and the CCP in the Chinese Civil War . In December 1949, the Kuomintang retreated to Taiwan following its defeat by the communists.

From 1949 to 1987, the KMT ruled Taiwan as an authoritarian one-party state after the February 28 incident . During this period (known as the White Terror ), martial law was in effect and civil liberties were curtailed as part of its anti-communism efforts. The party oversaw Taiwan's rapid economic development but experienced diplomatic setbacks , including the loss of the country's seat in the United Nations and loss of international diplomatic recognition to the CCP-led People's Republic of China (PRC) in the 1970s. In the late 1980s, party leader Chiang Ching-kuo lifted martial law and the ban on opposition parties. His successor, Lee Teng-hui , continued democratic reforms and was re-elected in 1996 through the first direct presidential election . The 2000 presidential election ended 72 years of KMT presidencies. The party later reclaimed power with the landslide victory of Ma Ying-jeou in the 2008 presidential election , then lost the presidency and its legislative majority in the 2016 election , but regained a legislative plurality in the 2024 election .

The party's guiding ideology is the Three Principles of the People , advocated by Sun Yat-sen and organized on a basis of democratic centralism . As the KMT supports the ROC as the only representative of China, it opposes both Chinese unification under the PRC and formal Taiwan independence . As the KMT opposes non-peaceful means to resolve the cross-strait disputes while still strongly adhering to the ROC constitution , the party favors a closer relationship with the PRC and accepts the 1992 Consensus , which defines both sides of the Taiwan Strait as " one China " but maintains its ambiguity to different interpretations. It seeks to maintain Taiwan's status quo rather than formal independence or unification.

History [ edit ] Main article: History of the Kuomintang Founding and Sun Yat-sen era [ edit ] The KMT reveres its founder, Sun Yat-sen , as the "Father of the Nation" The KMT traces its ideological and organizational roots to the work of Sun Yat-sen , a proponent of Chinese nationalism and democracy who founded the Revive China Society at the capital of the Republic of Hawaii , Honolulu , on 24 November 1894.

[ 14 ] On 20 August 1905, Sun joined forces with other anti-monarchist societies in Tokyo, Empire of Japan , to form the Tongmenghui , a group committed to the overthrow of the Qing dynasty and to establish a republic in China.

The Revolutionary Army attacking Nanjing in 1911 The group supported the Xinhai Revolution of 1911 and the founding of the Republic of China on 1 January 1912. Although Sun and the Tongmenghui are often depicted as the principal organizers of the Xinhai Revolution, this view is disputed by scholars who argue that the Revolution broke out in a leaderless and decentralized way and that Sun was only later elected provisional president of the new Chinese republic.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] However, Sun did not have military power and ceded the provisional presidency of the republic to Yuan Shikai , who arranged for the abdication of Puyi , the last Emperor, on 12 February.

On 25 August 1912, the Nationalist Party was established at the Huguang Guild Hall in Beijing , where the Tongmenghui and five smaller pro-revolution parties merged to contest the first national elections.

[ 17 ] Sun was chosen as the party chairman with Huang Xing as his deputy.

The most influential member of the party was the third ranking Song Jiaoren , who mobilized mass support from gentry and merchants for the Nationalists to advocate a constitutional parliamentary democracy. The party opposed constitutional monarchists and sought to check the power of Yuan. The Nationalists won an overwhelming majority in the first National Assembly election in December 1912.

However, Yuan soon began to ignore the parliament in making presidential decisions. Song Jiaoren was assassinated in Shanghai in 1913. Members of the Nationalists, led by Sun Yat-sen, suspected that Yuan was behind the plot and thus staged the Second Revolution in July 1913, a poorly planned and ill-supported armed rising to overthrow Yuan, and failed. Yuan, claiming subversiveness and betrayal, expelled adherents of the KMT from the parliament .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Yuan dissolved the Nationalists, whose members had largely fled into exile in Japan, in November and dismissed the parliament early in 1914.

Yuan Shikai proclaimed himself emperor in December 1915. While exiled in Japan in 1914, Sun established the Chinese Revolutionary Party on 8 July 1914, [ 20 ] but many of his old revolutionary comrades, including Huang Xing, Wang Jingwei , Hu Hanmin and Chen Jiongming , refused to join him or support his efforts in inciting armed uprising against Yuan. To join the Revolutionary Party, members had to take an oath of personal loyalty to Sun, which many old revolutionaries regarded as undemocratic and contrary to the spirit of the revolution. As a result, he became largely sidelined within the Republican movement during this period.

Sun returned to China in 1917 to establish a military junta at Canton to oppose the Beiyang government but was soon forced out of office and exiled to Shanghai . There, with renewed support, he resurrected the KMT on 10 October 1919, under the name Kuomintang of China ( 中國國民黨 ) and established its headquarters in Canton in 1920.

In 1923, the KMT and its Canton government accepted aid from the Soviet Union after being denied recognition by the western powers. Soviet advisers—the most prominent of whom was Mikhail Borodin , an agent of the Comintern —arrived in China in 1923 to aid in the reorganization and consolidation of the KMT along the lines of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) , establishing a Leninist party structure that lasted into the 1990s.

[ 21 ] The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) was under Comintern instructions to cooperate with the KMT, and its members were encouraged to join while maintaining their separate party identities, forming the First United Front between the two parties.

Mao Zedong and early members of the CCP also joined the KMT in 1923.

Venue of the 1st National Congress of Kuomintang in 1924 Soviet advisers also helped the KMT to set up a political institute to train propagandists in mass mobilization techniques, and in 1923 Chiang Kai-shek, one of Sun's lieutenants from the Tongmenghui days, was sent to Moscow for several months' military and political study. At the first party congress in 1924 in Guangzhou , Guangdong, which included non-KMT delegates such as members of the CCP, they adopted Sun's political theory, which included the Three Principles of the People : nationalism, democracy and people's livelihood.

Official portrait of President Chiang Kai-shek of the Republic of China , 1955 Under Chiang Kai-shek in mainland China [ edit ] When Sun Yat-sen died in 1925, the political leadership of the KMT fell to Wang Jingwei (" Reorganization Group ") and Hu Hanmin (" Western Hills Group "), respectively the left-wing and right-wing leaders of the party. However, the real power was in the hands of Chiang Kai-shek, who was in near complete control of the military as the superintendent of the Whampoa Military Academy . With their military superiority, the KMT confirmed their rule on Canton, the provincial capital of Guangdong . The Guangxi warlords pledged loyalty to the KMT. The KMT now became a rival government in opposition to the warlord Beiyang government based in Beijing .

[ 22 ] Chiang assumed leadership of the KMT on 6 July 1926. Unlike Sun Yat-sen, whom he admired greatly and who forged all his political, economic, and revolutionary ideas primarily from what he had learned in Hawaii and indirectly through Hong Kong and Japan under the Meiji Restoration , Chiang knew relatively little about the West. He also studied in Japan, but he was firmly rooted in his ancient Han Chinese identity and was steeped in Chinese culture . As his life progressed, he became increasingly attached to ancient Chinese culture and traditions. His few trips to the West confirmed his pro-ancient Chinese outlook and he studied the ancient Chinese classics and ancient Chinese history assiduously.

[ 22 ] In 1923, after the formation of the First United Front , Sun Yat-sen sent Chiang to spend three months in Moscow studying the political and military system of the Soviet Union. Although Chiang did not follow the Soviet Communist doctrine, he, like the Communist Party, sought to destroy warlordism and foreign imperialism in China , and upon his return established the Whampoa Military Academy near Guangzhou, following the Soviet Model.

[ 23 ] Chiang was also particularly committed to Sun's idea of "political tutelage". Sun believed that the only hope for a unified and better China lay in a military conquest, followed by a period of political tutelage that would culminate in the transition to democracy. Using this ideology, Chiang built himself into the dictator of the Republic of China, both in the Chinese mainland and after the national government relocated to Taiwan .

[ 22 ] Following the death of Sun Yat-sen, Chiang Kai-shek emerged as the KMT leader and launched the Northern Expedition to defeat the northern warlords and unite China under the party. With its power confirmed in the southeast, the Nationalist Government appointed Chiang Kai-shek commander-in-chief of the National Revolutionary Army (NRA), and the Northern Expedition to suppress the warlords began. Chiang had to defeat three separate warlords and two independent armies. Chiang, with Soviet supplies, conquered the southern half of China in nine months.

A split erupted between the Chinese Communist Party and the KMT, which threatened the Northern Expedition. Wang Jing Wei, who led the KMT leftist allies, took the city of Wuhan in January 1927. With the support of the Soviet agent Mikhail Borodin , Wang declared the National Government as having moved to Wuhan. Having taken Nanjing in March, Chiang halted his campaign and prepared a violent break with Wang and his communist allies. Chiang's expulsion of the CCP and their Soviet advisers, marked by the Shanghai massacre on 12 April, led to the beginning of the Chinese Civil War . Wang finally surrendered his power to Chiang. Once this split had been healed, Chiang resumed his Northern Expedition and managed to take Shanghai.

[ 22 ] The National Revolutionary Army soldiers marched into the British concessions in Hankou during the Northern Expedition During the Nanjing incident in March 1927, the NRA stormed the consulates of the United States, the United Kingdom and Imperial Japan , looted foreign properties and almost assassinated the Japanese consul. An American, two British, one French, an Italian and a Japanese were killed.

[ 24 ] These looters also stormed and seized millions of dollars' worth of British concessions in Hankou , refusing to hand them back to the UK government.

[ 25 ] Both Nationalists and Communist soldiers within the army participated in the rioting and looting of foreign residents in Nanjing.

[ 26 ] NRA took Beijing in 1928. The city was the internationally recognized capital, even when it was previously controlled by warlords. This event allowed the KMT to receive widespread diplomatic recognition in the same year. The capital was moved from Beijing to Nanjing, the original capital of the Ming dynasty , and thus a symbolic purge of the final Qing elements. This period of KMT rule in China between 1927 and 1937 was relatively stable and prosperous and is still known as the Nanjing decade .

After the Northern Expedition in 1928, the Nationalist government under the KMT declared that China had been exploited for decades under the unequal treaties signed between the foreign powers and the Qing dynasty. The KMT government demanded that the foreign powers renegotiate the treaties on equal terms.

[ 27 ] Before the Northern Expedition, the KMT began as a heterogeneous group advocating American-inspired federalism and provincial autonomy. However, the KMT under Chiang's leadership aimed at establishing a centralized one-party state with one ideology. This was even more evident following Sun's elevation into a cult figure after his death. The control by one single party began the period of "political tutelage", whereby the party was to lead the government while instructing the people on how to participate in a democratic system. The topic of reorganizing the army, brought up at a military conference in 1929, sparked the Central Plains War . The cliques, some of them former warlords, demanded to retain their army and political power within their own territories. Although Chiang finally won the war, the conflicts among the cliques would have a devastating effect on the survival of the KMT. Muslim Generals in Gansu waged war against the Guominjun in favor of the KMT during the conflict in Gansu in 1927–1930 .

[ 28 ] Nationalist soldiers during the Second Sino-Japanese War In 1931, Japanese aggression resumed with the Mukden Incident and occupation of Manchuria, and the CCP founded the Chinese Soviet Republic (CSR) in Jiangxi while secretly recruiting within the KMT government and military. Chiang was alarmed by the expansion of communist influence; he wanted to suppress internal conflicts before confronting foreign aggression. The KMT were aided by German military advisors. The CSR was destroyed in 1934 after a series of KMT offensives. The communists abandoned bases in southeast China for Shaanxi in a military retreat called the Long March ; less than 10% of the communist army survived. A new base, the Shaan-Gan-Ning Border Region , was created with Soviet aid.

KMT secret police persecuted suspected communists and political opponents with terror . In The Birth of Communist China , C.P. Fitzgerald describes China under the rule of the KMT thus: "the Chinese people groaned under a regime Fascist in every quality except efficiency." [ 29 ] In 1936, Chiang was kidnapped by Zhang Xueliang in the Xi'an Incident and forced into the Second United Front , an anti-Japanese alliance with the CCP; the Second Sino-Japanese War started the following year. The alliance brought little coordination and was treated as a temporary cease fire in the civil war. The New Fourth Army incident in 1941 ended the alliance.

The retrocession of Taiwan in Taipei on 25 October 1945 Japan surrendered in 1945, and Taiwan was returned to the Republic of China on 25 October of that year. The brief period of celebration was soon shadowed by the possibility of a civil war between the KMT and CCP. The Soviet Union declared war on Japan just before it surrendered and occupied Manchuria , the north eastern part of China. The Soviet Union denied the KMT army the right to enter the region but allowed the CCP to take control of the Japanese factories and their supplies.

KMT flag displayed in Lhasa, Tibet in 1938 The KMT in Tihwa (Ürümqi) , Xinjiang in 1942 Full-scale civil war between the Communists and the Nationalists erupted in 1946. The Communist Chinese armies, the People's Liberation Army (PLA), previously a minor faction, grew rapidly in influence and power due to several errors on the KMT's part. First, the KMT reduced troop levels precipitously after the Japanese surrender, leaving large numbers of able-bodied, trained fighting men who became unemployed and disgruntled with the KMT as prime recruits for the PLA.

Secondly, the KMT government proved thoroughly unable to manage the economy, allowing the hyperinflation in China to go uncontrolled in the late 1930s . Among the most despised and ineffective efforts it undertook to contain inflation was the conversion to the gold standard for the national treasury and the Chinese gold yuan in August 1948, outlawing private ownership of gold, silver and foreign exchange, collecting all such precious metals and foreign exchange from the people and issuing the Gold Standard Scrip in exchange. As most farmland in the north were under CCP's control, the cities governed by the KMT lacked food supply and this added to the hyperinflation. The new scrip became worthless in only ten months and greatly reinforced the nationwide perception of the KMT as a corrupt or at best inept entity. Third, Chiang Kai-shek ordered his forces to defend the urbanized cities. This decision gave CCP a chance to move freely through the countryside. At first, the KMT had the edge with the aid of weapons and ammunition from the United States (US). However, with the country suffering from hyperinflation , widespread corruption and other economic ills, the KMT continued to lose popular support. Some leading officials and military leaders of the KMT hoarded material, armament and military-aid funding provided by the US. This became an issue which proved to be a hindrance of its relationship with US government . US President Harry S. Truman wrote that " the Chiangs , the Kungs and the Soongs (were) all thieves", having taken $750 million in US aid.

[ 30 ] Territories under the control of the Kuomintang/warlords (orange/grey) and communists (yellow) in 1948 At the same time, the suspension of American aid and tens of thousands of deserted or decommissioned soldiers being recruited to the PLA cause tipped the balance of power quickly to the CCP side, and the overwhelming popular support for the CCP in most of the country made it all but impossible for the KMT forces to carry out successful assaults against the Communists.

By the end of 1949, the CCP controlled almost all of mainland China , as the KMT retreated to Taiwan with a significant amount of China's national treasures and 2 million people, including military forces and refugees . Some party members stayed in the mainland and broke away from the main KMT to found the Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang (also known as the Left Kuomintang), which still currently exists as one of the eight minor registered parties of the People's Republic of China.

In Taiwan: 1945–present [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: North–South divide in Taiwan This article is part of a series on Politics of Taiwan Government Constitution of the Republic of China Additional Articles of the Constitution Law Taxation Presidency President of the Republic of China Lai Ching-te ( DPP ) Vice President of the Republic of China Hsiao Bi-khim ( DPP ) Office of the President National Security Council Executive Executive Yuan Premier Cho Jung-tai ( DPP ) Vice Premier Cheng Li-chun ( DPP ) Legislature Legislative Yuan 11th Legislative Yuan President of the Legislative Yuan Han Kuo-yu ( KMT ) Vice President of the Legislative Yuan Johnny Chiang ( KMT ) Judiciary Judicial Yuan President of the Judicial Yuan and Chief Justice Shieh Ming-yan acting Vice President of the Judicial Yuan Vacant Supreme Court High Courts District Courts Other branches Examination Yuan President of the Examination Yuan Chou Hung-hsien Vice President of the Examination Yuan Hsu Shu-hsiang Control Yuan President of the Control Yuan Chen Chu Vice President of the Control Yuan Lee Hung-chun Local government Mayors and Magistrates Elections Central Election Commission Presidential elections Legislative elections Local elections Referendums Political parties Represented in the Legislative Yuan Kuomintang Democratic Progressive Party Taiwan People's Party Others New Power Party Taiwan Statebuilding Party People First Party Taiwan Solidarity Union New Party Non-Partisan Solidarity Union Green Party Taiwan Mass media Television Newspapers United Daily News Liberty Times China Times Taipei Times Propaganda Censorship Film censorship White Terror Foreign relations Ministry of Foreign Affairs Foreign Minister Lin Chia-lung Cross-Strait relations Special state-to-state relations One Country on Each Side 1992 Consensus Taiwan consensus Chinese Taipei Australia–Taiwan relations Canada–Taiwan relations France–Taiwan relations Russia–Taiwan relations Taiwan–United Kingdom relations Taiwan–United States relations Taiwan and the World Health Organization Related topics Political status of Taiwan Republic of China (1912–1949) Chinese Civil War One-China policy China and the United Nations Chinese unification Taiwan independence movement Taiwanese nationalism Tangwai movement Third Taiwan Strait Crisis Taiwan portal Other countries v t e The former KMT headquarters in Taipei City (1949–2006), whose imposing structure, directly facing the Presidential Office Building , was seen as a symbol of the party's wealth and dominance In 1895, Formosa (now called Taiwan), including the Penghu islands, became a Japanese colony via the Treaty of Shimonoseki following the First Sino-Japanese War .

After Japan's defeat at the end of World War II in 1945, General Order No. 1 instructed Japan to surrender its troops in Taiwan to Chiang Kai-shek. On 25 October 1945, KMT general Chen Yi acted on behalf of the Allied Powers to accept Japan's surrender and proclaimed that day as Taiwan Retrocession Day .

Tensions between the local Taiwanese and mainlanders from mainland China increased in the intervening years, culminating in a flashpoint on 27 February 1947 in Taipei when a dispute between a female cigarette vendor and an anti-smuggling officer in front of Tianma Tea House triggered civil disorder and protests that would last for days. The uprising turned bloody and was shortly put down by the ROC Army in the February 28 Incident . As a result of the 28 February Incident in 1947, Taiwanese people endured what is called the " White Terror ", a KMT-led political repression that resulted in the death or disappearance of over 30,000 Taiwanese intellectuals, activists, and people suspected of opposition to the KMT.

[ 31 ] Following the establishment of the People's Republic of China (PRC) on 1 October 1949, the commanders of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) believed that Kinmen and Matsu had to be taken before a final assault on Taiwan. The KMT fought the Battle of Guningtou on 25–27 October 1949 and stopped the PLA invasion. The KMT headquarters were set up on 10 December 1949 at No. 11 Zhongshan South Road.

[ 32 ] In 1950, Chiang took office in Taipei under the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion . The provision declared martial law in Taiwan and halted some democratic processes, including presidential and parliamentary elections, until the mainland could be recovered from the CCP. The KMT estimated it would take 3 years to defeat the Communists. The slogan was "prepare in the first year, start fighting in the second, and conquer in the third year." Chiang also initiated the Project National Glory to retake back the mainland in 1965, but was eventually dropped in July 1972 after many unsuccessful attempts. However, various factors, including international pressure, are believed to have prevented the KMT from militarily engaging the CCP full-scale. The KMT backed Muslim insurgents formerly belonging to the National Revolutionary Army during the KMT Islamic insurgency in 1950–1958 in mainland China. A cold war with a couple of minor military conflicts was resulted in the early years. The various government bodies previously in Nanjing , that were re-established in Taipei as the KMT-controlled government, actively claimed sovereignty over all China. The Republic of China in Taiwan retained China's seat in the United Nations until 1971 as well as recognition by the United States until 1979.

In response to widespread corruption, factionalism, and bureaucratic inefficiency that had plagued the Kuomintang and were viewed as key contributors to its defeat in the Chinese Civil War, Chiang Kai-shek initiated a sweeping modernization campaign known as the Party Reform Program between 1950 and 1952. The reform aimed to consolidate party discipline and centralize authority under Chiang's leadership. The campaign was led by the newly established Central Reform Committee, which sought to eliminate defeatism, factionalism, bureaucratism, and dependency within the party ranks. It also emphasized institutionalization, organizational cohesion, and the transformation of party culture. At the KMT's National Congress held in October 1952, Chiang declared the reform a success. As a result, the party charter was amended to redefine the Kuomintang as a revolutionary democratic party, drawing its social base from youth, intellectuals, and the working and agricultural classes, while positioning patriotic revolutionaries among these classes as the core of party membership. The program also marginalized rival factions such as the CC Clique , paving the way for the rise of figures like Chen Cheng and later Chiang Ching-kuo, who would dominate party leadership in the decades to come.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Until the 1970s, the KMT successfully pushed ahead with land reforms, developed the economy, implemented a democratic system in a lower level of the government, improved relations between Taiwan and the mainland and created the Taiwan economic miracle . However, the KMT controlled the government under a one-party authoritarian state until reforms in the late 1970s through the 1990s. The ROC in Taiwan was once referred to synonymously with the KMT and known simply as Nationalist China after its ruling party. In the 1970s, the KMT began to allow for "supplemental elections" in Taiwan to fill the seats of the aging representatives in the National Assembly .

Although opposition parties were not permitted, the pro-democracy movement Tangwai ("outside the KMT") created the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) on 28 September 1986. Outside observers of Taiwanese politics expected the KMT to clamp down and crush the illegal opposition party, though this did not occur, and instead the party's formation marked the beginning of Taiwan's democratization .

[ 35 ] Martial law ceased in 1987 and the President Lee Teng-hui terminated the Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of Communist Rebellion in 1991. All parties started to be allowed to compete at all levels of elections, including the presidential election.

Lee Teng-hui , the ROC's first democratically elected president and the leader of the KMT during the 1990s, announced his advocacy of "special state-to-state relations" with the PRC. The PRC associated this idea with Taiwan independence .

The KMT faced a split in 1993 that led to the formation of the New Party in August 1993, alleged to be a result of Lee's "corruptive ruling style". The New Party has, since the purging of Lee, largely reintegrated into the KMT. A much more serious split in the party occurred as a result of the 2000 presidential election . Upset at the choice of Lien Chan as the party's presidential nominee, former party Secretary-General James Soong launched an independent bid, which resulted in the expulsion of Soong and his supporters and the formation of the People First Party (PFP) on 31 March 2000. The KMT candidate placed third behind Soong in the elections. After the election, Lee's strong relationship with the opponent became apparent. To prevent defections to the PFP, Lien moved the party away from Lee's pro-independence policies and became more favorable toward Chinese unification . This shift led to Lee's expulsion from the party and the formation of the Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU) by Lee supporters on 24 July 2001.

Pan-blue supporters at a rally during the 2004 presidential election Prior to this, the party's voters had defected to both the PFP and TSU, and the KMT did poorly in the December 2001 legislative elections and lost its position as the largest party in the Legislative Yuan . However, the party did well in the 2002 local government mayoral and council election with Ma Ying-jeou , its candidate for Taipei mayor, winning reelection by a landslide and its candidate for Kaohsiung mayor narrowly losing but doing surprisingly well. Since 2002, the KMT and PFP have coordinated electoral strategies. In 2004, the KMT and PFP ran a joint presidential ticket, with Lien running for president and Soong running for vice-president.

The loss of the presidential election of 2004 to DPP President Chen Shui-bian by merely over 30,000 votes was a bitter disappointment to party members, leading to large scale rallies for several weeks protesting alleged electoral fraud and the "odd circumstances" of the shooting of President Chen . However, the fortunes of the party were greatly improved when the KMT did well in the legislative elections held in December 2004 by maintaining its support in southern Taiwan achieving a majority for the Pan-Blue Coalition .

Soon after the election, there appeared to be a falling out with the KMT's junior partner, the People First Party and talk of a merger seemed to have ended. This split appeared to widen in early 2005, as the leader of the PFP, James Soong appeared to be reconciling with President Chen Shui-Bian and the Democratic Progressive Party . Many PFP members including legislators and municipal leaders have since defected to the KMT, and the PFP is seen as a fading party.

In 2005, Ma Ying-jeou became KMT chairman defeating speaker Wang Jin-pyng in the first public election for KMT chairmanship . The KMT won a decisive victory in the 3-in-1 local elections of December 2005, replacing the DPP as the largest party at the local level. This was seen as a major victory for the party ahead of legislative elections in 2007. There were elections for the two municipalities of the ROC, Taipei and Kaohsiung in December 2006. The KMT won a clear victory in Taipei, but lost to the DPP in the southern city of Kaohsiung by the slim margin of 1,100 votes.

On 13 February 2007, Ma was indicted by the Taiwan High Prosecutors Office on charges of allegedly embezzling approximately NT$11 million (US$339,000), regarding the issue of "special expenses" while he was mayor of Taipei. Shortly after the indictment, he submitted his resignation as KMT chairman at the same press conference at which he formally announced his candidacy for ROC president. Ma argued that it was customary for officials to use the special expense fund for personal expenses undertaken in the course of their official duties. In December 2007, Ma was acquitted of all charges and immediately filed suit against the prosecutors. In 2008, the KMT won a landslide victory in the Republic of China presidential election on 22 March 2008 . The KMT fielded former Taipei mayor and former KMT chairman Ma Ying-jeou to run against the DPP's Frank Hsieh. Ma won by a margin of 17% against Hsieh. Ma took office on 20 May 2008, with vice-presidential candidate Vincent Siew, and ended 8 years of the DPP presidency. The KMT also won a landslide victory in the 2008 legislative elections , winning 81 of 113 seats, or 71.7% of seats in the Legislative Yuan . These two elections gave the KMT firm control of both the executive and legislative yuans.

On 25 June 2009, President Ma launched his bid to regain the KMT leadership and registered as the sole candidate for the chairmanship election . On 26 July, Ma won 93.9% of the vote, becoming the new chairman of the KMT, [ 36 ] taking office on 17 October 2009. This officially allowed Ma to be able to meet with Xi Jinping , the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party , and other PRC delegates, as he was able to represent the KMT as leader of a Chinese political party rather than as head-of-state of a political entity unrecognized by the PRC.

[ 37 ] On 29 November 2014, the KMT suffered a heavy loss in the local election to the DPP, winning only 6 municipalities and counties, down from 14 in the previous election in 2009 and 2010 . Ma Ying-jeou subsequently resigned from the party chairmanship on 3 December and replaced by acting Chairman Wu Den-yih .

Chairmanship election was held on 17 January 2015 and Eric Chu was elected to become the new chairman. He was inaugurated on 19 February.

[ 38 ] In September 2021, Kuomintang elected its former leader (in office 2015–2016), veteran politician Eric Chu , as its new leader to replace Johnny Chiang (in office 2020–2021).

[ 39 ] In January 2024, no party won a majority in Taiwan's legislative election for the first time since 2004, meaning 51 seats for the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), 52 seats for the Kuomintang (KMT), and the Taiwan People's Party (TPP) secured eight seats.

[ 40 ] Current issues and challenges [ edit ] Party assets [ edit ] Upon arriving in Taiwan the KMT occupied assets previously owned by the Japanese and forced local businesses to make contributions directly to the KMT. Some of this real estate and other assets was distributed to party loyalists, but most of it remained with the party, as did the profits generated by the properties.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] As the ruling party on Taiwan, the KMT amassed a vast business empire of banks, investment companies, petrochemical firms, and television and radio stations, thought to have made it the world's richest political party, with assets once estimated to be around US$2–10 billion.

[ 43 ] Although this war chest appeared to help the KMT until the mid-1990s, it later led to accusations of corruption (often referred to as " black gold ").

After 2000, the KMT's financial holdings appeared to be more of a liability than a benefit, and the KMT started to divest itself of its assets. However, the transactions were not disclosed and the whereabouts of the money earned from selling assets (if it has gone anywhere) is unknown. There were accusations in the 2004 presidential election that the KMT retained assets that were illegally acquired. During the 2000–2008 DPP presidency, a law was proposed by the DPP in the Legislative Yuan to recover illegally acquired party assets and return them to the government. However, due to the DPP's lack of control of the legislative chamber at the time, it never materialized.

The KMT also acknowledged that part of its assets were acquired through extra-legal means and thus promised to "retro-endow" them to the government. However, the quantity of the assets which should be classified as illegal are still under heated debate. DPP, in its capacity as ruling party from 2000 to 2008, claimed that there is much more that the KMT has yet to acknowledge. Also, the KMT actively sold assets under its title to quench its recent financial difficulties, which the DPP argues is illegal. Former KMT chairman Ma Ying-Jeou 's position is that the KMT will sell some of its properties at below market rates rather than return them to the government and that the details of these transactions will not be publicly disclosed.

Kuomintang public service center in Shilin, Taipei In 2006, the KMT sold its headquarters at 11 Zhongshan South Road in Taipei to Evergreen Group for NT$ 2.3 billion (US$96 million). The KMT moved into a smaller building on Bade Road in the eastern part of the city.

[ 44 ] In July 2014, the KMT reported total assets of NT$26.8 billion (US$892.4 million) and interest earnings of NT$981.52 million for the year of 2013, making it one of the richest political parties in the world.

[ 45 ] In August 2016, the Ill-gotten Party Assets Settlement Committee was set up by the ruling DPP government to investigate KMT party assets acquired during the martial law period and recover those that were determined to be illegally acquired.

[ 46 ] Supporter base [ edit ] Support for the KMT in Taiwan encompasses a wide range of social groups but is largely determined by age. KMT support is concentrated in northern Taiwan in urban areas, where it draws its backing from big businesses due to its policy of maintaining commercial links with mainland China. As of 2020, only 3% of KMT members are under 40 years of age.

[ 47 ] [ needs update ] The KMT also has some support in the labor sector because of the many labor benefits and insurance implemented while the KMT was in power. The KMT traditionally has strong cooperation with military officers and veterans, teachers, and government workers. Among ethnic groups in Taiwan, the KMT has stronger support among mainlanders and their descendants for ideological and ethnic reasons and among some Taiwanese indigenous peoples who do not agree with the Pan-Green political pandering. The support for the KMT generally tend to be stronger in majority- Hakka and Mandarin -speaking counties of Taiwan, in contrast to the Hokkien -majority southwestern counties that tend to support the Democratic Progressive Party .

Hostility between indigenous communities and (Taiwanese) Hoklo and the indigenous communities' robust KMT networks both contribute to the indigenous tendency to vote for the KMT and their skepticism towards the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP).

[ 48 ] Indigenous peoples have criticized politicians for abusing the "indigenization" movement for political gains, such as indigenous opposition to the DPP's "rectification" by recognizing the Taroko for political reasons, with the majority of mountain townships voting for Ma Ying-jeou .

[ 49 ] In 2005 the Kuomintang displayed a massive photo of the anti-Japanese Seediq leader Mona Rudao at its headquarters in honor of the 60th anniversary of Taiwan's retrocession from Japan to the Republic of China.

[ 50 ] On social issues, the KMT does not take an official position on same-sex marriage , though most members of legislative committees, mayors of cities, and the 2020 presidential candidate Han Kuo-yu oppose it. The party does, however, have a small faction that supports same-sex marriage, consisting mainly of young people and residents of the Taipei metropolitan area . The opposition to same-sex marriage comes mostly from Christian groups, who wield significant political influence within the KMT.

[ 51 ] The party also support transnational marriages between mainland Chinese and Taiwanese in an attempt to preserve Chinese culture in Taiwan, although not without controversies over assimilation and espionage .

[ 52 ] Organization [ edit ] Bade building in Taipei City, before becoming the KMT headquarters. The KMT Central Committee sold the original headquarters to private investors of the EVA Airways Corporation, and moved to this more modest building in June 2006.

KMT Kinmen headquarters office in Jincheng Township , Kinmen County KMT Korea headquarters in Seoul The KMT maintains offices in some of the Chinatowns of the world and its United States party headquarters are located in San Francisco Chinatown , on Stockton Street directly across the Chinese Six Companies KMT Eastern U.S. headquarters, located in New York Chinatown , are the party's earliest offices in the U.S., established in 1909.

[ 53 ] KMT Building in Vancouver's Chinatown , British Columbia, Canada KMT office of Australasia in Sydney, Australia Leadership [ edit ] The Kuomintang's constitution designated Sun Yat-sen as party president. After his death, the Kuomintang opted to keep that language in its constitution to honor his memory forever, further designating him as "Permanent Prime Minister" and Chiang Kai-Shek as "Permanent President". The party has since been headed by a director-general (1927–1975) and a chairman (since 1975), positions which officially discharge the functions of the president.

Current Central Committee Leadership [ edit ] Further information: Chairman of the Kuomintang and Secretary-General of the Kuomintang Position Name(s) Chairman Eric Chu Vice Chairpersons Huang Min-hui , Andrew Hsia , Sean Lien Secretary-General Justin Huang Deputy Secretaries-General Chiang Chun-ting [ zh ] (full-time), Wang Yu-min [ zh ] (full-time), Lee Yen-hsiu , Hsieh Yi-fong , Alex Fai Policy Committee Executive Director Tseng Ming-chung Organizational Development Committee [ zh ] Director Hsu Yu-chen Culture and Communications Committee [ zh ] Director Ling Tao [ zh ] Administration Committee Director Chiu Da-chan [ zh ] Party Disciplinary Committee [ zh ] Director Lee Guei-min [ zh ] Institute of Revolutionary Practice Director Lin Yi-hua [ zh ] Legislative Yuan leader (Caucus leader) [ edit ] 谷鳳翔 （- 18 August 1965） 郭澄 （18 August 1965 - 6 February 1967） 張寶樹 （1967 - 1968） 王任遠 (1968 - 1970) Chao Tzu-chi (1970 - 1988) Liang Su-jung (1988–1989) Yao Eng-chi (1993) Hong Yuh-chin [ zh ] (1 February 1999 – 1 February 2004) Tseng Yung-chuan (1 February 2004 – 1 December 2008) Lin Yi-shih (1 December 2008 – 1 February 2012) Lin Hung-chih (1 February 2012 – 31 July 2014) Alex Fai (31 July 2014 – 7 February 2015) Lai Shyh-bao (7 February 2015 – 7 July 2016) Liao Kuo-tung (7 July 2016 – 29 June 2017) Lin Te-fu (29 June 2017 – 14 June 2018) Johnny Chiang (14 June 2018 – 2019) Tseng Ming-chung (2019 – 2020) Lin Wei-chou [ zh ] (2020 – 2021) Alex Fai (2021 – 2022) Tseng Ming-chung (2022 – 2024) Fu Kun-chi (since 2024) Party organization and structure [ edit ] The KMT is being led by a Central Committee with a commitment to a Leninist principle of democratic centralism : [ 54 ] National Congress Party chairman Vice-chairmen Central Committee Central Steering Committee for Women Central Standing Committee Secretary-General Deputy Secretaries-General Executive Director Standing committees and departments [ edit ] Policy Committee Policy Coordination Department Policy Research Department Mainland Affairs Department Institute of Revolutionary Practice , formerly National Development Institute Kuomintang Youth League Research Division Education and Counselling Division Party Disciplinary Committee Evaluation and Control Office Audit Office Culture and Communications Committee Cultural Department Communications Department KMT Party History Institute Administration Committee Personnel Office General Office Finance Office Accounting Office Information Center Organizational Development Committee Organization and Operations Department Elections Mobilization Department Community Volunteers Department Overseas Department Youth Department Women's Department Party charter [ edit ] The Kuomintang Party Charter was adopted on January 28, 1924. The current charter has 51 articles and includes contents of General Principles, Party Membership, Organization, The National President, The Director-General, The National Congress, The Central Committee, District and Sub-District Party Headquarters, Cadres and Tenure, Discipline, Awards and Punishment, Funding, and Supplementary Provisions.

[ 55 ] The most recent version was made at the Twentieth National Congress on July 28, 2019.

Factions [ edit ] “Mainlander” faction  (外省派) - Ma Ying-jeou , Eric Chu “Taiwanese” faction (本土派) - Hou You-yi , Johnny Chiang Huang Fu-hsing faction (黃復興) - Hau Pei-tsun [ 56 ] Ideology in mainland China [ edit ] See also: History of the Kuomintang and Conservatism in China Part of a series on Three Principles of the People Principles Anti-imperialism Republicanism Nationalism (Mínzú) Chinese unification Pan-Asianism Five Races Under One Union Zhonghua minzu Democracy (Mínquán) Five-Power Constitution Popular initiative Popular sovereignty Recall election Referendum Revolutionary people's rights [ zh ] Socialism (Mínshēng) Equalization of Land Ownership [ zh ] The International Development of China [ zh ] Land reform in Taiwan State-owned enterprise History 1911 Revolution First United Front History of the Kuomintang June 16 incident [ zh ] Kidnapped in London National Revolution [ zh ] National Revolutionary Army Nationalist government New Life Movement Northern Expedition Provisional Government of the Republic of China Second Revolution Parties Chinese Nationalist Party Chinese Pan-Blue Alliance Revolutionary Committee 123 Democratic Alliance Democratic Alliance Hong Kong and Kowloon Trades Union Council Revive China Society Tongmenghui Young China Party Organisations Blue Shirts Society Chinese Muslim Association Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People Guominjun Kuomintang Youth League Reorganization Group Western Hills Group People Sun Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wei-shui) Dai Hu Huang Liao Shao Song Wang (Chonghui) Wang (Jingwei) Wu Yu Zhang [ zh ] Zhu Zou (Lu) [ zh ] Zou (Rong) Outside of mainland China Kokang Democracy and Unity Party Korea Nationalist Party Malaysian Chinese Association People's Power Party Restoration League of Vietnam Three Principles of the Equality Taiwanese People's Party Tibet Improvement Party Vietnamese Nationalist Party Related ideologies Anarchism Anti-communism (element) Chiangism Communitarianism Cultural conservatism Dai Jitao Thought Georgism Liberalism (element) Multiracialism Progressivism Economic Revolutionary nationalism Related topics Anti-Qing sentiment Constitution of the Republic of China Democratic centralism (Kuomintang) National Assembly National Anthem Pan-Blue Coalition mainland China Hong Kong Republic of China Military Academy Republic of China portal People's Republic of China portal v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in China Ideologies Authoritarian Capitalism Party-state Chiangism Communitarianism Cultural Dai Jitao Thought Monarchism Nationalist Han Neo Ultra Neoauthoritarianism Social Traditionalist Confucianism Neo New Legalism Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Asian values Authority Bureaucracy Civilization state Chinese culture Genealogy book Great Unity Duty Elitism Meritocracy Exceptionalism Familialism Filial piety Mandate of Heaven Hierarchy Humaneness Irredentism Law and order Rectification of names Respect Sinicization Sinocentrism Social order Sovereignty Tradition Technocracy Zhonghua minzu History 1992 Consensus Boluan Fanzheng Boxer Rebellion Chinese Civil War Chinese Cultural Renaissance Dang Guo Dynasties of China Han Empire of China (1915–1916) History of the Kuomintang Nationalist government Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Imperial China Imperial examination Tributary system Manchu Restoration Nanjing decade Martial law in Taiwan Language policy New Life Movement Project National Glory Reform and opening up Republic of China (1912–1949) Shanghai massacre Strike Hard Against Crime Campaign Tongzhi Restoration Self-Strengthening Movement White Terror in Taiwan Xueheng School Intellectuals Bell Chang (Ya-chung) Chen (Yuan) Chao Confucius Dai Dong Gan Gu Hu (Hanmin) Hu (Xijin) Jaw Jiang (Qing) Jiang (Shigong) Jin Kang Li (Ao) Li (Hongzhi) Li (Zehou) Liang Liu Pan Liu Shang Tam Tan Wang Wu Xiao Xiong Zhang (Weiwei) Zheng (Yongnian) Zhu Zou Politicians Imperial China Chao Duke Shao Wen Emperor Wu (Han) Yang Yongle Yuan Zhang Duke Zhou Republic of China (before 1949) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Dai (Jitao) Dai (Li) Hu (Hanmin) Li Lin Soong Yuan People's Republic of China (Mainland) Hu Huang Jiang Wang Xi Hong Kong Chan (Gary) Chan (Joephy) Chow Fok Ho Ip (Kwok-him) Ip (Regina) Kwok Lam Lee (Dominic) Lee (John) Lee (Starry) Leung Liao Quat Tsang (Donald) Tsang (Yok-sing) Tung Yung Macau Chui Ho (Edmund) Ho (Iat Seng) Sam Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wan-an) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Chiu Chu Gou Han Hau (Lung-pin) Hau (Pei-tsun) Hung Jaw Lee Lien Lin Ma Soong (James) Soong (Mei-ling) Sun Yu Extant parties Mainland China Chinese Communist Party ( factions ) Hong Kong Business and Professionals Alliance Civil Force Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress Federation of Public Housing Estates Hong Kong Federation of Education Workers Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions Kowloon West New Dynamic Liberal Party New Century Forum New People's Party New Prospect New Territories Association of Societies Politihk Social Strategic Roundtable Silent Majority Macau Alliance for Change Macau-Guangdong Union New Macau Development Union United Citizens Association Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chinese Nationalist Party Chinese New Party Chinese Unification Promotion Party For Public Good Party Patriot Alliance Association People First Party Young China Party Overseas Malaysian Chinese Association Historical parties Progressive Party Republican Party Royalist Party Unity Party Hong Kong Co-operative Resources Centre Federation for the Stability Hong Kong Alliance of Chinese and Expatriates Hong Kong Progressive Alliance Liberal Democratic Federation New Hong Kong Alliance Professional Forum Progressive Hong Kong Society Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Congress Party Alliance Republican Party The Motorists' Party of ROC Overseas Ryukyu Guomindang Tibet Improvement Party Alliances Pro-Kuomintang camp Republic of China mainland China Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Hong Kong Macau Literature America Against America Analects Classic of Filial Piety The China Wave Farewell to Revolution Organisations Active China Youth Service & Recreation Center Institute of Revolutionary Practice Defunct Blue Shirts Society Group of 89 National Revolutionary Army Tsotanhui Clique Western Hills Group Media Mainland China Economic Daily Global Times Guancha Hong Kong Headline Daily Hong Kong Economic Times Oriental Daily News Sing Tao Daily The Standard Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chung T'ien Television China Television China Times Commercial Times TVBS United Daily News Overseas The Epoch Times Former Central Daily News Shen Bao By region Hong Kong Taiwan (Republic of China) Variants and movements Anti-communism Conservative localism in Hong Kong Hanfu Movement Related ideologies Authoritarian capitalism Fascism Han chauvinism Hui pan-nationalism Imperialism State nationalism Related topics Anti-national sentiments Japanese Taiwanese Tibetan Baizuo Falun Gong Four big families of Hong Kong Liberalism in China (opposing) Pro-ROC sentiment " Straight man cancer " Taishang Taiwanese nationalism (opposing) World League for Freedom and Democracy Conservatism portal China portal Hong Kong portal Taiwan portal v t e Chinese nationalism [ edit ] See also: Chinese nationalism § State nationalism The KMT was a nationalist revolutionary party that had been supported by the Soviet Union. It was organized on the Leninist principle of democratic centralism .

[ 21 ] The KMT had several influences upon its ideology by revolutionary thinking. The KMT and Chiang Kai-shek used the words feudal and counterrevolutionary as synonyms for evil and backwardness, and they proudly proclaimed themselves to be revolutionaries .

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Chiang called the warlords feudalists, and he also called for feudalism and counterrevolutionaries to be stamped out by the KMT.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Chiang showed extreme rage when he was called a warlord, because of the word's negative and feudal connotations.

[ 63 ] Ma Bufang was forced to defend himself against the accusations, and stated to the news media that his army was a part of "National army, people's power".

[ 64 ] Chiang Kai-shek, the head of the KMT, warned the Soviet Union and other foreign countries about interfering in Chinese affairs. He was personally angry at the way China was treated by foreigners, mainly by the Soviet Union, Britain, and the United States.

[ 60 ] [ 65 ] He and his New Life Movement called for the crushing of Soviet, Western, American and other foreign influences in China. Chen Lifu, a CC Clique member in the KMT, said "Communism originated from Soviet imperialism, which has encroached on our country." It was also noted that "the white bear of the North Pole is known for its viciousness and cruelty".

[ 62 ] KMT leaders across China adopted nationalist rhetoric. The Chinese Muslim general Ma Bufang of Qinghai presented himself as a Chinese nationalist to the people of China who was fighting against Western imperialism to deflect criticism by opponents that his government was feudal and oppressed minorities like Tibetans and Buddhist Mongols. He used his Chinese nationalist credentials to his advantage to keep himself in power.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Fascist influences [ edit ] See also: Dang Guo The Blue Shirts Society , a ultranationalist paramilitary organization within the KMT that modeled itself after Mussolini 's blackshirts , was anti-foreign and anti-communist , and it stated that its agenda was to expel foreign (Japanese and Western) imperialists from China, crush Communism, and eliminate feudalism.

[ 68 ] In addition to being anticommunist, some KMT members, like Chiang Kai-shek's right-hand man Dai Li were anti-American, and wanted to expel American influence.

[ 69 ] Close Sino-German ties also promoted cooperation between the Kuomintang and the Nazi Party (NSDAP).

[ 70 ] The Kuomintang sought to build a one-party ideological state in China, called Dang Guo , to solidify its rule and ideological supremacy.

[ 71 ] The New Life Movement was a government-led civic movement in 1930s China initiated by Chiang Kai-shek to promote cultural reform and Neo-Confucian social morality and to ultimately unite China under a centralised ideology following the emergence of ideological challenges to the status quo. The Movement attempted to counter threats of Western and Japanese imperialism through a resurrection of traditional Chinese morality, which it held to be superior to modern Western values. As such the Movement was based upon Confucianism , mixed with Christianity , nationalism and authoritarianism that have some similarities to fascism.

[ 72 ] It rejected individualism and liberalism , while also opposing socialism and communism . Some historians regard this movement as imitating Nazism and being a neo- nationalistic movement used to elevate Chiang's control of everyday lives.

Frederic Wakeman suggested that the New Life Movement was "Confucian fascism".

[ 73 ] According to Stanley Payne , Chiang's KMT was "normally classified as a multi-class populist or ' nation-building ' party but not a fitting candidate for fascism (except by old-line Communists)." He also stated that, "Lloyd Eastman has called the Blue Shirts, whose members admired European fascism and were influenced by it, a Chinese fascist organization. This is probably an exaggeration. The Blue Shirts certainly exhibited some of the characteristics of fascism, as did many nationalist organizations around the world, but it is not clear that the group possessed the full qualities of an intrinsic fascist movement....The Blue Shirts probably had some affinity with and for fascism, a common feature of nationalisms in crisis during the 1930s, but it is doubtful that they represented any clear-cut Asian variant of fascism." [ 74 ] The Sino-German relationship also rapidly deteriorated as Germany failed to pursue a détente between China and Japan, which led to the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War . China later declared war on fascist countries , including Germany, Italy, and Japan, as part of the Declarations of war during World War II and Chiang, the head of the KMT, became the most powerful " anti-fascist " leader in Asia.

[ 75 ] Ideology of the New Guangxi Clique [ edit ] The KMT branch in Guangxi province, led by the New Guangxi Clique of Bai Chongxi and Li Zongren , implemented anti-imperialist, anti-religious, and anti-foreign policies. During the Northern Expedition, in 1926 in Guangxi, Muslim General Bai Chongxi led his troops in destroying most of the Buddhist temples and smashing idols, turning the temples into schools and KMT headquarters. Bai led an anti-foreign wave in Guangxi, attacking American, European, and other foreigners and missionaries, and generally making the province unsafe for non-natives. Westerners fled from the province, and some Chinese Christians were also attacked as imperialist agents.

[ 76 ] The leaders clashed with Chiang Kai-shek, which led to the Central Plains War where Chiang defeated the clique.

Socialism and anti-capitalist agitation [ edit ] Main articles: Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang and Canton Merchant Volunteers Corps Uprising The KMT had a left wing and a right wing, the left being more radical in its pro-Soviet policies, but both wings equally persecuted merchants, accusing them of being counterrevolutionaries and reactionaries. The right wing under Chiang Kai-shek prevailed, and continued radical policies against private merchants and industrialists, even as they denounced communism.

[ 77 ] One of the Three Principles of the People of the KMT, Mínshēng, was defined as socialism by Sun Yat-sen. He defined this principle of saying in his last days "it's socialism and it's communism". The concept may be understood as social welfare as well. Sun understood it as an industrial economy and equality of land holdings for the Chinese peasant farmers. Here he was influenced by the American thinker Henry George (see Georgism ), the land value tax in Taiwan is a legacy thereof. He divided livelihood into four areas: food, clothing, housing, and transportation; and planned out how an ideal (Chinese) government can take care of these for its people.

[ 77 ] The KMT was referred to having a socialist ideology. "Equalization of land rights" was a clause included by Sun in the original Tongmenhui. The KMT's revolutionary ideology in the 1920s incorporated unique Chinese Socialism as part of its ideology.

[ 78 ] The Soviet Union trained KMT revolutionaries in the Moscow Sun Yat-sen University . In the West and in the Soviet Union, Chiang was known as the "Red General".

[ 79 ] Movie theaters in the Soviet Union showed newsreels and clips of Chiang, at Moscow Sun Yat-sen University Portraits of Chiang were hung on the walls, and in the Soviet May Day Parades that year [ when?

] , Chiang's portrait was to be carried along with the portraits of Karl Marx , Lenin , Stalin , and other socialist leaders.

[ 80 ] The KMT attempted to levy taxes upon merchants in Canton, and the merchants resisted by raising an army, the Merchant's volunteer corps. Sun initiated this anti-merchant policy, and Chiang Kai-shek enforced it, Chiang led his army of Whampoa Military Academy graduates to defeat the merchant's army. Chiang was assisted by Soviet advisors, who supplied him with weapons, while the merchants were supplied with weapons from the Western countries.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] The KMT was accused of leading a "Red Revolution" in Canton. The merchants were conservative and reactionary , and their Volunteer Corp leader Chen Lianbao was a prominent comprador trader.

[ 81 ] The merchants were supported by the Western powers , who led an international flotilla to support them against the KMT.

[ 82 ] The KMT seized many of Western-supplied weapons from the merchants, using them to equip their troops. A KMT General executed several merchants, and the KMT formed a Soviet-inspired Revolutionary Committee.

[ 83 ] The British Communist Party sent a letter to Sun, congratulating him on his military successes.

[ 84 ] In 1948, the KMT again attacked the merchants of Shanghai. Chiang Kai-shek sent his son Chiang Ching-kuo to restore economic order. Ching-kuo copied Soviet methods, which he learned during his stay there, to start a social revolution by attacking middle-class merchants. He also enforced low prices on all goods to raise support from the proletariat .

[ 85 ] As riots broke out and savings were ruined, bankrupting shop owners, Ching-kuo began to attack the wealthy, seizing assets and placing them under arrest. The son of the gangster Du Yuesheng was arrested by him. Ching-kuo ordered KMT agents to raid the Yangtze Development Corporation's warehouses, which was privately owned by H.H. Kung and his family. H.H. Kung's wife was Soong Ai-ling , the sister of Soong Mei-ling who was Ching-kuo's stepmother. H.H. Kung's son David was arrested, the Kung's responded by blackmailing the Chiang's, threatening to release information about them, eventually he was freed after negotiations, and Ching-kuo resigned, ending the terror on the Shanghainese merchants.

[ 86 ] The KMT also promotes government-owned corporations . KMT founder Sun Yat-sen, was heavily influenced by the economic ideas of Henry George, who believed that the rents extracted from natural monopolies or the usage of land belonged to the public. Sun argued for Georgism and emphasized the importance of a mixed economy, which he termed "The Principle of Minsheng" in his Three Principles of the People.

"The railroads, public utilities, canals, and forests should be nationalized, and all income from the land and mines should be in the hands of the State. With this money in hand, the State can therefore finance the social welfare programs." [ 87 ] The KMT Muslim Governor of Ningxia , Ma Hongkui , promoted state-owned monopolies. His government had a company, Fu Ning Company, which had a monopoly over commerce and industry in Ningxia.

[ 88 ] Corporations such as CSBC Corporation, Taiwan , CPC Corporation and Aerospace Industrial Development Corporation are owned by the state in the Republic of China.

Marxists also existed in the KMT. They viewed revolution in different terms than the CCP, claiming that China already went past its feudal stage and was in a stagnation period rather than in another mode of production. These Marxists in the KMT opposed the CCP ideology.

[ 89 ] The Left Kuomintang who disagreed with Chiang Kai-shek formed the Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang when the KMT was on the edge of defeat in the civil war and later joined the government of the CCP.

Confucianism and religion in its ideology [ edit ] From left to right, KMT members pay tribute to the Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum in Beijing in 1928 after the success of the Northern Expedition: Generals Cheng Jin , Zhang Zuobao , Chen Diaoyuan , Chiang Kai-shek , Woo Tsin-hang , Yan Xishan , General Ma Fuxiang , Ma Sida and General Bai Chongxi The KMT used traditional Chinese religious ceremonies. According to the KMT, the souls of party martyrs were sent to heaven. Chiang Kai-shek believed that these martyrs still witnessed events on Earth.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] The KMT backed the New Life Movement, which promoted Confucianism, and it was also against westernization. KMT leaders also opposed the May Fourth Movement . Chiang Kai-shek, as a nationalist, and Confucianist, was against the iconoclasm of the May Fourth Movement. He viewed some western ideas as foreign, as a Chinese nationalist, and that the introduction of western ideas and literature that the May Fourth Movement wanted was not welcome. He and Sun Yat-sen criticized these May Fourth intellectuals for corrupting morals of youth.

[ 94 ] The KMT also incorporated Confucianism in its jurisprudence . It pardoned Shi Jianqiao for murdering Sun Chuanfang , because she did it in revenge since Sun executed her father Shi Congbin, which was an example of filial piety to one's parents in Confucianism.

[ 95 ] The KMT encouraged filial revenge killings and extended pardons to those who performed them.

[ 96 ] In response to the Cultural Revolution , Chiang Kai-shek promoted a Chinese Cultural Renaissance movement which followed in the steps of the New Life Movement, promoting Confucian values.

[ 97 ] Education [ edit ] The KMT purged China's education system of Western ideas, introducing Confucianism into the curriculum. Education came under the total control of the state, which meant, in effect, the KMT, via the Ministry of Education. Military and political classes on KMT's Three Principles of the People were added. Textbooks, exams, degrees and educational instructors were all controlled by the state, as were all universities.

[ 98 ] Soviet-style military [ edit ] Chiang Ching-kuo, appointed as KMT director of Secret Police in 1950, was educated in the Soviet Union, and initiated Soviet style military organization in the Republic of China Armed Forces , reorganizing and Sovietizing the political officer corps, surveillance, and KMT activities were propagated throughout the whole of the armed forces. Opposed to this was Sun Li-jen , who was educated at the American Virginia Military Institute .

[ 99 ] Chiang Ching-kuo then arrested Sun Li-jen, charging him of conspiring with the American CIA of plotting to overthrow Chiang Kai-shek and the KMT, Sun was placed under house arrest in 1955.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] Anti-communism [ edit ] See also: Anti-communism in China § Republic of China (1912–1949) Before the founding of the People's Republic of China, the Kuomintang, also known as the Chinese Nationalist Party, led by Chiang Kai-shek, was ruling China and strongly opposed the Chinese Communist Party as it was funded and militarily backed by the COMINTERN ( Soviet Union ) and pursuing a communist revolution to overthrow the Republic of China . On 12 April 1927, Chiang Kai-shek purged the communists in what was known as the Shanghai massacre which led to the Chinese Civil War .

[ 102 ] The Chinese Nationalist government then led 5 military campaigns in order to wipe out Chinese Soviet Republic , a Soviet-puppet state established by the Chinese Communist Party. Initially, the Kuomintang was successful, eventually forcing the Chinese Communist Party to escape on a long march until a full-scale invasion of China by Japan forced both the Nationalists and the Communists into an alliance . After the war, the two parties were thrown back into a civil war. The Kuomintang were defeated in the mainland and escaped in exile to Taiwan while the rest of mainland China became Communist in 1949.

Policy on ethnic minorities [ edit ] Further information: List of ethnic groups in China , Zhonghua minzu , and Xinjiang conflict Former KMT leader Chiang Kai-shek considered all the minority peoples of China as descendants of the Yellow Emperor , the semi-mythical initiator of the Chinese civilization. Chiang considered all ethnic minorities in China to belong to the Zhonghua minzu (Chinese nation) and he introduced this into KMT ideology, which was propagated into the educational system of the Republic of China, and the Constitution of the ROC considered Chiang's ideology to be true.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] In Taiwan, the president performs a ritual honoring the Yellow Emperor, while facing west, in the direction of the Chinese mainland.

[ 106 ] The KMT retained the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission for dealing with Mongolian and Tibetan affairs. A Muslim, Ma Fuxiang, was appointed as its chairman.

[ 107 ] The KMT was known for sponsoring Muslim students to study abroad at Muslim universities like Al-Azhar University and it established schools especially for Muslims, Muslim KMT warlords like Ma Fuxiang promoted education for Muslims.

[ 108 ] KMT Muslim Warlord Ma Bufang built a girls' school for Muslim girls in Linxia City which taught modern secular education.

[ 109 ] Tibetans and Mongols refused to allow other ethnic groups like Kazakhs to participate in the Kokonur ceremony in Qinghai, but KMT Muslim General Ma Bufang allowed them to participate.

[ 110 ] Chinese Muslims were among the most hardline KMT members.

Ma Chengxiang was a Muslim KMT member, and he refused to surrender to the Communists.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] The KMT incited anti- Yan Xishan and Feng Yuxiang sentiments among Hui people and Mongols, encouraging for them to topple their rule during the Central Plains War.

[ 113 ] Masud Sabri , a Uyghur was appointed as Governor of Xinjiang by the KMT, as was the Tatar Burhan Shahidi and the Uyghur Yulbars Khan .

[ 114 ] The Muslim General Ma Bufang also put KMT symbols on his mansion, the Ma Bufang Mansion along with a portrait of party founder Sun Yat-sen arranged with the KMT flag and the Republic of China flag.

General Ma Bufang and other high ranking Muslim Generals attended the Kokonuur Lake Ceremony where the God of the Lake was worshipped, and during the ritual, the Chinese national anthem was sung, all participants bowed to a Portrait of KMT founder Sun Yat-sen, and the God of the Lake was also bowed to, and offerings were given to him by the participants, which included the Muslims.

[ 115 ] This cult of personality around the KMT leader and the KMT was standard in all meetings. Sun Yat-sen's portrait was bowed to three times by KMT party members.

[ 116 ] Sun's portrait was arranged with two flags crossed under, the KMT flag and the flag of the Republic of China .

The KMT also hosted conferences of important Muslims like Bai Chongxi, Ma Fuxiang, and Ma Liang. Ma Bufang stressed "racial harmony" as a goal when he was Governor of Qinghai.

[ 117 ] In 1939, Isa Yusuf Alptekin and Ma Fuliang were sent on a mission by the KMT to the Middle Eastern countries such as Egypt , Turkey and Syria to gain support for the Chinese War against Japan , they also visited Afghanistan in 1940 and contacted Muhammad Amin Bughra , they asked him to come to Chongqing , the capital of the Nationalist Government. Bughra was arrested by the British government in 1942 for spying, and the KMT arranged for Bughra's release. He and Isa Yusuf worked as editors of KMT Muslim publications.

[ 118 ] Ma Tianying ( 馬天英 ) (1900–1982) led the 1939 mission which had 5 other people including Isa and Fuliang.

[ 119 ] Anti-separatism [ edit ] The claimed sovereign borders of the Republic of China, as inherited from the Great Qing in 1912 and claimed by the Kuomintang.

The KMT, being anti-separatist, claims sovereignty over Outer Mongolia and Tuva as well as the territories of the modern People's Republic and Republic of China.

[ 120 ] KMT Muslim General Ma Bufang waged war on the invading Tibetans during the Sino-Tibetan War with his Muslim army, and he repeatedly crushed Tibetan revolts during bloody battles in Qinghai provinces. Ma Bufang was fully supported by President Chiang Kai-shek, who ordered him to prepare his Muslim army to invade Tibet several times and threatened aerial bombardment on the Tibetans. With support from the KMT, Ma Bufang repeatedly attacked the Tibetan area of Golog seven times during the KMT Pacification of Qinghai , eliminating thousands of Tibetans.

[ 110 ] General Ma Fuxiang , the chairman of the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission stated that Mongolia and Tibet were an integral part of the Republic of China, arguing: Our Party [the Guomindang] takes the development of the weak and small and resistance to the strong and violent as our sole and most urgent task. This is even more true for those groups which are not of our kind [Ch. fei wo zulei zhe]. Now the people of Mongolia and Tibet are closely related to us, and we have great affection for one another: our common existence and common honor already have a history of over a thousand years. [...] Mongolia and Tibet's life and death are China's life and death. China absolutely cannot cause Mongolia and Tibet to break away from China's territory, and Mongolia and Tibet cannot reject China to become independent. At this time, there is not a single nation on earth except China that will sincerely develop Mongolia and Tibet.

[ 107 ] Ma Bufang also crushed Mongol separatist movements, abducting the Genghis Khan Shrine and attacking Tibetan Buddhist Temples like Labrang, and keeping a tight control over them through the Kokonur God ceremony.

[ 115 ] [ 121 ] Ideology in Taiwan [ edit ] Anti-communism [ edit ] See also: Anti-communism in China § Taiwan (Republic of China, 1949–present) On 28 February 1947, the Kuomintang cracked down on an anti-government uprising in Taiwan known as the February 28 incident and the government began the White Terror in Taiwan in order to purge communist spies and prevent Chinese communist subversion.

[ 122 ] While in Taiwan, the Republic of China government under the Kuomintang remained anti-communist and attempted to recover the mainland from the Communist forces . During the Cold War , Taiwan was referred to as Free China [ 123 ] while the China on the mainland was known as Red China [ 124 ] or Communist China in the West, to mark the ideological difference between the capitalist ' Free World ' and the communist nations. The ROC government under the Kuomintang also actively supported anti-communist efforts in Southeast Asia and around the world.

[ 125 ] This effort did not cease until the death of Chiang Kai-shek in 1975.

[ 126 ] The Kuomintang continued to be anti-communist during the period of Chiang Chin-kuo. Contacts between Kuomintang and Chinese Communist Party have started since 1990s to re-establish Cross-Strait relations . Although relations has improved with the PRC since the 1992 Consensus , [ 127 ] with both sides having a common opposition to Taiwanese nationalism , [ 128 ] it continues to be opposed to communism , as anti-communism is written under Article 2 of Kuomintang's party charter.

[ 127 ] Three Principles of the People [ edit ] Main article: Three Principles of the People Sun Yat-sen was not just the founder of the Republic of China, but also the founder of the Kuomintang. Sun Yat-sen's political ideology was based on building a free and democratic China founded on Three Principles of the People , namely Democracy (civil rights of people), people's economic livelihood and nationalism. Although the Kuomintang lost control over mainland China in 1949, the Republic of China under Kuomintang rule was able to achieve the political ideal of a democratic Republic of China on the island of Taiwan based on the Three Principles of the People after its retreat to Taiwan.

[ 129 ] The Three Principles of the People is not just written in the ROC Constitution , but also in Article 1, 5, 7, 9, 37, 42, 43 of Kuomintang's party charter.

[ 127 ] Chinese democracy [ edit ] The Kuomintang advocates a free and democratic China under the Republic of China founded on Three Principles of the People. In fact, during the 1980s, Chiang Ching-kuo advocated Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People . Since then, a democracy promotion banner for Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People continues to exist in Kinmen today as a display to mainland China that the Republic of China's unification principle should be based on Chinese democracy. Today, the Kuomintang continues to view the Republic of China as the free, democratic and legitimate China.

Cross-Strait relations [ edit ] A Chinese nationalist party, [ 65 ] [ 107 ] the Kuomintang strongly adheres to the defense of the Republic of China and upholding the Constitution of the Republic of China. It is strongly opposed to formal Taiwanese independence and the party also holds that the ROC is the sole legitimate representative of all of China. It favors a closer relationship with the PRC and the CCP, [ 128 ] though it also opposes Chinese unification under the " One country, two systems " framework of the PRC.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] It opposes any non-peaceful means to resolve the cross-strait disputes .

[ 133 ] The party also accepts the 1992 Consensus , which defines both sides of the Taiwan Strait as " one China " but maintains its ambiguity to different interpretations.

[ 131 ] Although the KMT's long-term goal is to unify China under the ROC, the party advocates maintaining the status quo of Taiwan.

Chinese conservatism [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Taiwan (Republic of China) Ideologies Capitalist Party-state Chiangism Confucianism Communitarianism Liberal Economic National Chinese Taiwanese Social Principles All Pan-Blue Anti-Taiwan independence Asian values Bureaucracy Chinese culture Chinese irredentism One China with respective interpretations Unification under ROC " Free China " Free trade Great Unity Humaneness Humanistic Buddhism Meritocracy Republic of China independence Sinicization Status quo (since 1992) Three Principles of the People Zhonghua minzu Chiangist rule (Before 1992) Anti-communism Anti-PRC Christianity Cult of personality Chiang Kai-shek statues Democratic centralism Dirigisme Han nationalism Militarism Reclaim The Mainland Right-wing authoritarianism Taiwan, pro-Beijing Anti-Americanism Anti-Japanese sentiment Anti-Taiwan independence Anti-Taiwanese sentiment Chinese culture PRC Chinese irredentism One China principle Unification under PRC " United front " One country, two systems Sinicization Syncretic politics Zhonghua minzu Taiwan, pro-independence (limited to conservative factions) Anti-communism Anti-Chinese sentiment Christianity Han Taiwanese nationalism (factions) Militarism Peace through strength Nativism Pro-Americanism Taiwanese culture Taiwanization Westernization History Republic of China (1912–1949) 1911 Revolution Anti-Qing sentiment Chinese Civil War Great Retreat Empire of China (1915–1916) Nationalist government Dang Guo Nanjing decade New Life Movement Shanghai massacre " Nationalist Revolution [ zh ] " Retrocession of Taiwan Xueheng School Taiwan (1949–) 1992 Consensus Chinese Cultural Renaissance Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Land reform in Taiwan Ma–Xi meeting Party Reform Program Project National Glory Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty Taiwan Miracle Taiwan Strait Crises First Second Third Three Links Three Noes White Terror Language policy Martial law Temporary Provisions Intellectuals Republic of China (1912–1949) Dai Hu Liang Xiong Taiwan, pan-Blue Chang Jaw Li Politicians Republic of China (1912–1949) Chen (Cheng) Chen (Lifu) Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Dai (Jitao) Dai (Li) Hu (Hanmin) Ku Li Lin Soong Sun Yuan Taiwan, pan-Blue Chen (Cheng) Chen (Lifu) Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wan-an) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Chu Gou Han Hau (Lung-pin) Hau (Pei-tsun) Hung Ku Lee (Huan) Lee (Teng-hui) (early) Lien Lin Ma Soong (James) Soong (Mei-ling) Yu Taiwan, pro-Beijing Chang Chou Chiu Hung Taiwan, pro-independence (limited to conservative factions) Lee Liu Extant parties Taiwan, pan-Blue Chinese Nationalist Party Chinese New Party People First Party Taiwan, pro-Beijing Chinese New Party Chinese Unification Promotion Party For Public Good Party Patriot Alliance Association Taiwan, pro-independence (limited to conservative factions) Taiwan Solidarity Union Taiwanese Localism Front Taiwan, other Young China Party Hong Kong, pro-ROC Hong Kong and Kowloon Trades Union Council Mainland China, pro-ROC (after 1949) Union of Chinese Nationalists (banned) Historical parties Republic of China (1912–1949) Chinese Nationalist Party Progressive Party Republican Party Royalist Party Unity Party Young China Party Taiwan, pan-Blue Republican Party Taiwan, pro-independence (limited to conservative factions) Taiwan Nationalist Party Taiwan, other Congress Party Alliance The Motorists' Party of ROC Taiwan under Japanese rule Imperial Rule Assistance Association Imperial Subjects for Patriotic Services Rikken Seiyūkai Hong Kong, pro-ROC 123 Democratic Alliance Yuen Long Tin Shui Wai Democratic Alliance Alliances All Pan-Blue Pan-Blue Coalition mainland China Hong Kong Taiwan, pro-Beijing United front in Taiwan Organized crime in Taiwan Taiwan, pro-independence (limited to conservative factions) Formosa Alliance (factions) Organisations Republic of China (1912–1949) Blue Shirts Society National Revolutionary Army Tsotanhui Clique Western Hills Group Taiwan, pan-Blue Kuomintang Youth League Tsotanhui Clique Want Want World League for Freedom and Democracy Taiwan, other Fo Guang Shan Hong Kong, pro-ROC China Youth Service & Recreation Center Media Republic of China (1912–1949) Central Daily News Shen Bao Taiwan, pan-Blue Central Daily News Chung T'ien Television China Television China Times Commercial Times Free China Journal TVBS United Daily News Hong Kong, pro-ROC Kung Sheung Daily News Sing Tao Daily ( historically ) Wah Kiu Yat Po Related topics Conservatism in China Cross-strait relations One nation, two states Conservative indigenous peoples Han chauvinism History of the Kuomintang Progressivism in Taiwan Waishengren Pro-ROC sentiment Taishang Conservatism portal Taiwan portal v t e In modern Taiwanese politics, the Kuomintang is seen as a centre-right [ 7 ] to right-wing [ 8 ] political party. The Kuomintang believes in the values associated with conservatism .

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] The Kuomintang has a strong tradition of defending the established institutions of the Republic of China, such as defending Constitution of the Republic of China, defending the five branches of government (modeled on Sun Yat-sen's political philosophy of Three Principles of the People), espousing the One-China policy as a vital component for the Republic of China (ROC)'s international security and economic development, as opposed to Taiwanization . The Kuomintang claims to have a strong tradition of fighting to defend, preserve and revive traditional Chinese culture and religious freedom as well as advocating for Confucian values, economic liberalism and anti-communism . The KMT still sees the Republic of China in Taiwan as presenting the true cultural China which has preserved Chinese culture, as compared to the People's Republic of China which had experienced Chinese cultural destruction during the Cultural Revolution .

Some Kuomintang conservatives see traditional social or family values as being threatened by liberal values and oppose same-sex marriage , [ 136 ] [ 137 ] but some KMT member of the Legislative Yuan , including Chiang Wan-an , Ko Chih-en , Chen Yi-min , Hsu Shu-hua , etc., voted in favor of the No. 748 Same-Sex Marriage Case , in 2019.

[ 138 ] Many KMT politicians are also typically against the abolishment of capital punishment, arguing the need to maintain deterrence against harsh crimes.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Conservative KMT policies may also be characterized by a focus on maintaining the traditions and doctrine of Confucian thought, namely reinforcing the morals of paternalism and patriarchy in Taiwan's society, [ citation needed ] but KMT is a more liberal stance on women's rights and gender equality compared to other advanced countries in East Asian mainstream conservatives, such as Japan's Liberal Democratic Party .

[ 141 ] In terms of education policy, KMT policies advocate increasing more Classical Chinese content in Chinese education and Chinese history content in order to reinforce Chinese cultural identity, as opposed to de-sinicization attempts by advocates of Taiwan independence who typically decrease Classical Chinese and Chinese history content in schools in order to achieve Taiwanization . The party also support transnational marriages between mainland Chinese and Taiwanese in an attempt to preserve Chinese culture in Taiwan, although not without controversies over assimilation and espionage .

[ 52 ] Parties affiliated with the Kuomintang [ edit ] Malaysian Chinese Association [ edit ] Malaysian Chinese Association The Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA) was initially pro-ROC and mainly consisted of KMT members who joined as an alternative and were also in opposition to the Malayan Communist Party , supporting the KMT in China by funding them with the intention of reclaiming the Chinese mainland from the communists.

[ 142 ] Tibet Improvement Party [ edit ] Main article: Tibet Improvement Party The Tibet Improvement Party was founded by Pandatsang Rapga , a pro-ROC and pro-KMT Khampa revolutionary, who worked against the 14th Dalai Lama 's Tibetan Government in Lhasa . Rapga borrowed Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles of the People doctrine and translated his political theories into the Tibetan language, hailing it as the best hope for Asian peoples against imperialism. Rapga stated that "the Sanmin Zhuyi was intended for all peoples under the domination of foreigners, for all those who had been deprived of the rights of man. But it was conceived especially for the Asians. It is for this reason that I translated it. At that time, a lot of new ideas were spreading in Tibet," during an interview in 1975 by Heather Stoddard.

[ 143 ] He wanted to destroy the feudal government in Lhasa, in addition to modernizing and secularizing Tibetan society. The ultimate goal of the party was the overthrow of the Dalai Lama's regime, and the creation of a Tibetan Republic which would be an autonomous Republic within the ROC.

[ 144 ] Chiang Kai-shek and the KMT funded the party and their efforts to build an army to battle the Dalai Lama's government.

[ 145 ] The KMT was extensively involved in the Kham region, recruiting the Khampa people to both oppose the Dalai Lama's Tibetan government, fight the Communist Red Army, and crush the influence of local Chinese warlords who did not obey the central government.

Vietnamese Nationalist Party [ edit ] Main article: Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng Vietnamese Kuomintang People's Action Party of Vietnam The KMT assisted the Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng party which translates literally into Chinese ( 越南國民黨 ; Yuènán Guómíndǎng ) as the Vietnamese Nationalist Party.

[ 146 ] When it was established, it was based on the Chinese KMT and was pro-Chinese.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] The Chinese KMT helped the party, known as the VNQDD, set up headquarters in Canton and Yunnan, to aid their anti-imperialist struggle against the French occupiers of Indochina and against the Vietnamese Communist Party . It was the first revolutionary nationalist party to be established in Vietnam, before the communist party. The KMT assisted VNQDD with funds and military training.

The VNQDD was founded with KMT aid in 1925, they were against Ho Chi Minh 's Viet Nam Revolutionary Youth League.

[ 149 ] When the VNQDD fled to China after the failed uprising against the French, they settled in Yunnan and Canton, in two different branches.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] The VNQDD existed as a party in exile in China for 15 years, receiving help, militarily and financially, and organizationally from the Chinese KMT.

[ 152 ] The two VNQDD parties merged into a single organization, the Canton branch removed the word "revolutionary" from the party name.

Lu Han , a KMT official in Nanjing, who was originally from Yunnan, was contacted by the VNQDD, and the KMT Central Executive Committee and Military made direct contact with VNQDD for the first time, the party was reestablished in Nanjing with KMT help.

[ 149 ] The Chinese KMT used the VNQDD for its own interests in south China and Indo China. General Zhang Fakui (Chang Fa-kuei), who based himself in Guangxi, established the Việt Nam Cách mệnh Đồng minh Hội meaning "Viet Nam Revolutionary League" in 1942, which was assisted by the VNQDD to serve the KMT's aims. The Chinese Yunnan provincial army, under the KMT, occupied northern Vietnam after the Japanese surrender in 1945, the VNQDD tagging alone, opposing Ho Chi Minh's communist party.

[ 153 ] The Viet Nam Revolutionary League was a union of various Vietnamese nationalist groups, run by the pro Chinese VNQDD. Its stated goal was for unity with China under the Three Principles of the People, created by KMT founder Sun and opposition to Japanese and French Imperialists.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] The Revolutionary League was controlled by Nguyễn Hải Thần . General Zhang shrewdly blocked the Communists of Vietnam, and Ho Chi Minh from entering the league, as his main goal was Chinese influence in Indo China.

[ 156 ] The KMT utilized these Vietnamese nationalists during World War II against Japanese forces.

[ 157 ] A KMT left-winger, General Chang Fa-kuei, worked with Nguyễn Hải Thần, a VNQDD member, against French Imperialists and Communists in Indo China.

[ 158 ] General Chang Fa-kuei planned to lead a Chinese army invasion of Tonkin in Indochina to free Vietnam from French control, and to get Chiang Kai-shek's support.

[ 159 ] The VNQDD opposed the government of Ngo Dinh Diem during the Vietnam War.

[ 160 ] The party dissolved after the Fall of Saigon in 1977 and was later re-founded in 1991 as the People's Action Party of Vietnam (Đảng Nhân dân Hành động Việt Nam).

Ryukyu Guomindang [ edit ] See also: Ryukyu independence movement The Ryukyu Guomindang (琉球国民党) was established on 30 November 1958.

Tsugumasa Kiyuna headed its predecessor party, the Ryukyuan separatist Ryukyu Revolutionary Party (琉球革命党) which was backed by the Kuomintang in Taiwan.

[ 161 ] Hong Kong Pro-ROC camp [ edit ] The pro-ROC camp is a political alignment in Hong Kong. It pledges allegiance to the Republic of China. One of these members, the 123 Democratic Alliance , dissolved in 2000 due to the lack of financial support from the Taiwanese government after the 2000 presidential election .

[ 162 ] Sponsored organizations [ edit ] Taipei Grand Mosque Ma Fuxiang founded Islamic organizations sponsored by the KMT, including the China Islamic Association ( 中國回教公會 ).

[ 107 ] KMT Muslim General Bai Chongxi was Chairman of the Chinese Islamic National Salvation Federation.

[ 163 ] The Muslim Chengda school and Yuehua publication were supported by the Nationalist Government, and they supported the KMT.

[ 164 ] The Chinese Muslim Association was also sponsored by the KMT, and it evacuated from the mainland to Taiwan with the party. The Chinese Muslim Association owns the Taipei Grand Mosque which was built with funds from the KMT.

[ 165 ] The Yihewani (Ikhwan al Muslimun a.k.a. Muslim brotherhood) was the predominant Muslim sect backed by the KMT. Other Muslim sects, like the Xidaotang were also supported by the KMT. The Chinese Muslim brotherhood became a Chinese nationalist organization and supported KMT rule. Brotherhood Imams like Hu Songshan ordered Muslims to pray for the Nationalist Government, salute KMT flags during prayer , and listen to nationalist sermons.

Election results [ edit ] Presidential elections [ edit ] Election Candidate Running mate Total votes Share of votes Outcome 1923 Sun Yat-sen [ A ] — 33 6.9% Defeated 1948 Chiang Kai-shek [ A ] Li Zongren 2,430 90.0% Elected 1954 Chen Cheng 1,507 96.9% Elected 1960 1,481 100% Unopposed 1966 Yen Chia-kan 1,481 100% Unopposed 1972 1,308 100% Unopposed 1978 Chiang Ching-kuo Hsieh Tung-min 1,184 100% Unopposed 1984 Lee Teng-hui 1,012 100% Unopposed 1990 Lee Teng-hui Lee Yuan-tsu 641 100% Unopposed 1996 Lien Chan 5,813,699 54.0% Elected 2000 Lien Chan Vincent Siew 2,925,513 23.1% Defeated 2004 James Soong ( PFP ) 6,442,452 49.9% Defeated 2008 Ma Ying-jeou Vincent Siew 7,659,014 58.5% Elected 2012 Wu Den-yih 6,891,139 51.6% Elected 2016 Eric Chu Wang Ju-hsuan ( Ind.

) 3,813,365 31.0% Defeated 2020 Han Kuo-yu Chang San-cheng ( Ind.

) 5,522,119 38.6% Defeated 2024 Hou Yu-ih Jaw Shaw-kong 4,671,021 33.5% Defeated ^ a b Other KMT candidates running in this election are not listed.

Legislative elections [ edit ] Election Total seats won Total votes Share of votes Changes Election leader Status President 1948 716 / 759 Chiang Kai-shek Majority Chiang Kai-shek 1969 8 / 11 Chiang Kai-shek Majority 1972 41 / 51 Chiang Kai-shek Majority 1975 42 / 52 Chiang Ching-kuo Majority Yen Chia-kan 1980 79 / 97 Chiang Ching-kuo Majority Chiang Ching-kuo 1983 83 / 98 Chiang Ching-kuo Majority 1986 79 / 100 Chiang Ching-kuo Majority 1989 94 / 130 Lee Teng-hui Majority Lee Teng-hui 1992 95 / 161 5,030,725 53.0% 7 seats Lee Teng-hui Majority 1995 85 / 164 4,349,089 46.1% 12 seats Lee Teng-hui Majority 1998 123 / 225 4,659,679 46.4% 7 seats (adjusted) Lee Teng-hui Majority Opposing majority Chen Shui-bian 2001 68 / 225 2,949,371 31.3% 46 seats Lien Chan Opposing plurality 2004 79 / 225 3,190,081 34.9% 11 seats Lien Chan Opposing plurality 2008 81 / 113 5,291,512 53.5% 41 seats (adjusted) Wu Po-hsiung Opposing majority Majority Ma Ying-jeou 2012 64 / 113 5,863,379 44.5% 17 seats Ma Ying-jeou Majority 2016 35 / 113 3,280,949 26.9% 29 seats Eric Chu Minority Tsai Ing-wen 2020 38 / 113 4,723,504 33.3% 3 seats Wu Den-yih Minority 2024 52 / 113 4,764,293 34.6% 14 seats Eric Chu Opposing plurality Lai Ching-te Local elections [ edit ] Election Magistrates and mayors Councillors Township/city mayors Township/city council representatives Village chiefs Party leader 1994 provincial 2 / 3 91 / 175 — — — Lee Teng-hui 1997 8 / 23 522 / 886 236 / 319 — — 1998 municipal 1 / 2 48 / 96 — — — 2001 9 / 23 382 / 897 195 / 319 — — Lien Chan 2002 municipal 1 / 2 32 / 96 — — — 2005 14 / 23 408 / 901 173 / 319 — — Ma Ying-jeou 2006 municipal 1 / 2 41 / 96 — — — 2009 12 / 17 289 / 587 121 / 211 — — 2010 municipal 3 / 5 130 / 314 — — 1,195 / 3,757 2014 unified 6 / 22 386 / 906 80 / 204 538 / 2,137 1,794 / 7,836 2018 unified 15 / 22 394 / 912 83 / 204 390 / 2,148 1,120 / 7,744 Wu Den-yih 2022 unified 14 / 22 367 / 910 76 / 204 294 / 2,139 953 / 7,748 Eric Chu National Assembly elections [ edit ] Election Total seats won Total votes Share of votes Changes Party leader Status President 1912 132 / 274(Senate) 269 / 596(House) ?

?

Sung Chiao-jen Plurality Yuan Shikai 1947 2,901 / 3,045 ?

?

Chiang Kai-shek Majority Chiang Kai-shek 1969 15 / 15 ?

?

Majority 1972 43 / 53 ?

?

Majority 1980 61 / 76 ?

?

Chiang Ching-kuo Majority Chiang Ching-kuo 1986 68 / 84 ?

?

Majority 1991 254 / 325 6,053,366 69.1% 186 seats Lee Teng-hui Majority Lee Teng-hui 1996 183 / 334 5,180,829 49.7% 71 seats Lee Teng-hui Majority 2005 117 / 300 1,508,384 38.92% 66 seats Lien Chan Plurality Chen Shui-bian See also [ edit ] Kuomintang in Burma Elections in Taiwan Index of Taiwan-related articles Republic of China Armed Forces One nation, two states Republic of China Military Academy Notes [ edit ] ^ Eternal Premier of the Kuomintang ^ Eternal President of the Kuomintang ^ Also written Guomindang ( GMD ), [ 11 ] the Chinese Nationalist Party ( CNP ), [ 2 ] the Nationalist Party of China ( NPC ), [ 1 ] or the National People's Party of China ( NPPC ).

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Language notes ^ Traditional Chinese script : 中國國民黨 Mandarin Pinyin : Zhōngguó Guómíndǎng Hokkien : Tiong-kok Kok-bîn-tóng Sixian Hakka: Chûng-koet Koet-mìn-tóng Matsu : Dṳ̆ng-guók Guók-mìng-dōng References [ edit ] ^ a b Ahmed, Munir (28 June 2021).

"Wishing China's Communist Party a happy birthday" .

Daily Times (Pakistan) .

Islamabad , Pakistan.

Archived from the original on 7 July 2021 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ a b "Taiwan – The World Factbook" .

Langley, Virginia , U.S.: Central Intelligence Agency . January 2021.

Archived from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2021 .

^ "Kuomintang Official Website" . Kuomintang.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2015 . Retrieved 13 September 2011 .

^ Wakeman, Frederic (2003).

"Ideological Rivalries: The Blue Shirts and the "CC" Clique" . In Wakeman, Frederic (ed.).

Spymaster: Dai Li and the Chinese Secret Service . University of California Press. pp.

98– 109.

doi : 10.1525/california/9780520234079.003.0009 .

ISBN 978-0-520-23407-9 .

Archived from the original on 18 July 2023 . Retrieved 18 July 2023 .

^ 最大在野黨實力！ 國民黨資產202億、黨員45萬人 [The greatest opposition party strength! The KMT has assets of NT$20.2 billion and 450,000 members.] (in Chinese). NOWnews. 23 July 2023 . Retrieved 14 October 2024 .

^ Evans, David (2 April 2019).

"The KMT Paradox: The Anti-Communist Party or the 'One China' Party?" .

The News Lens International Edition . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

Wei, Jia-yu (18 March 2020).

"Taking the KMT back to its roots" .

Taipei Times . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

"【The Silent War】Taiwan's Kuomintang at a Crossroads: Should the Nationalist Rethink Its China-leaning Posture? - 報導者 The Reporter" .

www.twreporter.org (in Chinese (Taiwan)) . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

"To win back Taiwan, KMT must return to its anti-communist roots" .

South China Morning Post . 22 June 2020 . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

"國民黨從反共到親共的政治演變" .

Yahoo News (in Chinese). 10 March 2025 . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

^ a b "New face for KMT in Taiwan" .

The Australian .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

The problems for the centre-right KMT in retaining the presidency over the centre-left DPP...

Qi, Dongtao (11 November 2013). "Globalization, Social Justice Issues, Political and Economic Nationalism in Taiwan: An Explanation of the Limited Resurgence of the DPP during 2008–2012".

The China Quarterly .

216 : 1018– 1044.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741013001124 .

S2CID 154336295 .

Furthermore, the studies also suggest that the DPP, as a centre-left party opposed to the centre-right KMT, has been the leading force in addressing Taiwan's various social justice issues.

Shim, Jaemin (2018).

"Mind the Gap! Comparing Gender Politics in Japan and Taiwan" .

GIGA Focus | Asia (5).

German Institute for Global and Area Studies .

Archived from the original on 26 December 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ a b Fell, Dafydd (2005).

Party Politics in Taiwan: Party Change and the Democratic Evolution of Taiwan, 1991–2004 .

Routledge . pp.

98 , 117 .

ISBN 1-134-24021-X .

Rigger, Shelley (2016).

"Kuomintang Agonistes: Party Politics in the Wake of Taiwan's 2016 Elections" .

Orbis .

60 (4): 408– 503.

doi : 10.1016/j.orbis.2016.08.005 .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 May 2020 .

Instead of reshaping its priorities to fit the expectations of a changing society, the KMT (at least for the moment) seems to be doubling down on its self-marginalizing approach. The new party chair is Hung Hsiu-chu, the erstwhile presidential candidate whose far-right views made it necessary to replace her.

Yoshiyuki Ogasawara (12 December 2019).

"Taiwan's 2020 Presidential Elections" .

The Diplomat .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2022 . Retrieved 12 February 2021 .

These supporters, called 'Han maniacs,' elevated Han to presidential nominee. Ultimately, though, they were a minority, possibly some twenty percent of the overall electorate, and Han's political position, friendly to Beijing and inclined to right-wing populism, started to erode his support.

^ M. Troy Burnett, ed. (2020).

Nationalism Today: Extreme Political Movements around the World [2 volumes] .

ABC-CLIO . p. 201.

ISBN 978-1-4408-5000-4 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 July 2022 .

The center-right Pan-Blue Coalition, led by the KMT, maintains that the ROC is the sole legitimate government for all of China (including Taiwan) and that the aim of the government should be the eventual reunification of the mainland ...

^ "Members" . IDU. Archived from the original on 16 July 2015.

^ "Brill's Encyclopedia of China" .

referenceworks.brillonline.com . 10 November 2008.

Archived from the original on 26 November 2021 . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ Gauss, Clarence E.

(30 July 1942).

"Foreign Relations of the United States: Diplomatic Papers, 1942, China Document 177 893.00/14876" .

Chungking , China: Office of the Historian , United States Department of State . Retrieved 15 March 2025 .

^ Lattimore, Owen ; Gauss, Eleanor (1 August 1944).

"The Chinese Revolution – from GI Roundtable 42: Our Chinese Ally (1944)" .

Washington, D.C.

, United States: American Historical Association . Retrieved 15 March 2025 .

^ See (Chinese) "Major Events in KMT" History Official Site of the KMT Archived 26 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine last accessed 30 August 2009 ^ Spence, Jonathan (2012).

The Search for Modern China (3rd ed.).

W. W. Norton . pp.

249– 254.

ISBN 978-0-393-93451-9 .

^ Wright, Mary Clabaugh (4 September 2009).

Introduction, China in Revolution . Yale University Press. pp.

52– 53.

ISBN 978-0-300-01460-0 .

Archived from the original on 7 November 2020 . Retrieved 11 March 2021 .

^ Strand, David (2002).

"Chapter 2: Citizens in the Audience and at the Podium" . In Goldman, Merle; Perry, Elizabeth (eds.).

Changing Meanings of Citizenship in Modern China . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. pp.

59– 60.

ISBN 978-0-674-00766-6 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 24 September 2016 .

^ Hugh Chisholm (1922). Hugh Chisholm (ed.).

The Encyclopædia Britannica . The Encyclopædia Britannica, Company ltd. p. 658.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2011 .

^ Hugh Chisholm (1922).

The Encyclopædia Britannica: Abbe to English history ("The first of the new volumes") . The Encyclopædia Britannica, Company ltd. p. 658.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2011 .

^ "Nationalist Party – Chinese political party" .

Chicago , Illinois, U.S.: Encyclopædia Britannica . 15 March 2025 . Retrieved 15 March 2025 .

^ a b Fenby 2005 , p. 413.

^ a b c d "Nationalist China" . Washington State University. 6 June 1996. Archived from the original on 6 September 2006.

^ Bowblis, J.

"China in the 20th Century" .

Kings College History . King's College History Department.

Archived from the original on 5 November 2020 . Retrieved 31 October 2020 .

^ "Foreign News: NANKING" .

Time . 4 April 1927. Archived from the original on 26 April 2011 . Retrieved 11 April 2011 .

^ "China: Japan & France" .

Time . 11 April 1927. Archived from the original on 26 April 2011 . Retrieved 11 April 2011 .

^ Beede, R. Benjamin (1994).

The War of 1898, and U.S. interventions, 1898–1934: an encyclopedia . Taylor & Francis Publishing. p.

355 .

ISBN 0-8240-5624-8 .

^ "CHINA: Nationalist Notes" .

Time . 25 June 1928. Archived from the original on 26 April 2011 . Retrieved 11 April 2011 .

^ Andrew D. W. Forbes (1986).

Warlords and Muslims in Chinese Central Asia: a political history of Republican Sinkiang 1911–1949 . Cambridge, England: CUP Archive. p. 108.

ISBN 978-0-521-25514-1 .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2014 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ C.P. Fitzgerald, The Birth of Communist China , Penguin Books, 1964, pp. 106. ( ISBN 978-0140206944 ) ^ Wesley Marvin Bagby (1992).

The Eagle-Dragon Alliance: America's Relations With China in World War II . University of Delaware Press. p. 65.

ISBN 978-0-87413-418-6 .

^ "Ceremonies held to commemorate 228 Incident victims (2014/02/28)" Archived 11 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine .

englishnews.ftv.com.tw .

^ "Party's History" . Kuomintang.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2018 . Retrieved 26 December 2018 .

Following the government of the Republic of China, the Kuomintang relocates to Taiwan. Kuomintang Party headquarters are set up at No. 11 Zhongshan South Road.

^ Chen, Cheng-mao (2020).

日治及戰後初期臺灣政黨與政治團體史論 (1900–1960) (in Traditional Chinese). Yuan Hua Wen Chuang Co., Ltd.

ISBN 9789577111586 .

^ Slater, Dan; Wong, Joseph (2024).

從經濟發展到民主：現代亞洲轉型之路的不同面貌 (in Traditional Chinese). 春山出版有限公司. pp.

141– 143.

ISBN 9786267478080 .

^ Riedl, Rachel Beatty; Slater, Dan; Wong, Joseph; Ziblatt, Daniel (2020).

"Authoritarian-Led Democratization" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

23 : 315– 332.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-052318-025732 .

^ President Ma elected KMT chairman [ permanent dead link ] – CNA ENGLISH NEWS ^ Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou registers for KMT leadership race Archived 29 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine – eTaiwan News ^ "Polls open for 9-in-1 local government elections" . 29 November 2014.

Archived from the original on 6 July 2015 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

^ Hale, Erin (28 September 2021).

"Taiwan's new Kuomintang leader keeps party on China-friendly track" .

Nikkei Asia .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2021 . Retrieved 12 October 2021 .

^ "No party gets majority in Legislature; KMT wins most seats - Focus Taiwan" .

Focus Taiwan - CNA English News . 13 January 2024.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2024 . Retrieved 15 January 2024 .

^ Anaforian, Daniel (21 April 2021).

"KMT Assets a Barrier to Party Reform and Electoral Success" .

Global Taiwan Brief . Global Taiwan Institute.

Archived from the original on 25 April 2021 . Retrieved 25 April 2021 .

^ Xu, Dianqing (May 1997). "The KMT Party's Enterprises in Taiwan".

Modern Asian Studies .

31 (2): 399– 413.

doi : 10.1017/S0026749X00014359 .

S2CID 143714126 .

^ "Taiwan's Kuomintang On the brink" .

Economist . 6 December 2001.

Archived from the original on 8 September 2006 . Retrieved 21 March 2006 .

^ Mo, Yan-chih. " KMT headquarters sold for NT$2.3bn Archived 13 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine ." Taipei Times . Thursday 23 March 2006. Page 1. Retrieved 29 September 2009.

^ 2014-07-24, KMT is again 'world's richest party' Archived 26 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Taipei Times ^ Tai, Ya-chen; Hsieh, Chia-chen; Hsu, Elizabeth (31 August 2016).

"Commission to investigate KMT assets launched" . Central News Agency.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2016 . Retrieved 31 August 2016 .

^ "Taiwan's once-powerful Kuomintang faces make-or-break moment" .

The Mainichi . 22 April 2020. Archived from the original on 29 April 2020 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ Damm, Jens (2012). "Multiculturalism in Taiwan and the Influence of Europe". In Damm, Jens; Lim, Paul (eds.).

European perspectives on Taiwan . Wiesbaden: Springer VS. p. 95.

ISBN 978-3-531-94303-9 .

^ Simon 2011 Archived 20 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 28.

^ "The Enlightened Mindset - Exploring the World of Knowledge and Understanding" 國民黨紀念光復稱莫那魯道抗日英雄 .

Lihpao (in Traditional Chinese). 26 October 2005.

Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 26 March 2015 .

^ Agence France-Presse in Taipei (18 December 2015).

"Taiwan pins same-sex marriage hopes on political change" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 17 December 2015 .

[ dead link ] ^ a b https://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2025/01/14/2003830179 ^ "僑團史略" .

中國國民黨駐羅省分部 (in Chinese (Taiwan)).

^ "Kuomintang News Network" . Kmt.org.tw. 26 February 2009.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 13 September 2011 .

^ "Kuomintang News Network" .

www1.kmt.org.tw .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2013 . Retrieved 12 September 2015 .

^ "KMT Factional Divisions and their Implications for the 2024 Election" . 8 March 2023.

Archived from the original on 13 March 2024 . Retrieved 13 March 2024 .

^ Edgar Snow (2008).

Red Star Over China – The Rise of the Red Army . Read Books. p. 89.

ISBN 978-1-4437-3673-2 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Jieru Chen, Lloyd E. Eastman; Lloyd E. Eastman (1993).

Chiang Kai-shek's Secret Past: The Memoir of His Second Wife, Ch'en Chieh-ju . Westview Press. p.

19 .

ISBN 978-0-8133-1825-7 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Kai-shek Chiang; Philip Jacob Jaffe (1947). Philip Jacob Jaffe (ed.).

China's Destiny & Chinese Economic Theory . Roy Publishers. p. 225.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ a b Simei Qing (2007).

From Allies to Enemies: Visions of Modernity, Identity, and U.S.–China Diplomacy, 1945–1960 . Harvard University Press. p. 65.

ISBN 978-0-674-02344-4 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Kai Shew Chiang Kai Shew (2007).

China's Destiny and Chinese Economic Theory . Read Books. p. 225.

ISBN 978-1-4067-5838-2 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ a b Hongshan Li, Zhaohui Hong; Zhaohui Hong (1998).

Image, Perception, and the Making of U.S.–China Relations . University Press of America. p. 268.

ISBN 978-0-7618-1158-9 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Jieru Chen, Lloyd E. Eastman; Lloyd E. Eastman (1993).

Chiang Kai-shek's Secret Past: The Memoir of His Second Wife, Ch'en Chieh-ju . Westview Press. p.

226 .

ISBN 978-0-8133-1825-7 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Bulag 2002 , p. 50.

^ a b Fenby 2005 , p. 504.

^ Bulag 2002 , p. 48.

^ Bulag 2002 , p. 49.

^ Frederic E. Wakeman (2003).

Spymaster: Dai Li and the Chinese Secret Service . University of California Press. p. 75.

ISBN 978-0-520-23407-9 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Fenby 2005 , p. 414.

^ Rodriguez, Robyn L. (2011).

Journey to the East: The German Military Mission in China, 1927-1938 (Thesis).

OCLC 773097163 .

^ "當俄革命時" .

國父思想總論 . 國立國父紀念館 . Retrieved 1 March 2025 .

^ Schoppa, R. Keith.

The Revolution and Its Past Archived 3 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine (New York: Pearson Prentic Hall, 2nd ed. 2006, pp. 208–209 .

^ Wakeman, Frederic, Jr. (1997). "A Revisionist View of the Nanjing Decade: Confucian Fascism." The China Quarterly 150: 395–432.

^ Payne, Stanley (2021).

A History of Fascism 1914–1945 . University of Wisconsin Press. p. 337.

ISBN 978-0299148744 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ Guido Samarani, ed. (2005).

Shaping the Future of Asia: Chiang Kai-shek, Nehru and China-India Relations During the Second World War Period . Centre for East and South-East Asian Studies, Lund University.

^ Diana Lary (1974).

Region and Nation: The Kwangsi Clique in Chinese Politics, 1925–1937 . Cambridge University Press. pp.

98– 99.

ISBN 978-0-521-20204-6 .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ a b Lee, Edward Bing-Shuey (1930). "The Three Principles of the Kuomintang".

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

152 : 262– 265.

doi : 10.1177/000271623015200130 .

ISSN 0002-7162 .

JSTOR 1016560 .

S2CID 220853814 .

^ Arif Dirlik (2005).

The Marxism in the Chinese Revolution . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-7425-3069-0 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

Von KleinSmid Institute of International Affairs, University of Southern California. School of Politics and International Relations (1988).

Studies in comparative communism, Volume 21 . Butterworth-Heinemann. p. 134.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Pakula 2009 , p. 346.

^ Jay Taylor (2000).

The Generalissimo's son: Chiang Ching-kuo and the Revolutions in China and Taiwan . Harvard University Press. p. 42.

ISBN 978-0-674-00287-6 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ a b Fenby 2005 , p. 71.

^ a b Pakula 2009 , p. 128.

^ Fenby 2005 , p. 72.

^ Fenby 2005 , p. 73.

^ Fenby 2005 , p. 485.

^ Fenby 2005 , p. 486.

^ Simei Qing "From Allies to Enemies," 19 ^ A. Doak Barnett (1968).

China on the Eve of Communist Takeover . Praeger. p. 190.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ T. J. Byres, Harbans Mukhia; Harbans Mukhia (1985).

Feudalism and non-European Societies . Psychology Press. p. 207.

ISBN 978-0-7146-3245-2 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 November 2010 .

^ Jieru Chen, Lloyd E. Eastman; Lloyd E. Eastman (1993).

Chiang Kai-shek's Secret Past: The Memoir of His Second Wife, Chʻen Chieh-ju . Westview Press. p.

236 .

ISBN 978-0-8133-1825-7 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Hans J. Van de Ven (2003).

War and Nationalism in China, 1925–1945 . Psychology Press. p. 100.

ISBN 978-0-415-14571-8 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Linda Chao, Ramon H. Myers; Ramon H. Myers (1998).

The First Chinese Democracy: Political Life in the Republic of China on Taiwan . Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-8018-5650-1 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Kai-shek Chiang (1946).

President Chiang Kai-shek's Selected Speeches and Messages, 1937–1945 . China Cultural Service. p. 137.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Joseph T. Chen (1971).

The May Fourth Movement in Shanghai: The Making of a Social Movement in Modern China . Brill Archive. p. 13.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Eugenia Lean (2007).

Public Passions: The Trial of Shi Jianqiao and the Rise of Popular Sympathy in Republican China . University of California Press. p. 148.

ISBN 978-0-520-24718-5 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Eugenia Lean (2007).

Public Passions: The Trial of Shi Jianqiao and the Rise of Popular Sympathy in Republican China . University of California Press. p. 150.

ISBN 978-0-520-24718-5 .

Archived from the original on 11 October 2013 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ De Bary, William Theodore ; Lufrano, Richard John, eds. (2001).

Sources of Chinese Tradition: From 1600 Through the Twentieth Century . Introduction to Asian civilizations. Vol. 2 (2 ed.). Columbia University Press. p. 342.

ISBN 978-0-231-11271-0 . Retrieved 5 November 2011 .

The meaning of Li, Yi, Lian, and Chi[.] [...] li , yi , lian , and chi have always been regarded as the foundations of the nation [...] they may be interpreted as follows: Li means 'regulated attitude.' Yi means 'right conduct.' Lian means 'clear discrimination.' Chi means 'real self-consciousness.' ^ Werner Draguhn, David S. G. Goodman; David S.G. Goodman (2002).

China's Communist Revolutions: Fifty Years of the People's Republic of China . Psychology Press. p. 39.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1630-2 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 9 April 2011 .

^ Jay Taylor (2000).

The Generalissimo's Son: Chiang Ching-kuo and the Revolutions in China and Taiwan . Harvard University Press. p. 195.

ISBN 978-0-674-00287-6 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Peter R. Moody (1977).

Opposition and Dissent in Contemporary China . Hoover Press. p. 302.

ISBN 978-0-8179-6771-0 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ Nancy Bernkopf Tucker (1983).

Patterns in the dust: Chinese–American Relations and the Recognition Controversy, 1949–1950 . New York: Columbia University Press. p.

181 .

ISBN 0-231-05362-2 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Wilbur, Nationalist Revolution 114 ^ Rubinstein, Murray A. (1994).

The Other Taiwan: 1945 to the present . M.E. Sharpe. p. 416.

ISBN 978-1-56324-193-2 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Millward, James A. (2007).

Eurasian crossroads: a history of Xinjiang . Columbia University Press. p. 208.

ISBN 978-0-231-13924-3 .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Clyde, Paul Hibbert; Beers, Burton F. (1971).

The Far East: a history of the Western impact and the Eastern response (1830-1970) . Prentice-Hall. p.

409 .

ISBN 978-0-13-302976-5 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Cheong Ching (2001).

Will Taiwan break away: the rise of Taiwanese nationalism . World Scientific. p.

188 .

ISBN 978-981-02-4486-6 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ a b c d Lipman 2004 , p. 266.

^ Masumi, Matsumoto.

"The Completion of the Idea of Dual Loyalty towards China and Islam" . Archived from the original on 24 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Jaschok, Maria; Shui, Jingjun (2000).

The History of Women's Mosques in Chinese Islam: A Mosque of Their Own . Routledge. p. 361.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1302-8 .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2014 . Retrieved 29 June 2010 .

^ a b Bulag 2002 , p. 273.

^ Brown, Jeremy; Pickowicz, Paul (2007).

Dilemmas of Victory: The Early years of the People's Republic of China . Harvard University Press. p. 462.

ISBN 978-0-674-02616-2 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Wang, David D. (1999).

Under the Soviet Shadow: The Yining Incident: Ethnic Conflicts and International Rivalry in Xinjiang, 1944–1949 . Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press. p. 577.

ISBN 978-962-201-831-0 .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2014 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Lin, Hsiao-ting (2010).

Modern China's Ethnic Frontiers: A Journey to the West . Taylor & Francis. p. 22.

ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Forbes, Andrew D. W. (1986).

Warlords and Muslims in Chinese Central Asia: A Political History of Republican Sinkiang, 1911–1949 . Cambridge, England: CUP Archive. p. 376.

ISBN 978-0-521-25514-1 .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2014 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ a b Bulag 2002 , p. 51.

^ Fenby 2005 , p. 325.

^ Nihon Gaiji Kyōkai (1942).

Chiang Contemporary Japan: A Review of Japanese affairs, Volume 11 . The Foreign Affairs Association of Japan. p. 1626.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Lin, Hsiao-ting (2010).

Modern China's Ethnic Frontiers: A Journey to the West . Taylor & Francis. p. 90.

ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Aliya Ma Lynn (2007).

Muslims in China . University Press. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-88093-861-7 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Ko, Shu-Ling (8 October 2008).

"Ma refers to China as ROC territory in magazine interview" .

Taipei Times .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ Nietupski, Paul Kocot (1999).

Labrang: a Tibetan Buddhist Monastery at the Crossroads of Four Civilizations . Snow Lion Publications. p. 35.

ISBN 978-1-55939-090-3 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Rubinstein, Murray A. (2007).

Taiwan: A New History . Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe. p. 302.

ISBN 978-0-7656-1495-7 .

^ Walker, Richard L. (1959). "Taiwan's Development as Free China".

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

321 . Sage Publications, Inc: 122– 135.

doi : 10.1177/000271625932100114 .

JSTOR 1030986 .

S2CID 154403559 .

^ "RED CHINA: The Third Solution" .

Times Magazine .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 .

^ "Taiwan's Cold War in Southeast Asia" .

www.wilsoncenter.org . 7 April 2016.

Archived from the original on 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 28 May 2022 .

^ Cheung, Han (17 November 2019).

"Taiwan in Time: Spies, guerillas and the final counterattack" .

Taipei Times .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2019 . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ a b c "Party Charter" . Kuomintang.

Archived from the original on 6 February 2013 . Retrieved 6 September 2021 .

^ a b Hale, Erin (28 September 2021).

"Taiwan's new Kuomintang leader keeps party on China-friendly track" .

Nikkei Asia .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 3 August 2022 .

^ 政策綱領 .

Kmt.org.tw .

Archived from the original on 13 May 2019 . Retrieved 19 June 2016 .

"Three Principles of the People" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2016 . Retrieved 10 October 2016 .

Wright, Mary C.

(1955).

From Revolution to Restoration: The Transformation of Kuomintang Ideology .

Association for Asian Studies . pp.

515– 532.

Zarrow, Peter (1 July 2021).

"The Chinese Communist Party Has Followed Sun Yat-sen's Road Map" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on 25 October 2021 . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

Post, Louis Freeland (April 12, 1912). "Sun Yat Sen's Economic Program for China". The Public. 15: 349. Retrieved 8 November 2016.

^ Samson Ellis and Adrian Kennedy (4 July 2022).

"Xi's suppression of Hong Kong democracy pushes Taiwan further from China" .

The Japan Times .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2023 .

For Taiwan though, the proposal has never been an option. Even the Kuomintang — a vestige of the losing side in China's civil war and the main force backing eventual unification with the mainland, has rejected the model ^ a b Ivan Kanapathy (17 June 2022).

"The Collapse of One China" .

CSIS .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2023 .

Hong Kong's hastening loss of autonomy and civil liberties since then has only sharpened these sentiments in Taiwan... Thus, the KMT faces a dilemma. A significant and growing majority of Taiwanese people do not want political union with the mainland—certainly not if imposed on them. Following its 2020 electoral defeat, the KMT rejected the One Country Two Systems framework but continues to assert the 1992 Consensus ^ Micah McCartney (15 August 2022).

"Taiwan's KMT: Between a Rock and a Hard Place" .

The Diplomat .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2023 .

On August 10, a white paper published by China's Taiwan Affairs Office, the first such document released on Xi Jinping's watch, confirmed that "One Country, Two Systems" is fundamental to Beijing's vision of unification with Taiwan. This is makes a rapprochement with a KMT, or indeed any Taiwanese administration, more difficult to achieve given how "One Country, Two Systems" played out in Hong Kong. Even pro-China former President Ma has declared the framework "dead".

^ Brian Hioe (11 May 2023).

"Hou You-yi Emphasizes Opposition to Both "One Country, two systems", Taiwaneses independence" .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2023 .

^ "It's Not Techno-Angst That's Driving East Asia to Abandon Nuclear Power" .

Foreign Policy . 17 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2020 . Retrieved 7 July 2020 .

In Taiwan, the conservative Kuomintang's aging demographic base and support for closer ties with mainland China now appears out of touch with a younger electorate increasingly distrustful of China and hostile to reunification.

^ Glantz, Mickey, ed. (2012).

Climate Affairs: A Primer .

Island Press . p. 65.

ISBN 978-1-59726-941-4 . y8zdiN_Z1x0C&pg=PA65.

Archived from the original on 4 August 2020 . Retrieved 7 July 2020 .

^ Leung, Zoe (23 June 2021).

"Marriage Equality in Taiwan Hinges on Politics - In past electoral politics, marriage equality was seldom a dominant issue, but the landscape is shifting and some barriers to equality remain in place" .

The Diplomat .

Washington, D.C.

, United States . Retrieved 11 October 2024 .

^ Wen, Lii (21 December 2014).

"Gay marriage proposal set for review" .

Taipei Times .

Taipei , Taiwan . Retrieved 11 October 2024 .

^ "伴侶盟公布66位挺同立委　臉書號召電話謝票" .

ETtoday News Cloud [ zh ] (in Chinese (Taiwan)). 17 May 2019 . Retrieved 10 June 2025 .

此外，國民黨籍立委有7位，分別是蔣萬安、李彥秀、柯志恩、陳宜民、林奕華、許毓仁、許淑華；時代力量立委有5位，分別為林昶佐、黃國昌、洪慈庸、高潞．以用．巴魕剌、徐永明；三黨加起來一共有66位立委贊同。 ^ Thomson, Jono (25 September 2024).

"KMT slams new limitations on Taiwan death penalty" .

Taiwan News . Taipei City . Retrieved 11 October 2024 .

^ Fan, Chen-hsiang; Wang, Yang-yu; Kay, Liu (26 September 2024).

"KMT lawmakers criticize death penalty court ruling" . Taipei City. Central News Agency (Taiwan) . Retrieved 11 October 2024 – via Focus Taiwan .

^ Shim, Jaemin (2018).

"Mind the Gap! Comparing Gender Politics in Japan and Taiwan" .

GIGA Focus | Asia (5).

German Institute for Global and Area Studies .

Archived from the original on 26 December 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ Ching Fatt Yong; R. B. McKenna (1990).

The Kuomintang Movement in British Malaya, 1912–1949 . NUS Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-9971-69-137-0 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 24 September 2016 .

^ Gray Tuttle (2007).

Tibetan Buddhists in the Making of Modern China (illustrated ed.). Columbia University Press. p. 152.

ISBN 978-0-231-13447-7 .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2014 . Retrieved 27 December 2011 .

^ Melvyn C. Goldstein (1991).

A History of Modern Tibet, 1913–1951: The Demise of the Lamaist state . Vol. 1. University of California Press. p. 450.

ISBN 978-0-520-07590-0 .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2014 . Retrieved 27 December 2011 .

^ Hsiao-ting Lin (2010).

Modern China's Ethnic Frontiers: A Journey to the West . Routledge studies in the modern history of Asia. Vol. 67. Taylor & Francis. p. 95.

ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3 .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2016 . Retrieved 27 December 2011 .

^ FitzGerald 1972 , p. 238.

^ Archimedes L. A. Patti (1980).

Why Viet Nam?: Prelude to America's Albatross . University of California Press. p. 530.

ISBN 978-0-520-04156-1 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ Keat Gin Ooi (2004). Keat Gin Ooi (ed.).

Southeast Asia: a historical encyclopedia, from Angkor Wat to East Timor, Volume 2 . ABC-CLIO. p. 37.

ISBN 978-1-57607-770-2 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ a b Archimedes L. A. Patti (1980).

Why Viet Nam?: Prelude to America's Albatross . University of California Press. p. 532.

ISBN 978-0-520-04156-1 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ Ellen J. Hammer (1966) [1955].

Struggle for Indochina, 1940–1955 . Stanford University Press. p. 84.

ISBN 978-0-8047-0458-8 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ Berch Berberoglu (2007).

The State and Revolution in the Twentieth Century: Major Social Transformations of Our Time . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 53.

ISBN 978-0-7425-3884-9 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ Britannica Educational Publishing (2009).

The Korean War and the Vietnam War: People, Politics, and Power . The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 98.

ISBN 978-1-61530-047-1 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ Archimedes L. A. Patti (1980).

Why Viet Nam?: Prelude to America's Albatross . University of California Press. p. 533.

ISBN 978-0-520-04156-1 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ James P. Harrison (1989).

The Endless War: Vietnam's Struggle for Independence . Columbia University Press. p.

81 .

ISBN 978-0-231-06909-0 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ United States. Joint Chiefs of Staff. Historical Division (1982).

The History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: History of the Indochina incident, 1940–1954 . Michael Glazier. p. 56.

ISBN 978-0-89453-287-0 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ Oscar Chapuis (2000).

The Last Emperors of Vietnam: From Tu Duc to Bao Dai . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 106.

ISBN 978-0-313-31170-3 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ William J. Duiker (1976).

The Rise of Nationalism in Vietnam, 1900–1941 . Cornell University Press. p.

272 .

ISBN 978-0-8014-0951-6 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ N. Khac Huyen (1971).

Vision Accomplished?: The Enigma of Ho Chi Minh . Macmillan. p. 61.

ISBN 978-0-02-073590-8 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ James Fitzsimmons (1975).

Lugano Review, Volume 2, Issues 4–6 . J. Fitzsimmons. p. 6.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 November 2010 .

^ FitzGerald 1972 , p. 239.

^ 石井, 明 (29 October 2010).

中国の琉球・沖縄政策 : 琉球・沖縄の帰属問題を中心に (PDF) .

Japan Border Review (in Japanese).

1 : 71– 96.

doi : 10.14943/jbr.1.71 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 October 2016 . Retrieved 8 October 2016 .

^ Chan, Ming K.; So, Alvin Y. (2002).

Crisis and Transformation in China's Hong Kong . M.E. Sharpe. p. 142.

^ Michael Dillon (1999).

China's Muslim Hui Community: Migration, Settlement and Sects . Richmond: Curzon Press. p. 208.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1026-3 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Stéphane A. Dudoignon; Hisao Komatsu; Yasushi Kosugi (2006).

Intellectuals in the Modern Islamic World: Transmission, Transformation, Communication . Taylor & Francis. p. 375.

ISBN 978-0-415-36835-3 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Peter G. Gowing (July–August 1970).

"Islam in Taiwan" .

Saudi Aramco World . Archived from the original on 11 September 2014 . Retrieved 7 May 2014 .

Sources [ edit ] Bulag, Uradyn Erden (2002).

The Mongols at China's Edge: History and the Politics of National Unity . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-7425-1144-6 .

Fenby, Jonathan (2005).

Chiang Kai Shek: China's Generalissimo and the Nation He Lost . Carroll & Graf Publishers.

ISBN 978-0786714841 .

OCLC 1029283712 .

FitzGerald, Frances (1972).

Fire in the lake: the Vietnamese and the Americans in Vietnam . Little, Brown.

ISBN 978-0-316-15919-7 .

OCLC 375867 .

Lipman, Jonathan Neaman (2004).

Familiar Strangers: a History of Muslims in Northwest China . Seattle: University of Washington Press .

doi : 10.6069/9780295800554 .

ISBN 978-0-295-97644-0 .

JSTOR j.ctvbtzmb8 .

OCLC 36485989 .

Pakula, Hannah (2009).

The Last Empress: Madame Chiang Kai-Shek and the Birth of Modern China .

Simon and Schuster .

ISBN 978-1-4391-4893-8 .

OCLC 310397746 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bergère, Marie-Claire; Lloyd, Janet (2000).

Sun Yat-sen . Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-4011-1 .

Copper, John F.

The KMT Returns to Power: Elections in Taiwan, 2008 to 2012 (Lexington Books; 2013) 251 pp. – How Taiwan's Nationalist Party regained power after losing in 2000.

Roy, Denny (2003).

Taiwan: A Political History . Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-8805-4 .

Westad, Odd Arne.

Decisive Encounters: the Chinese Civil War, 1946–1950 (Stanford University Press, 2003).

excerpt Archived 8 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Kuomintang at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Official website (Chinese) Official website (English, inactive since 2020) The History of Kuomintang ( Archived 31 October 2009) National Policy Foundation Website (Kuomintang Think Tank) Archived 20 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine (in Chinese) v t e Kuomintang History History of the Kuomintang History of the Kuomintang cultural policy National Revolutionary Army Northern Expedition Blue Sky with a White Sun Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang 2005 Pan–Blue visits to mainland China Founders Song Jiaoren Sun Yat-sen Lu Haodong (Flag, emblem creator) Ideology Chinese unification Chiangism Dang Guo Democratic centralism Five Races Under One Union Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Three Principles of the People Zhonghua minzu Leaders Sun Yat-sen Song Jiaoren Zhang Renjie Chiang Kai-shek Hu Hanmin Wang Jingwei Chiang Ching-kuo Lee Teng-hui Lien Chan Ma Ying-jeou Wu Po-hsiung Chiang Pin-kung Wu Den-yih Eric Chu Huang Min-hui Hung Hsiu-chu Lin Junq-tzer Wu Den-yih Lin Rong-te Johnny Chiang Party congress 1st (1924) 2nd (1926) 3rd (1929) 4th (1931) 5th (1935) Extraordinary (1938) 6th (Wang, 1939) 6th (1945) 7th (1952) 8th (1957) 9th (1963) 10th (1969) 11th (1976) 12th (1981) 13th (1988) 14th (1993) 15th (1997) 16th (2001) 17th (2005) 18th (2009) 19th (2013) 20th (2017) 21st (2021) Leadership elections 2001 2005 2007 (b) 2009 2013 2015 (b) 2016 (b) 2017 2020 (b) 2021 2025 Significant venues Huguang Guild Hall Presidential Palace (Nanjing) See also List of assets owned by the Kuomintang 2019 Kuomintang presidential primary Notes: Acting leaders italicised ; By-elections denoted with (b) v t e Political parties of Taiwan Nationally represented ( Legislative Yuan seats) Kuomintang (52) Democratic Progressive Party (51) Taiwan People's Party (8) Locally represented Green Party Taiwan Labor Party New Party New Power Party Non-Partisan Solidarity Union People First Party Social Democratic Party Taiwan Solidarity Party Taiwan Statebuilding Party Zheng Shen Min Party Other parties List of political parties in Taiwan Politics of the Republic of China Politics portal List of political parties v t e Chinese Civil War Principal belligerents and campaigns Nationalist Party / National Government ( National Revolutionary Army ) → Constitutional ROC Government ( ROC Armed Forces ) → Republic of China on Taiwan Communist Party / Soviet Republic ( Red Army ) → Liberated Area ( 8th Route Army , New Fourth Army , etc.

→ People's Liberation Army ) → People's Republic of China Pre-1945 Post-1945 1923 Sun–Joffe Manifesto 1924 First United Front 1926 Canton Coup 1927–1949 Chinese Communist Revolution 1927 Nanking incident Shanghai Commune Shanghai massacre Nanjing–Wuhan split 715 Incident Little Long March Nanchang uprising Autumn Harvest Uprising Guangzhou Uprising 1930–1934 Li Lisan line Encirclement campaigns 1931–1934 Chinese Soviet Republic 1933–1934 Fujian People's Government 1934–1936 Long March 1936 Xi'an Incident 1937–1946 Second United Front ( Wartime perception of the Chinese Communists ) 1941 New Fourth Army incident 1944 Dixie Mission 1945 Chongqing Negotiations Double Tenth Agreement Retrocession of Taiwan 1946 Jiaochangkou Incident Peiping rape case 1945–1947 Marshall Mission 1945–1949 Operation Beleaguer 1947 Yu Zisan Incident 1948 SS Kiangya incident Liaoshen campaign 1948–1949 Huaihai campaign Pingjin campaign 1949 Taiping Steamer Incident Yangtze River Crossing campaign Amethyst Incident ROC Government retreat to Taiwan PRC incorporation of Xinjiang 1949–1953 Bombing of Shanghai 1950 Hainan Island campaign Wanshan Archipelago Campaign 1950–1958 Kuomintang Islamic insurgency 1961–1972 Project National Glory v t e Cross-strait relations Diplomatic posts Hong Kong Economic, Trade and Cultural Office (Taiwan) Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Hong Kong Macau Economic and Cultural Office (Taiwan) Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Macau Diplomacy Opening of the South-North route Restoration of Taiwan strait shipping Kinmen Agreement Wang–Koo summit Cross-strait charter 2004 Taiwanese cross-strait relations referendum May 17 Statement 2005 Pan–Blue visits to mainland China Cross-strait high-level talks First Chen–Chiang summit Second Chen–Chiang summit Fourth Chen–Chiang summit Fifth Chen–Chiang summit Sixth Chen–Chiang summit Seventh Chen–Chiang summit Tuan Tuan and Yuan Yuan Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Cross-Strait CEO Summit Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Jinjiang–Kinmen Pipeline 2014 Wang–Zhang meetings 2015 Xi–Chu meeting First Ma–Xi meeting Straits Forum Shanghai-Taipei City Forum Second Ma–Xi meeting Conflicts Chinese Civil War Second Kuomintang-Communist Civil War Retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan Guanbi policy First Taiwan Strait Crisis Project National Glory Battle of Dong-Yin Battle of Dongshan Battle of East Chongwu Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Third Taiwan Strait Crisis Senkaku Islands Dispute Incidents Capture of the Tuapse Kashmir Princess United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758 Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations CAAC Flight 296 China Airlines Flight 334 1987 Lieyu massacre Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Min Ping Yu No. 5202 1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions Qiandao Lake incident China Airlines Flight 611 Sunflower Student Movement Braga incident Anti-Black Box Curriculum Movement Wang Liqiang Freedom pineapples 2021 Solomon Islands unrest Chinese military exercises around Taiwan 2022 2023 2024 2025 Taiwan Exercise 2024 Kinmen Chinese motorboat capsizing incident Legislation Cross-Strait Act Proposed National Unification Promotion Law Anti-Secession Law Anti-Infiltration Act Organizations All-China Federation of Taiwan Compatriots Alumni Association of Huangpu Military Academy Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits Association for Tourism Exchange Across the Taiwan Straits Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs China Council for the Promotion of Peaceful National Reunification Cross-Straits Common Market Foundation Cross-Strait Economic, Trade and Culture Forum Cross-Strait Peace Forum Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People Institute of Taiwan Studies Lienchiang Cross-Strait Matters Forum Mainland Affairs Council National Unification Council Straits Exchange Foundation Taiwan Affairs Office Taiwan.cn Taiwan Competitiveness Forum Taiwan Strait Tourism Association Concepts 1992 Consensus Both sides of the Taiwan Strait are one family China Circle Chinese unification Chinese nationalism Chinese irredentism Chinese Taipei Cross-Strait Economic Zone Dang Guo Deng's Six Conceptions Four Noes and One Without Fujian Demonstration Zone Greater China Han chauvinism Hu's Four Points Hu's Six Points Jiang's Eight Points Message to Compatriots in Taiwan Never promise to renounce the use of force One China One China framework One China principle One-China policy One Country on Each Side One country, two systems Propaganda in China Cross-strait propaganda Qian's Seven Points Republic of China on Taiwan Self-determination Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Socialism with Chinese characteristics Special non-state-to-state relations Six Assurances Taiwan, China Two Chinas Three Noes Three Links Taiwan consensus Taiwan independence movement Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan United front in Taiwan Under the Roof of One China Xi Jinping Thought Xi's Five Points Ye's Nine Points White Paper on the Taiwan Question Zhonghua minzu Related Fujian–Taiwan relationship Hong Kong–Taiwan relations Hong Kong–Taiwan Economic and Cultural Co-operation and Promotion Council Taiwan–Hong Kong Economic and Cultural Co-operation Council Hong Kong and Kowloon Trades Union Council Pro-ROC camp Macau–Taiwan relations Chinese Travel Document Taiwan Entry Permit Mainland Travel Permit for Taiwan Resident Cross-strait language database ECFA Debate Geostrategy in Taiwan HMS Aurora (12) China and the United Nations China and the World Bank Chinese intelligence activity abroad Chinese information operations and information warfare Chinese Soviet Republic Freedom of religion in China Foreign relations of China Timeline of diplomatic relations with China Opinion polling on Taiwanese identity Political status of Taiwan Foreign relations of Taiwan Timeline of diplomatic relations of Taiwan Anti-Communist Hero Milk Tea Alliance Taishang G3 Beijing–Taipei Expressway G99 Taiwan Ring Expressway China National Highway 228 (Taiwan) Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission Tibet Religious Foundation of His Holiness the Dalai Lama The World Turned Upside Down Go and Reclaim the Mainland Pro–Republic of China sentiment 2045 Reversed Front Zero Day Attack Category:Cross-strait relations v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e International Democracy Union Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists Asia Pacific Democrat Union Caribbean Democrat Union Democrat Union of Africa European Democrat Union European People's Party International Women's Democrat Union International Young Democrat Union Union of Latin American Parties Member parties Democratic Party Palmavon Webster Liberal Party Austrian People's Party National Independence Party United Democratic Party Social Democrat Movement Party of Democratic Action Democrats Union of Democratic Forces Conservative Party Independent Democratic Union National Renewal Kuomintang Conservative Party Democratic Union Democratic Rally Civic Democratic Party Dominica Freedom Party National Progressive Force Social Christian Party Nationalist Republican Alliance Isamaa National Coalition Party United National Movement Christian Democratic Union Christian Social Union in Bavaria New Patriotic Party New Democracy New National Party Unionist Party National Party Fidesz Independence Party Bharatiya Janata Party Jamaica Labour Party Maldivian Democratic Party Liberal Democratic Party Democratic Party National Party Conservative Party VMRO–DPMNE Conservative Party Christian People's Party CDS–PP People's Action Movement United Workers Party New Democratic Party Democratic Party of Serbia Slovenian Democratic Party People Power Party People's Party United National Party People's Democratic Movement Moderate Party Forum for Democratic Change Conservative Party Republican Party Project Venezuela v t e Warlord Era and warlordism during the Nanjing decade 1915–1924 1925–1934 Factions 1911–1914 Bai Lang Rebellion 1913 Second Revolution 1915 Twenty-One Demands 1915–1916 Empire of China (Yuan Shikai) National Protection War 1916 Death of Yuan Shikai 1917 Manchu Restoration 1917–1922 Constitutional Protection Movement 1917–1929 Golok rebellions 1918–1920 Siberian intervention 1919 Paris Peace Conference Shandong Problem May Fourth Movement 1919–1921 Occupation of Outer Mongolia 1920 Zhili–Anhui War 1920–1921 Guangdong–Guangxi War 1920–1926 Spirit Soldier rebellions 1921 1st National CPC Congress 1921–1922 Washington Naval Conference 1922 First Zhili–Fengtian War 1923–1927 First United Front 1923 Lincheng Outrage 1924 Second Zhili–Fengtian War Canton Merchants' Corps Uprising Beijing Coup 1925 Yunnan–Guangxi War May Thirtieth Movement 1925–1926 Anti-Fengtian War Canton–Hong Kong strike 1926 Zhongshan Warship Incident 1926–1928 Northern Expedition Nanjing–Wuhan Split Nationalist-Communist Civil War 1927 Nanking incident of 1927 1927 Shanghai Commune of 1927 1927 Shanghai massacre 1927 July 15 Incident 1927–1930 Muslim conflict in Gansu 1928 Jinan incident Huanggutun incident Looting of the Eastern Mausoleum Northeast Flag Replacement 1928–1929 Third Red Spears' uprising in Shandong 1929 Chiang-Gui War Warlord Rebellion in northeastern Shandong (incl.

Beijing Revolt ) Sino-Soviet conflict 1930 Central Plains War 1930–1932 Sino-Tibetan War / Qinghai–Tibet War 1931–1935 Kumul Rebellion / Soviet invasion of Xinjiang 1932 Han–Liu War 1932 Two-Liu war 1934 War in Ningxia Beiyang Anhui Zhili Fengtian ( National Pacification Army ) Zhili Army Shanxi Guominjun Ma Xinjiang Yunnan Sichuan Old Guangxi New Guangxi Guangdong Guizhou Kuomintang (KMT) Communist Party (CCP) Republic of China (1912–1949) v t e Taiwan articles History 1945–present Retreat to Taiwan Guanbi policy White Terror Martial law Mandarin policy Dang Guo Taiwan Miracle Archaeological sites Cultural history Dance history Dutch Formosa Early Chinese contact Economic history Educational history Historiography Kingdom of Middag Kingdom of Tungning LGBTQ history Military history Prehistory Spanish Formosa Republic of Formosa Taiwan under Qing rule Taiwan under Japanese rule Taiwanese television history Timeline Geography Overviews Beaches Cities Climate Deforestation Earthquakes Endemic species / Protected species Hot springs Islands Lakes Mountains National parks Rivers Scenic areas Superlatives Urban planning Volcanoes Government Politics Economy Government and politics Cabinet Premier Censorship Civil defense Constitution Additional Articles Elections Human rights LGBT Freedom of religion Intelligence Law Law enforcement Military Parliament President Office of the President Secretary-General Vice President Political parties Propaganda Regions of Taiwan Administrative divisions Special municipalities Counties Cities List of administrative divisions Metropolitan areas Political issues Conscription Cross-Strait relations Chinese nationalism Chinese Taipei De-Sinicization Foreign relations North–South divide Opinion polling on Taiwanese identity Political status of Taiwan Chinese unification One Country on Each Side Special non-state-to-state relations Two Chinas Taiwan independence movement Taiwanese nationalism Economy Aerospace industry Agriculture Aquaculture Floriculture Automotive industry Banking List of banks Central bank Companies Largest State-owned enterprises Construction industry Defense industry Dollar (currency) Energy Exports Forestry FTAs Labor movement Maritime industries Mining Pharmaceutical industry Semiconductor industry Steel Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Textile Tourism Transportation Uniform Invoice lottery Water supply and sanitation National Symbols People Society Culture National symbols Anthems national flag Emblem Flags current proposed Olympic Flower Seals People Demographics Overseas Taiwanese Taiwanese people Taiwanese indigenous peoples List Hans Hoklos Hakkas Waishengren Languages Formosan languages Amis Atayal Bunun Kanakanavu Kavalan Paiwan Puyuma Rukai Saaroa Saisiyat Sakizaya Seediq Thao Tsou Yami Sinitic Mandarin Taiwanese Hokkien Hakka Matsu dialect Sign Language Braille Notable individuals Actresses Artists Footballers Magistrates and mayors Olympic flagbearers Singers Taiwanese Americans Wealthiest Writers Society Architecture Crime Organized crime Sex trafficking Education Healthcare International rankings Inventions and discoveries Prostitution Public holidays Public housing Squatting Superlatives Taiwan studies Waste management Women Culture Animation Art Cinema Cuisine Beer Dessert Wine Whisky Dance Drama 2000 to 2010 2011 to 2020 2021 to present Fashion Festivals Film Music Folk beliefs Gambling Glove puppetry Literature Media Music Best-selling albums Opera Night markets Performing arts Philosophy Photography Religion Baháʼí Buddhism Christianity Islam Judaism Secularism Shinto Smoking Sports Superstitions Kuai Kuai culture T-Beauty Taiwanese wave Television Golden Bell Awards Tea tea culture Tourist attractions Theater Category Portal Outline v t e China articles History Overviews History Timeline Historiography Military history Language Economic before 1912 1912–1949 1949–present Ethnic groups Foreign relations Dynasties Monarchs Prehistoric Paleolithic Neolithic Yellow River Yangtze Liao Ancient Xia Shang Late Zhou Western Zhou Spring and Autumn Warring States Imperial Qin Han Three Kingdoms Wei Han Wu Jin (266–420) Sixteen Kingdoms Northern and Southern dynasties Sui Tang Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Liao Song Jin (1115–1234) Yuan Ming Qing High Qing Century of humiliation Taiping Rebellion Eunuch Modern 1911 Revolution Republic of China Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China Cultural Revolution Reform and opening up Tiananmen Square COVID-19 persecution of Uyghurs List of massacres in China Geography Borders Extreme points Geology Natural disasters Regions East Northeast North South Central Central South Western Northwestern Southwestern Terrain Bays Canyons Caves Deserts Grasslands Hills Islands Mountains ranges passes Peninsulas Northeast / North / Central Plains Valleys Volcanoes Water Canals Lakes Rivers Waterfalls Wetlands Water resources Seas Bohai Yellow East China South China Environment Climate change Climate policy Environmental issues Environmental policy Protected areas National parks Nature reserves UNESCO Biosphere Reserves Wildlife Fauna Flora Subdivisions Baseline islands Border crossings Cities Province-level subdivisions Politics Law Judicial system Human rights LGBT in Tibet Law enforcement Penal system Naming laws Nationality law Terrorism Government Civil service Constitution Democracy Pro-democratisation Elections Environmental policy Foreign relations Laogai National People's Congress Standing Committee National security Political parties and movements Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Politburo Democratic parties (China) United front Political Consultative Conference System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Socialism with Chinese characteristics Primary stage of socialism President Vice President State Council Premier Vice Premier Whole-process people's democracy One country, two systems Military Outline of military history Central Military Commission Cyberwarfare and China Ministry of National Defense People's Liberation Army Ground Navy Air Rocket Strategic Support People's Armed Police Coast Guard Militia Maritime Militia Economy Agriculture Aquaculture Banking Central bank Chinese property sector crisis (2020–present) Currency Economic history Reform and opening up Special economic zones E-commerce Online advertising Economic inequality in China Energy Coal Petroleum Renewable Forced evictions Foreign aid received Foreign aid program Historical GDP Housing Income inequality in China Industry Chemical Gold mining Semiconductors Steel Textiles Labor relations Poverty Real estate Standard of living Taxation Tourism Trade Underoccupied developments Unemployment Infrastructure Architecture Housing Telecommunications Internet Water supply and sanitation Transport Automotive industry Civil aviation Rail Shipping industry Space program Society Abortion Censorship Chinese Dream Chinese language Standard Chinese Written Chinese Crime Corruption Prostitution Sex trafficking Education Literacy Freedom of the press Harmonious Society Health Food safety incidents HIV/AIDS Intellectualism Internment camps Martyrdom Surveillance Propaganda Protest ”Mass incidents” Public holidays Rural society Science and technology history Sexuality Social issues Patriarchy Racism Regional discrimination Suicide Social relations Structure Tang ping Time Urban society Welfare Culture Archaeology Archives Art Calligraphy Cinema Cuisine Dance Libraries Literature Poetry Martial arts Mass media Music Names Philosophy Smoking Sport Tea culture Variety art Major Historical and Cultural Sites World Heritage Sites Fours of China Four Treasures of the Study Four Great Inventions Four Gentlemen Flowers of the Four Seasons Four Beauties Four Classic Novels Four arts Four Symbols Four Holy Beasts Four Pillars of Destiny Four Paragons of the Early Tang Four Masters of the Ming dynasty Four Masters of the Yuan dynasty Four Wangs Gang of Four Four Olds Four Pests campaign Demographics Emigration Ethnic groups Eunuchs Internal migration Languages Life expectancy Statistics Population history " Post-80s " " Post-90s " Urbanization Women Religion Buddhism Chinese Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Confucianism Folk religion Christianity Catholic Church in China Protestantism Freedom of religion History of religion Irreligion Islam Taoism Symbols Anthem Emblem Flag Outline Index Category Portal Portals : Conservatism Republic of China Politics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic 2 Norway Korea Poland Vatican 2 Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kuomintang&oldid=1305449481 " Categories : Kuomintang 1912 establishments in China Republic of China Political history of Taiwan Three Principles of the People International Democracy Union member parties Neoliberal parties Chinese nationalism outside mainland China Centre-right parties in Asia Conservative parties in Asia Liberal conservative parties National conservative parties Nationalist parties in Asia Opposition to Taiwan independence Organizations based in Taipei Parties of one-party systems Political parties established in 1912 Political parties in the Republic of China Political parties in Taiwan Politics of the Republic of China (1912–1949) Hidden categories: Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Mandarin Chinese-language text Articles containing Min Nan Chinese-language text Articles containing Hakka-language text Articles containing Min Dong Chinese-language text CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 Chinese (Taiwan)-language sources (zh-tw) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Traditional Chinese-language sources (zh-hant) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2022 CS1: unfit URL CS1 uses Japanese-language script (ja) CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2024 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from March 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles needing additional references from August 2018 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from June 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Pages using Sister project links with default search Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles with Chinese-language sources (zh) This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 03:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kuomintang 86 languages Add topic

