Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Variation among judges 2 By gender or sex Toggle By gender or sex subsection 2.1 United States 2.2 United Kingdom 2.3 France 3 By race Toggle By race subsection 3.1 United States 4 Equality versus equity 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sentencing disparity 2 languages Deutsch Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of unequal treatment Criminal procedure Criminal trials and convictions Rights of the accused Appeal Bail Double jeopardy 2 Exclusionary rule 1 Fair trial Jury trial Trial as an adult Presumption of innocence Pre-trial Counsel Self-incrimination Rights of the victim Clearance rate Criminal justice Right to an effective remedy Speedy trial Victims' rights Verdict Acquittal Conviction Conviction rate Guilt Not proven 3 Directed verdict Sentencing Custodial Disparity Discharge Guidelines Totality 5, 6 Mandatory Periodic Dangerous offender 4, 5 Capital punishment Execution warrant Cruel and unusual punishment Imprisonment Life Indefinite Legal remedy Loss of rights Reparation Restitution Reform Suspended Three-strikes law Zero tolerance Post-sentencing Criminal justice Exoneration Parole Probation Habitual offender Life licence 6 Miscarriage of justice Pardon Recidivism Rehabilitation Restorative justice Sex offender registry Sexually violent predator laws 1 Tariff 6 Related areas of law Civil procedure Criminal defenses Criminal law Evidence Portals Law portal 1 US courts 2 Not in English/Welsh courts 3 Scottish courts 4 English/Welsh courts 5 Canadian courts 6 UK courts v t e Sentencing disparity or sentencing discrimination [ 1 ] is defined as "a form of unequal treatment in criminal punishment ".

[ 2 ] Variation among judges [ edit ] Two judges could be faced with a similar case and one could order a very harsh sentence while another would give a much lesser sentence. There is evidence that some U.S. federal judges give much longer prison sentences for similar offenses than other judges do.

[ 3 ] In 2005 Max Schanzenbach found that "increasing the proportion of female judges in a district decreases the sex disparity" in sentencing which he interprets as "evidence of a paternalistic bias among male judges that favors female offenders".

[ 4 ] A 2020 study found with decreasing number of female judges in French courts the gender gaps in prison and probation sentences widens - prison and probation sentences are lighter for women, while suspended prison sentences are longer. The gender of the prosecutor seem to play no role.

[ 5 ] By gender or sex [ edit ] United States [ edit ] A 2001 University of Georgia study found substantial sentencing discrimination against men "after controlling for extensive criminological, demographic, and socioeconomic variables". The study found that in US federal courts, "males are... less likely to get no prison term when that option is available; less likely to receive downward departures [from the guidelines]; and more likely to receive upward adjustments and, conditioned on having a downward departure, receive smaller reductions than ... females".

[ 6 ] In 2006 Ann Martin Stacey and Cassia Spohn found that women receive more lenient sentences than men after controlling for presumptive sentence, family responsibilities, offender characteristics, and other legally relevant variables, based on examination of three US district courts.

[ 7 ] In 2012 Sonja B. Starr from University of Michigan Law School found that, controlling for the crime, "men receive 63% longer sentences on average than women do," and "[w]omen are…twice as likely to avoid incarceration if convicted", also based on data from US federal court cases.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Natalie Goulette and her colleagues found 2014 support for the “evil woman” theory, which suggests that chivalry is reserved for certain groups of women who appear to be docile and in need of protection.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In 2019 The Guardian claimed that outdated data on sentencing disparity have been widely cited, [ 12 ] such as an 2006 ACLU article saying that the average prison sentence is 2 to 6 years for men who kill their female partners and 15 years for women who kill their male partners. This claim was repeated by Women's March organization [ 12 ] or by journalist Mona Eltahawy .

[ 13 ] ACLU stated the source of this information is "National Coalition Against Domestic Violence. 1989." [ 14 ] and the Bureau of Justice Statistics report on intimate partner violence from this period indicates that a higher proportion of female prisoners convicted of violence against their intimate partners received life sentences or the death penalty (33%) compared to male prisoners convicted of similar offenses (19%). Additionally, this percentage was also higher than that of female prisoners who committed violent crimes against non-intimate individuals (22%).

[ 15 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] A paper examining gender sentencing disparities in a large samples of assault, burglary and drugs offences found that male offenders are subjected to significantly harsher sentences, even when controlling for mitigating factors and case characteristics. Men were 2.84 times more likely than women to receive custodial sentence for the offence of assault, 1.89 more likely for the offence of burglary, and 2.72 more likely for offence related to drugs. For offences of assault, the gender factor was stronger than any other ‘harm and culpability’ factor with the exception of the ‘with intent to commit serious harm’ factor.

[ 16 ] France [ edit ] A 2020 study shows that women receive 33% (15 days) shorter prison sentences than men, even when controlling for all observable characteristics – including a very precise description of the crime. When pairs of mixed-gender offender are convicted together the gender gap is even higher - men receive 38.7 additional prison days and 10.7 fewer suspended prison days.

From a procedural point of view, when controlling for the type of crime, men are on average judged after shorter investigations, and are more likely to be sentenced after an accelerated procedure. When taken to court, men are 20% less likely to be discharged (6% vs. 4%). In 2017, 19.9% of convicted men were sentenced to prison, compared to 8.5% of convicted women.

[ 5 ] By race [ edit ] United States [ edit ] See also: War on drugs § Racial disparities in sentencing A 2001 University of Georgia study found substantial sentencing racism against African Americans "after controlling for extensive criminological, demographic, and socioeconomic variables". The study found that in US federal courts, "blacks... less likely to get no prison term when that option is available; less likely to receive downward departures [from the guidelines]; and more likely to receive upward adjustments and, conditioned on having a downward departure, receive smaller reductions than whites".

[ 17 ] A 2023 study found for grand juries in the USA a "small but statistically significant disparate impact on Black defendants", but no taste-based discrimination or statistical discrimination between black and white races based on data from a quarter million felony cases.

[ 18 ] Equality versus equity [ edit ] Some have argued in favor of sentencing disparity because of social equity or substantive equality for race and gender. In 2016, Mirko Bagaric argued that African-Americans and Indigenous Australians should receive a sentencing discount in all but the most serious of crimes, in part to offset unacknowledged biases to the opposite effect, while women should "be treated more leniently when they commit the same crime as a man" - in this case, he did not make any exception for serious offending.

[ 19 ] In the United Kingdom, Jean Corston 's 2007 report planned as a "review of women with particular vulnerabilities in the criminal justice system" is described as making the case "that prisons should be scrapped for all but a tiny number of women", [ 20 ] which Corston justified on the basis "equality does not mean treating everyone the same" ( social equality , formal equality ). She proposed "Custodial sentences for women must be reserved for serious and violent offenders who pose a threat to the public" and that overt separate sentencing for men and women could be considered after then-pending equality legislation.

[ 21 ] In 2024, UK's Secretary of State for Justice Shabana Mahmood unveiled plans to decrease the number of women in jail, close women’s prisons, or convert them to male prisons to tackle an overcrowding crisis.

[ 22 ] For this purpose, Mahmood plans to establish a new public body , the Women’s Justice Board, and increase prison alternatives for women, such as community sentences and residential women’s centres.

[ 23 ] Some legal commentators and Men's Rights activists argue that giving women lighter sentences than men is infantilizing, based on stereotyping, and incompatible with gender equality .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Ambivalent sexism Focal concerns theory Judicial discretion Judicial misconduct Hate crime Millet (Ottoman Empire) Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Religious law Women-are-wonderful effect References [ edit ] ^ Thomson, Randall J.; Zingraff, Matthew T. (1981). "Detecting Sentencing Disparity: Some Problems and Evidence".

American Journal of Sociology .

86 (4): 869– 880.

doi : 10.1086/227320 .

ISSN 0002-9602 .

^ Alfred Blumstein, et al.

Research on Sentencing: The Search for Reform , Volume II (1983) , p.9 ^ Secret, Mosi (5 March 2012).

"Wide Sentencing Disparity Found Among U.S. Judges" .

New York Times . Retrieved 24 April 2016 .

^ Schanzenbach, Max (2005).

"Racial and Sex Disparities in Prison Sentences: The Effect of District-Level Judicial Demographics" .

The Journal of Legal Studies .

34 (1): 57– 92.

doi : 10.1086/425597 .

ISSN 0047-2530 .

S2CID 145574173 .

^ a b Philippe, A. (19 January 2020).

"Gender disparities in sentencing" (PDF) .

Economica .

97 (348): 1037– 1077.

doi : 10.1111/ecca.12333 .

hdl : 1983/27152ffc-61ad-44b1-ae51-2c4541426dcb . Retrieved 23 August 2023 .

^ Mustard, David B. (2001-03-06). "Racial, Ethnic and Gender Disparities in Sentencing: Evidence from the Us Federal Courts".

Journal of Law and Economics .

44 (1). Rochester, NY: 285– 314.

doi : 10.1086/320276 .

S2CID 154533225 .

SSRN 259138 .

^ Ann Martin Stacey and Cassia Spohn, Gender and the Social Costs of Sentencing: An Analysis of Sentences Imposed on Male and Female Offenders in Three U.S. District Courts, 11 Berkeley J. Crim. L. 43 (2006).(DOI) https://doi.org/10.15779/Z38F32G https://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1001&context=bjcl ^ "Study finds large gender disparities in federal criminal cases" .

www.law.umich.edu . Retrieved 2016-12-06 .

^ Starr, Sonja B. (2012-08-29).

"Estimating Gender Disparities in Federal Criminal Cases" .

American Law and Economics Review . Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network.

SSRN 2144002 .

^ Kelsh, Chaz (2015-11-12).

"Are criminal courts more lenient on women?" . Retrieved 2024-05-13 .

^ Doerner, Jill K.; Demuth, Stephen (2014). "Gender and Sentencing in the Federal Courts: Are Women Treated More Leniently?".

Criminal Justice Policy Review .

25 (2): 242– 269.

doi : 10.1177/0887403412466877 .

ISSN 0887-4034 .

^ a b Chalabi, Mona (2019-01-12).

"Are women punished more harshly for killing an intimate partner?" .

The Guardian .

The average prison sentence for men who kill their female partners is two to six years [...] By contrast women, who kill their partners are sentenced on average to 15 years.

^ Mona, Eltahawy (2020-09-18).

"Essay: How Many Rapists Must We Kill?" .

^ "Words From Prison - Did You Know...?" .

ACLU . 2006-06-12.

^ Bureau of Justice Statistics (November 1994).

"Violence between Intimates" .

Violence between Intimates (PDF) (Report). p. 6 . Retrieved 2024-10-15 .

In large urban counties, the average prison sentence length on a murder or nonnegligent manslaughter conviction (excluding life sentences or the death penalty) was 17.5 years for men convicted of killing their wives 6.2 years for women convicted of killing their husbands.

^ Sanchez, Pina; Harris, L (4 December 2019).

"Sentencing gender? Investigating the presence of gender disparities in Crown Court sentences" (PDF) .

Criminal Law Review .

2020 (1): 3– 28 . Retrieved 23 August 2023 .

^ Mustard, David B. (2001-03-06). "Racial, Ethnic and Gender Disparities in Sentencing: Evidence from the Us Federal Courts".

Journal of Law and Economics .

44 (1). Rochester, NY: 285– 314.

doi : 10.1086/320276 .

S2CID 154533225 .

SSRN 259138 .

^ Hoekstra, Mark, Suhyeon Oh, and Meradee Tangvatcharapong. "Are American juries racially discriminatory? Evidence from over a quarter million felony grand jury cases." (2023). NBER ^ Bagaric, Mirko (1 June 2016).

"Why we should close women's prisons and treat their crimes more fairly" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 27 April 2017 .

^ "Crispin Blunt's enlightened views must be backed by cash" .

The Observer . London. 13 November 2011 . Retrieved 27 April 2017 .

^ "The Corston Report" (PDF) . The Home Office. March 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-02-06 . Retrieved 27 April 2017 .

^ Devlin, Kate (2024-09-24).

"Justice secretary Shabana Mahmood unveils plan to shut women's prisons amid overcrowding crisis" .

independent.co.uk . Independent . Retrieved 2024-10-16 .

Justice secretary Shabana Mahmood has set out plans to slash the number of women going to jail and ultimately close women's prisons amid an overcrowding crisis.

^ "Extra support for women through the criminal justice system announced" .

gov.uk . Ministry of Justice. 2024-09-24 . Retrieved 2024-10-16 .

The strategy will also focus on enhancing alternatives to prison, such as community sentences and residential women's centres.

^ "Why feminists need to discuss gender disparity in the criminal justice system - The Arizona State Press. Women also get lighter sentences because of the violent nature as men commit 80 percent of the violent crimes such as murder" .

www.statepress.com . Retrieved 2023-07-07 .

^ Foges, Clare (2023-07-07).

"Women must face the same justice as men" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 2023-07-07 .

External links [ edit ] Look up pussy pass or slap on the wrist in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Crow, M.S., Bales, W. (2006).

Sentencing guidelines and focal concerns: The effect of sentencing policy as a practical constraining on sentencing decisions.

American Journal of Criminal Justice , 30(2) Rhodes, W.M., et al. (2016).

Federal sentencing disparity: 2005-2012.

Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics .

Kathryn Hopkins, Noah Uhrig, and Matt Colahan (2016) Associations between being male or female and being sentenced to prison in England and Wales in 2015.

Ministry of Justice Analytical Services, UK v t e Miscarriage of justice Types of misconduct Prosecutorial misconduct Police misconduct Police corruption Selective prosecution Malicious prosecution Selective enforcement Abuse of process Attorney misconduct Bad apples Abuse of discretion Entrapment False arrest Gaming the system Justice delayed is justice denied Legal malpractice Kangaroo court Sentencing disparity Show trial Trial by media Sharp practice Jury tampering Witness tampering Brady disclosure Spoliation of evidence Civil wrong False evidence False confession Forced confession False accusation Rape Child sexual abuse Police perjury Mistaken identity Eyewitness memory Eyewitness identification Cross-race effect Misinformation effect Tampering with evidence Frameup Wrongful convictions List of wrongful convictions in the United States List of exonerated death row inmates List of miscarriage of justice cases Overturned convictions in the United States Wrongful execution Advocacy Innocence Project National Registry of Exonerations Investigating Innocence Contributing factors Correlates of crime Race and crime Race in the United States criminal justice system Sex differences in crime Judicial misconduct Innocent prisoner's dilemma Obstructionism Offender profiling Racial profiling Perverting the course of justice Blue wall of silence Loophole Ineffective assistance of counsel Prosecutor's fallacy Norms and remedies Legal ethics Exculpatory evidence Right to a fair trial Actual innocence Equal Protection Clause Innocence Protection Act Related concepts Capital punishment in the United States Batson v. Kentucky List of death row inmates in the United States Law portal v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sentencing_disparity&oldid=1306333824 " Categories : Racism Sentencing (law) Sexism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 05:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sentencing disparity 2 languages Add topic

