Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Employment-based pensions 1.1.1 Military 1.2 State pension 1.3 Social pensions 1.4 Disability pensions 2 Defined benefit plans Toggle Defined benefit plans subsection 2.1 Criticisms 3 Defined contribution plans Toggle Defined contribution plans subsection 3.1 Examples 4 Risk sharing pensions Toggle Risk sharing pensions subsection 4.1 Risk sharing pension sponsor examples 5 Funded 6 Pay-as-you-go 7 Underfunding Toggle Underfunding subsection 7.1 Dependency ratio 7.2 Economic challenges 7.3 Pension crisis 8 Balancing pension funding Toggle Balancing pension funding subsection 8.1 Decrease of real pensions 8.2 Increase of pension contributions 8.3 Reduction of expected years in retirement 9 Effects Toggle Effects subsection 9.1 Risk and responsibility 9.2 Incentives for parental investment 9.3 Redistribution 9.4 Gender pension gap 9.5 Years in retirement 10 Pillars Toggle Pillars subsection 10.1 Zero pillar 10.2 First pillar 10.3 Second pillar 10.4 Third pillar 10.5 Fourth Pillar 11 Pension systems by country 12 History Toggle History subsection 12.1 Germany 12.2 Ireland 12.3 Spain 12.4 United Kingdom 12.5 United States 13 See also 14 References 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Pension 63 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Русский Simple English Ślůnski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Retirement savings ) Retirement fund Not to be confused with Pension (lodging) or Pension (film) .

Personal finance Credit · Debt Mortgage Car loan Charge card Credit card Unsecured personal loan Rent-to-own Student loan Pawn Title loan Payday loan Refund anticipation loan Refinancing Debt consolidation Debt rescheduling Bankruptcy Employment contract Salary Wage Salary packaging Employee stock ownership Employee benefits Retirement Filial responsibility laws Pension By country Defined benefit Defined contribution Pay-as-you-go Social pension Personal budget and investment Active management Alternative investment Asset allocation economics growth Bond (finance) Cash Diversification (finance) Equity (finance) ESG Estate planning ETF Financial adviser asset independence literacy plan planner Fundamental analysis Government bond Growth investing Growth stock Hedge (finance) Impact investing Investment advisory Investment performance Investment style Investor profile Market risk Net worth Passive management Portfolio optimization Robo-advisor Saving Savings account Speculation Stock Stockbroker Target date fund Wealth List of countries by wealth per adult See also Asset pricing Bank Citizen's dividend Cooperative Credit union Economic bubble Financial deepening Financial inclusion Financial risk Financial technology Guaranteed minimum income Market impact Risk-return spectrum Social dividend Structured product Sustainability Systematic risk Universal basic income Volatility (finance) Watered stock v t e A pension ( / ˈ p ɛ n ʃ ən / ; from Latin pensiō ' payment ' ) is a fund into which amounts are paid regularly during an individual's working career, and from which periodic payments are made to support the person's retirement from work. A pension may be either a " defined benefit plan ", where defined periodic payments are made in retirement and the sponsor of the scheme (e.g. the employer) must make further payments into the fund if necessary to support these defined retirement payments, or a " defined contribution plan ", under which defined amounts are paid in during working life, and the retirement payments are whatever can be afforded from the fund.

[ 1 ] Pensions should not be confused with severance pay ; the former is usually paid in regular amounts for life after retirement, while the latter is typically paid as a fixed amount after involuntary termination of employment before retirement.

The terms " retirement plan " and " superannuation " tend to refer to a pension granted upon retirement of the individual; [ 2 ] the terminology varies between countries. Retirement plans may be set up by employers, insurance companies, the government, or other institutions such as employer associations or trade unions. Called retirement plans in the United States , they are commonly known as pension schemes in the United Kingdom and Ireland and superannuation plans (or super [ 3 ] ) in Australia and New Zealand . Retirement pensions are typically in the form of a guaranteed life annuity , thus insuring against the risk of longevity .

A pension created by an employer for the benefit of an employee is commonly referred to as an occupational or employer pension.

Labor unions , the government, or other organizations may also fund pensions. Occupational pensions are a form of deferred compensation , usually advantageous to employee and employer for tax reasons. Many pensions also contain an additional insurance aspect, since they often will pay benefits to survivors or disabled beneficiaries. Other vehicles (certain lottery payouts, for example, or an annuity ) may provide a similar stream of payments.

The common use of the term pension is to describe the payments a person receives upon retirement, usually under predetermined legal or contractual terms. A recipient of a retirement pension is known as a pensioner or retiree .

Types [ edit ] Employment-based pensions [ edit ] A retirement plan is an arrangement to provide people with an income during retirement when they are no longer earning a steady income from employment. Often retirement plans require both the employer and employee to contribute money to a fund during their employment in order to receive defined benefits upon retirement. It is a tax deferred savings vehicle that allows for the tax-free accumulation of a fund for later use as retirement income. Funding can be provided in other ways, such as from labor unions, government agencies, or self-funded schemes. Pension plans are therefore a form of "deferred compensation". A SSAS is a type of employment-based Pension in the UK. The 401(k) is the iconic self-funded retirement plan that many Americans rely on for much of their retirement income; these sometimes include money from an employer, but are usually mostly or entirely funded by the individual using an elaborate scheme where money from the employee's paycheck is withheld, at their direction, to be contributed by their employer to the employee's plan. This money can be tax-deferred or not, depending on the exact nature of the plan.

Military [ edit ] Some countries also grant pensions to military veterans. Military pensions are overseen by the government; an example of a standing agency is the United States Department of Veterans Affairs .

Ad hoc committees may also be formed to investigate specific tasks, such as the U.S.

Commission on Veterans' Pensions (commonly known as the "Bradley Commission") in 1955–56. Pensions may extend past the death of the veteran himself, continuing to be paid to the widow.

In the U.S., retired military receive a military retirement pay , not called a "pension" as they can be recalled to active duty at any time. Military retirement pay is calculated on number of years on active duty, final pay grade and the retirement system in place when they entered service. Members awarded the Medal of Honor qualify for a separate stipend. Retirement pay for military members in the reserve and US National Guard is based on a point system.

[ 4 ] State pension [ edit ] Many countries have created schemas for their citizens and residents to provide income when they retire (or in some cases become disabled). Typically this requires payments throughout the citizen's working life in order to qualify for benefits later on. A basic state pension is a "contribution based" benefit, and depends on an individual's contribution history. For examples, see National Insurance in the UK, or Social Security in the United States of America.

Social pensions [ edit ] Social pensions are intended to prevent economic deprivation at old age. Over 80 countries have social pensions .

[ 5 ] Examples of universal pensions include New Zealand Superannuation [ 6 ] and the Basic Retirement Pension of Mauritius .

[ 7 ] Most social pensions are means tested , such as Supplemental Security Income in the United States of America or the "older person's grant" in South Africa .

[ 8 ] Disability pensions [ edit ] Main article: Disability pension Some pension plans will provide for members in the event they suffer a disability . This may take the form of early entry into a retirement plan for a disabled member below the normal retirement age.

[ citation needed ] Defined benefit plans [ edit ] Main article: Defined benefit pension plan A Defined Benefit (DB) pension plan is a plan in which workers accrue pension rights during their time at a firm and upon retirement the firm pays them a benefit that is a function of that worker's tenure at the firm and of their earnings.

[ 9 ] In other words, a DB plan is a plan in which the benefit on retirement is determined by a set formula, rather than depending on investment returns. Government pensions such as Social Security in the United States are a type of defined benefit pension plan. Traditionally, defined benefit plans for employers have been administered by institutions which exist specifically for that purpose, by large businesses, or, for government workers, by the government itself. A traditional form of defined benefit plan is the final salary plan, under which the pension paid is equal to the number of years worked, multiplied by the member's salary at retirement, multiplied by a factor known as the accrual rate . The final accrued amount is available as a monthly pension or a lump sum, but usually monthly.

In the US, 26 U.S.C.

§ 414(j) specifies a defined benefit plan to be any pension plan that is not a defined contribution plan (see below) where a defined contribution plan is any plan with individual accounts. A traditional pension plan that defines a benefit for an employee upon that employee's retirement is a defined benefit plan. In the U.S., corporate defined benefit plans, along with many other types of defined benefit plans, are governed by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA).

[ 10 ] In the United Kingdom , benefits are typically indexed for inflation (known as Retail Prices Index (RPI)) as required by law for registered pension plans.

[ 11 ] Inflation during an employee's retirement affects the purchasing power of the pension; the higher the inflation rate, the lower the purchasing power of a fixed annual pension. This effect can be mitigated by providing annual increases to the pension at the rate of inflation (usually capped, for instance at 5% in any given year). This method is advantageous for the employee since it stabilizes the purchasing power of pensions to some extent.

If the pension plan allows for early retirement, payments are often reduced to recognize that the retirees will receive the payouts for longer periods of time. In the United States, under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 , any reduction factor less than or equal to the actuarial early retirement reduction factor is acceptable.

[ 12 ] Many DB plans include early retirement provisions to encourage employees to retire early, before the attainment of normal retirement age. Companies would rather hire younger employees at lower wages. Some of those provisions come in the form of additional temporary or supplemental benefits , which are payable to a certain age, usually before attaining normal retirement age.

[ 13 ] Due to changes in pensions over the years, many pension systems, including those in Alabama , California , Indiana , and New York , have shifted to a tiered system.

[ 14 ] For a simplified example, suppose there are three employees that pay into a state pension system: Sam, Veronica, and Jessica. The state pension system has three tiers: Tier I, Tier II, and Tier III. These three tiers are based on the employee's hire date (i.e. Tier I covers 1 January 1980 (and before) to 1 January 1995, Tier II 2 January 1995 to 1 January 2010, and Tier III 1 January 2010 to present) and have different benefit provisions (e.g. Tier I employees can retire at age 50 with 80% benefits or wait until 55 with full benefits, Tier II employees can retire at age 55 with 80% benefits or wait until 60 for full benefits, Tier III employees can retire at age 65 with full benefits). Therefore, Sam, hired in June 1983, would be subject to the provisions of the Tier I scheme, whereas Veronica, hired in August 1995, would be permitted to retire at age 60 with full benefits and Jessica, hired in December 2014, would not be able to retire with full benefits until she became 65.

Criticisms [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Traditional defined benefit plan designs (because of their typically flat accrual rate and the decreasing time for interest discounting as people get closer to retirement age) tend to exhibit a J-shaped accrual pattern of benefits, where the present value of benefits grows quite slowly early in an employee's career and accelerates significantly in mid-career: in other words it costs more to fund the pension for older employees than for younger ones (an "age bias"). Defined benefit pensions tend to be less portable than defined contribution plans, even if the plan allows a lump sum cash benefit at termination. Most plans, however, pay their benefits as an annuity, so retirees do not bear the risk of low investment returns on contributions or of outliving their retirement income. The open-ended nature of these risks to the employer is the reason given by many employers for switching from defined benefit to defined contribution plans over recent years. The risks to the employer can sometimes be mitigated by discretionary elements in the benefit structure, for instance in the rate of increase granted on accrued pensions, both before and after retirement.

The age bias, reduced portability and open ended risk make defined benefit plans better suited to large employers with less mobile workforces, such as the public sector (which has open-ended support from taxpayers). This coupled with a lack of foresight on the employers part means a large proportion of the workforce are kept in the dark over future investment schemes.

Defined benefit plans are sometimes criticized as being paternalistic as they enable employers or plan trustees to make decisions about the type of benefits and family structures and lifestyles of their employees. However they are typically more valuable than defined contribution plans in most circumstances and for most employees (mainly because the employer tends to pay higher contributions than under defined contribution plans), so such criticism is rarely harsh.

The "cost" of a defined benefit plan is not easily calculated, and requires an actuary or actuarial software. However, even with the best of tools, the cost of a defined benefit plan will always be an estimate based on economic and financial assumptions. These assumptions include the average retirement age and lifespan of the employees, the returns to be earned by the pension plan's investments and any additional taxes or levies, such as those required by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation in the U.S. So, for this arrangement, the benefit is relatively secure but the contribution is uncertain even when estimated by a professional. This has serious cost considerations and risks for the employer offering a pension plan.

One of the growing concerns with defined benefit plans is that the level of future obligations will outpace the value of assets held by the plan ( Unfunded mandate ). This "underfunding" dilemma can be faced by any type of defined benefit plan, private or public, but it is most acute in governmental and other public plans where political pressures and less rigorous accounting standards can result in excessive commitments to employees and retirees, but inadequate contributions. Many states and municipalities across the United States of America and Canada now face chronic pension crises.

[ 1 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Defined contribution plans [ edit ] Main article: Defined contribution plan A defined contribution (DC) plan, is a pension plan where employers set aside a certain proportion (i.e. contributions) of a worker's earnings (such as 5%) in an investment account, and the worker receives this savings and any accumulated investment earnings upon retirement.

[ 17 ] These contributions are paid into an individual account for each member. The contributions are invested, for example in the stock market, and the returns on the investment (which may be positive or negative) are credited to the individual's account. On retirement, the member's account is used to provide retirement benefits, sometimes through the purchase of an annuity which then provides a regular income. Defined contribution plans have become widespread all over the world in recent years, and are now the dominant form of plan in the private sector in many countries. For example, the number of defined benefit plans in the U.S. has been steadily declining, as more and more employers see pension contributions as a large expense avoidable by disbanding the defined benefit plan and instead offering a defined contribution plan.

Money contributed can either be from employee salary deferral or from employer contributions. The portability of defined contribution pensions is legally no different from the portability of defined benefit plans. However, because of the cost of administration and ease of determining the plan sponsor's liability for defined contribution plans (you do not need to pay an actuary to calculate the lump sum equivalent that you do for defined benefit plans) in practice, defined contribution plans have become generally portable.

In a defined contribution plan, investment risk and investment rewards are assumed by each individual/employee/retiree and not by the sponsor/employer, and these risks may be substantial.

[ 18 ] In addition, participants do not necessarily purchase annuities with their savings upon retirement, and bear the risk of outliving their assets. (In the United Kingdom, for instance, it is a legal requirement [ needs update ] to use the bulk of the fund to purchase an annuity.) The "cost" of a defined contribution plan is readily calculated, but the benefit from a defined contribution plan depends upon the account balance at the time an employee is looking to use the assets. So, for this arrangement, the contribution is known but the benefit is unknown (until calculated).

Despite the fact that the participant in a defined contribution plan typically has control over investment decisions, the plan sponsor retains a significant degree of fiduciary responsibility over investment of plan assets, including the selection of investment options and administrative providers.

Examples [ edit ] In the United States, the legal definition of a defined contribution plan is a plan providing for an individual account for each participant, and for benefits based solely on the amount contributed to the account, plus or minus income, gains, expenses and losses allocated to the account (see 26 U.S.C.

§ 414(i) ). Examples of defined contribution plans in the United States include individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and 401(k) plans . In such plans, the employee is responsible, to one degree or another, for selecting the types of investments toward which the funds in the retirement plan are allocated. This may range from choosing one of a small number of pre-determined mutual funds to selecting individual stocks or other financial assets. Most self-directed retirement plans are characterized by certain tax advantages , and some provide for a portion of the employee's contributions to be matched by the employer. In exchange, the funds in such plans may not be withdrawn by the investor prior to reaching a certain age—typically the year the employee reaches 59.5 years old (with a small number of exceptions)—without incurring a substantial penalty.

Advocates of defined contribution plans point out that each employee has the ability to tailor the investment portfolio to his or her individual needs and financial situation, including the choice of how much to contribute, if anything at all. However, others state that these apparent advantages could also hinder some workers who might not possess the financial savvy to choose the correct investment vehicles or have the discipline to voluntarily contribute money to retirement accounts.

In the US, defined contribution plans are subject to IRS limits on how much can be contributed, known as the section 415 limit. In 2009, the total deferral amount, including employee contribution plus employer contribution, was limited to $49,000 or 100% of compensation, whichever is less. The employee-only limit in 2009 was $16,500 with a $5,500 catch-up. These numbers usually increase each year and are indexed to compensate for the effects of inflation. For 2015, the limits were raised to $53,000 and $18,000, [ 19 ] respectively.

Examples of defined contribution pension schemes in other countries are, the UK's personal pensions and proposed National Employment Savings Trust (NEST), Germany's Riester plans, Australia's Superannuation system and New Zealand's KiwiSaver scheme. Individual pension savings plans also exist in Austria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Greece, Finland, Ireland, Netherlands, Slovenia and Spain.

[ 20 ] Risk sharing pensions [ edit ] In collective risk sharing schemes members pool their contributions and to a greater or less extent share the investment and longevity risk . There are multiple naming conventions for these plans reflecting the fact that the future payouts are a target or ambition of the plan sponsor rather than a guarantee, common naming conventions include: Defined Ambition Plans Target benefit plans Collective Defined Contribution Schemes Tontine Pensions Risk sharing pension sponsor examples [ edit ] US: State of Wisconsin Investment Board US: TIAA UK: Royal Mail Pension Fund Netherlands: Stichting Pensioenfonds ABP Denmark: Arbejdsmarkedets Tillægspension Funded [ edit ] In a funded pension plan , contributions are invested in a fund towards meeting the future pension benefits. All plans must be funded in some way, so this type of plan is more accurately known as pre-funded or fully-funded . The future returns on the investments, and the future benefits to be paid, are not known in advance, so there is no guarantee that a given level of contributions will be enough to meet the benefits. Typically, the contributions to be paid are regularly reviewed in a valuation of the plan's assets and liabilities, carried out by an actuary to ensure that the pension fund will meet future payment obligations. This means that in a defined benefit pension, investment risk and investment rewards are typically assumed by the sponsor/employer and not by the individual. If a plan is not well-funded, the plan sponsor may not have the financial resources to continue funding the plan.

Occupational pensions are typically provided through employment agreements between workers and employers, and their financing structure must meet legislative requirements. In common-law jurisdictions, the law requires that pensions be pre-funded in trusts, with a range of requirements to ensure the trustees act in the best interests of the beneficiaries. These jurisdictions account for over 80% of assets held by private pension plans around the world.

[ 21 ] Of the $50.7 trillion of global assets in 2019, $32.2T were in U.S. plans, the next largest being the U.K. ($3.2T), Canada ($2.8T), Australia ($1.9T), Singapore ($0.3T), Hong Kong and Ireland (each roughly $0.2T), New Zealand, India, Kenya, Nigeria, Jamaica, etc.

[ citation needed ] Civil-law jurisdictions with statutory trust vehicles for pensions include the Netherlands ($1.8T), Japan ($1.7T), Switzerland ($1.1T), Denmark ($0.8T), Sweden, Brazil and S. Korea (each $0.5T), Germany, France, Israel, P.R. China, Mexico, Italy, Chile, Belgium, Spain and Finland (each roughly $0.2T), etc. Without the vast body of common law to draw upon, statutory trusts tend to be more uniform and tightly regulated.

[ citation needed ] Canadians have the option to open a registered retirement savings plan (RRSP), as well as a range of employee and state pension programs. This plan allows contributions to this account to be marked as un-taxable income and remain un-taxed until withdrawal. Most countries' governments will provide advice on pension schemes.

[ citation needed ] Several countries have hybrid systems which are partially funded. Spain set up the Social Security Reserve Fund and France set up the Pensions Reserve Fund ; in Canada the wage-based retirement plan (CPP) is partially funded, with assets managed by the CPP Investment Board while the U.S.

Social Security system is partially funded by investment in special U.S. Treasury Bonds.

Pay-as-you-go [ edit ] Main article: Pay-as-you-go pension plan In an unfunded or pay-as-you-go ( PAYGO ) pension plan current pension benefits are paid from current pension contributions. Pension arrangements provided by the state in many countries in the world are at least partially unfunded, with benefits paid directly from current workers' contributions and taxes. This method of financing is known as pay-as-you-go , or PAYGO .

[ 22 ] The social security systems of many European countries are unfunded, [ 23 ] having current benefits paid directly out of current taxes and social security contributions.
Social and state pensions depend largely upon legislation and future taxes for their sustainability. Some have identified funds, but these hold essentially government bonds —a form of IOU .

[ 24 ] Some countries, such as Germany, France, Italy and Spain, have very little saved pension assets and depend the pay-as-you-go approach. Nevertheless, in terms of typical net income replacement in retirement, these countries rank well relative to those with pension assets.

[ 25 ] The pay-as-you-go financing depends on intergenerational solidarity and the future dependency ratio .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] In Pay-as-you-go pension systems working adults pay for the current pensions of their parents and grandparents generations , while the pensions of people above retirement age are paid by child and grandchild generations .

Underfunding [ edit ] Another growing challenge is the recent trend of states and businesses in the United States purposely under-funding their pension schemes in order to push the costs onto the federal government. For example, in 2009, the majority of states have unfunded pension liabilities exceeding all reported state debt.

Bradley Belt , former executive director of the PBGC (the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation , the federal agency that insures private-sector defined-benefit pension plans in the event of bankruptcy), testified before a Congressional hearing in October 2004, "I am particularly concerned with the temptation, and indeed, growing tendency, to use the pension insurance fund as a means to obtain an interest-free and risk-free loan to enable companies to restructure. Unfortunately, the current calculation appears to be that shifting pension liabilities onto other premium payers or potentially taxpayers is the path of least resistance rather than a last resort." [ citation needed ] Challenges have further been increased by the post-2007 credit crunch. Total funding of the nation's 100 largest corporate pension plans fell by $303bn in 2008, going from a $86bn surplus at the end of 2007 to a $217bn deficit at the end of 2008.

[ 31 ] Dependency ratio [ edit ] A growing challenge for pay-as-you-go pensions is the dependency ratio .

[ 32 ] As birth rates in most countries drop and life expectancy increases, an ever-larger portion of the population is elderly . This leaves fewer workers for each retired person. In many developed countries this means that government and public sector pensions could potentially be a drag on their economies unless pension benefits are reduced or pension contribution are increased. Higher old-age dependency ratio can result in a pensions crisis .

[ 33 ] Economic challenges [ edit ] Low interest rates can make it more difficult for pension funds to generate returns on their investments, which can in turn lead to lower benefits for pensioners. In addition, economic downturns can lead to higher unemployment rates , which can result in lower contributions to pension plans. The share of people who don't contribute or contribute less to pensions can rise, for example in the gig economy .

[ 34 ] Pension crisis [ edit ] These paragraphs are an excerpt from Pensions crisis .

[ edit ] The pensions crisis or pensions timebomb is the predicted difficulty in paying for corporate or government employment retirement pensions in various countries, due to a difference between pension obligations and the resources set aside to fund them. The basic difficulty of the pension problem is that institutions must be sustained over far longer than the political planning horizon.

[ 35 ] Shifting demographics are causing a lower ratio of workers per retiree; contributing factors include retirees living longer (increasing the relative number of retirees), and lower birth rates (decreasing the relative number of workers, especially relative to the Post-WW2 Baby Boom ). An international comparison of pension institution by countries is important to solve the pension crisis problem.

[ 36 ] There is significant debate regarding the magnitude and importance of the problem, as well as the solutions.

[ 37 ] One aspect and challenge of the "Pension timebomb" is that several countries' governments have a constitutional obligation to provide public services to its citizens, but the funding of these programs, such as healthcare are at a lack of funding, especially after the 2008 recession and the strain caused on the dependency ratio by an ageing population and a shrinking workforce, which increases costs of elderly care.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Balancing pension funding [ edit ] See also: Welfare reform Balancing pension funding can include a decrease of real pensions, increases in pension contributions or reducing the expected years in retirement by increasing the retirement age: [ 40 ] Some software  allow to predict the effect of pension policies.

[ 41 ] The electoral costs of pension reforms can depend on financial literacy .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Decrease of real pensions [ edit ] One pension reform channel is to decrease the amount of real pensions paid to retirees.

[ 41 ] Increase of pension contributions [ edit ] This channel involves the increase of employee or employer pension contribution. This pension contribution is spent by the employee as a share of income received or by the employer as a share of wages paid to each employee. This decreases the employee's disposable income . The rise of the direct labor cost degrades the labour demand and increases the costs of production, reducing competitivity .

[ 41 ] The size of pension contribution can depend on the number of children raised , since the children's future pensions contribution balance out the pension funding.

[ 44 ] Reduction of expected years in retirement [ edit ] This pension reform channel involves an increase of the retirement age closer to the life expectancy , which decreases the number of retirees receiving pensions.

[ 41 ] High old-age dependency ratios lead to forecasts of retirement ages of up to 70 years.

[ 32 ] Effects [ edit ] Risk and responsibility [ edit ] The benefits of defined benefit and defined contribution plans differ based on the degree of financial security provided to the retiree. With defined benefit plans, retirees receive a guaranteed payout at retirement, determined by a fixed formula based on factors such as salary and years of service.

[ 45 ] The risk and responsibility of ensuring sufficient funding through retirement is borne by the employer or plan managers. This type of plan provides a level of financial security for retirees, ensuring they will receive a specific amount of income throughout their retirement years. However this income is not usually guaranteed to keep up with inflation, so its purchasing power may decline over the years.

On the other hand, defined contribution plans are dependent upon the amount of money contributed and the performance of the investment vehicles used.

[ 46 ] Employees are responsible for ensuring that their contributions are sufficient to provide for their retirement needs, and they face the risk of market fluctuations that could reduce their retirement savings. However, defined contribution plans provide more flexibility for employees, who can choose how much to contribute and how to invest their funds.

Hybrid plans, such as cash balance and pension equity plans, combine features of both defined benefit and defined contribution plans. These plans have become increasingly popular in the U.S. since the 1990s. Cash balance plans, for example, provide a guaranteed benefit like a defined benefit plan, but the benefit is expressed as an account balance, like a defined contribution plan. Pension equity plans are a type of cash balance plan that credits employee accounts with a percentage of their pay each year, similar to a defined contribution plan.

[ citation needed ] Incentives for parental investment [ edit ] Pay-as-you-go pensions can misalign incentives between parental investment and elderly care .

[ 47 ] [ 33 ] According to the old-age-security hypothesis , the elderly care by the child generation can offset the cost of raising a child .

[ 48 ] Redistribution [ edit ] Pensions can have redistributive effects within a generation and between generations due to higher or lower pension entitlements than the pension contributions of an individual.

[ 49 ] Gender pension gap [ edit ] The gender pension gap, the difference between genders in average pensions, varies by country. In OECD countries the gender pension gap varied from 3% in Estonia to 47% in Japan according to data between 2013 and 2018.

[ 50 ] Eastern European countries tend to have a smaller pension gender gap due to less pronounced gender differences in part-time jobs .

[ 51 ] Possible contributions to the pension gender gap include gender pay gaps , differences in employment rates, parental leave , unpaid care work and gender roles .

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] Years in retirement [ edit ] There is a gender gap in expected years in retirement with 22.8 years for women and 18.4 years for men on average ( OECD , 2022), contributed by sex differences in life expectancy .

[ 55 ] The difference in years in retirement contribute to gender-differentiated pension rates.

[ 56 ] Pillars [ edit ] Most national pension systems are based on multi-pillar schemes to ensure greater flexibility and financial security to the old in contrast to reliance on one single system. In general, there are three main functions of pension systems: saving, redistribution and insurance functions. According to the report by the World Bank titled "Averting the Old Age Crisis", countries should consider separating the saving and redistributive functions, when creating pension systems, and placing them under different financing and managerial arrangements into three main pillars.

The Pillars of Old Age Income Security: [ 57 ] Properties Mandatory publicly managed pillar Mandatory privately managed pillar Voluntary pillar Financing Tax-financed Regulated fully funded Fully funded Form Means tested , minimum pension guarantee, or flat Personal savings plan or occupational plan Personal savings plan or occupational plan Objectives Redistributive plus coinsurance Savings plus coinsurance Savings plus coinsurance However, this typology is rather a prescriptive than a descriptive one and most specialists usually allocate all public programmes to the first pillar, including earnings-related public schemes, which does not fit the original definition of the first pillar.

[ 58 ] Zero pillar [ edit ] This non-contributory pillar was introduced only recently, aiming to alleviate poverty among the elderly, and permitting fiscal conditions. It is usually financed by the state and is in form of basic pension schemes or social assistance.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] In some typologies, the zero and the first pillar overlap.

[ 58 ] First pillar [ edit ] Pillar 1, sometimes referred to as the public pillar or first-tier , answers the aim to prevent the poverty of the elderly, provide some absolute, minimum income based on solidarity and replace some portion of lifetime pre-retirement income. It is financed on a redistributive principle without constructing large reserves and takes the form of mandatory contributions linked to earnings such as minimum pensions within earnings-related plans, or separate targeted programs for retirement income. These are provided by the public sector and can be pay-as-you-go financed.

Second pillar [ edit ] Pillar 2, or the second tier, built on the basis of defined benefit and defined contribution plans with independent investment management, aims to protect the elderly from relative poverty and provides benefits supplementary to the income from the first pillar to contributors.

[ 59 ] Therefore, the second pillar fulfils the insurance function. In addition to DB's and DC's, other types of pension schemes of the second pillar are the contingent accounts , known also as Notional Defined Contributions (implemented for example in Italy, Latvia, Poland and Sweden) or occupational pension schemes (applied, for instance, in Estonia, Germany and Norway).

[ 59 ] Third pillar [ edit ] The third tier consists of voluntary contributions in various different forms, including occupational or private saving plans, and products for individuals.

Fourth Pillar [ edit ] The fourth pillar is usually excluded from classifications since it does not usually have a legal basis and consists of "informal support (such as family), other formal social programs (such as health care or housing), and other individual assets (such as home ownership and reverse mortgages)." [ 60 ] [ 61 ] These five pillars and their main criteria are summarised in the table below by Holzmann and Hinz.

Multipillar Pension Taxonomy: [ 60 ] Pillar Objectives Characteristics Participation 0 Elderly poverty protection Social pension , universal or means-tested Universal or residual 1 Elderly poverty protection and consumption smoothing Public pension plan, publicly managed, defined benefit or notional defined contribution Mandated 2 Consumption smoothing and elderly poverty protection through minimum pension Occupational or personal pension plans, fully funded defined benefit or fully funded defined contribution Mandated 3 Consumption smoothing Occupational or personal pension plans, partially or fully funded defined benefit or funded defined contribution Voluntary 4 Elderly poverty protection and consumption smoothing Access to informal (e.g. family support), other formal social programs (e.g. health) and other individual financial and nonfinancial assets (e.g. homeownership) Voluntary Pension systems by country [ edit ] Main article: Pension systems by country First pillar of pension system by country: Basic non-contributory pension Mandatory individual accounts Provident fund system Workers can switch between social insurance system or individual accounts Social insurance system History [ edit ] See also: History of retirement In the classical world, Romans offered veteran legionnaires (centurions) military pensions, typically in the form of a land grant or a special, often semi-public, appointment.

Augustus Caesar (63 BC–AD 14) [ 62 ] introduced one of the first recognisable pension schemes in history with his military treasury. In 13 BC Augustus created a pension plan in which retired soldiers were to receive a pension (of minimum 3,000 denarii in a lump sum, which at the time represented around 13 times a legionnaires' annual salary) after 16 years of service in a legion and four years in the military reserves. The retiring soldiers were in the beginning paid from general revenues and later from a special fund ( aeririum militare ) established by Augustus in 5 or 6 AD.

[ 63 ] This was in an attempt to quell a rebellion within the Roman Empire which was facing militaristic turmoil at the time.

Widows' funds were among the first pension type arrangement to appear. For example, Duke Ernest the Pious of Gotha in Germany founded a widows' fund for clergy in 1645 and another for teachers in 1662.

[ 64 ] "Various schemes of provision for ministers' widows were then established throughout Europe at about the start of the eighteenth century, some based on a single premium others based on yearly premiums to be distributed as benefits in the same year." [ 65 ] Modern forms of pension systems were first introduced in the late 19th century. Germany was the first country to introduce a universal pension program for employees.

[ 66 ] Germany [ edit ] Main article: State Socialism (Germany) See also: Pensions in Germany As part of Otto von Bismarck 's social legislation, the Old Age and Disability Insurance Bill was enacted and implemented in 1889.

[ 67 ] The Old Age Pension program, financed by a tax on workers, was originally designed to provide a pension annuity for workers who reached the age of 70 years, though this was lowered to 65 years in 1916. Unlike accident insurance and health insurance, this program covered industrial, agrarian, artisans and servants from the start and was supervised directly by the state.

[ 68 ] Germany's mandatory state pension provisions are based on the pay-as-you-go (or redistributive) model. Funds paid in by contributors (employees and employers) are not saved and neither invested but are used to pay current pension obligations.

Ireland [ edit ] Main article: Pensions in the Republic of Ireland There is a history of pensions in Ireland that can be traced back to Brehon Law imposing a legal responsibility on the kin group to take care of its members who were aged, blind, deaf, sick or insane.

[ 69 ] For a discussion on pension funds and early Irish law, see F Kelly, A Guide to Early Irish Law (Dublin, Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies , 1988). In 2010, there were over 76,291 pension schemes operating in Ireland.

[ 70 ] In January 2018, a "total contributions approach" qualification system was announced, effective from March 2018, for those pensioners who reached state pension age after 1 September 2012. The new system requires a person to have 40 years' worth or contributions to receive the full rate and a minimum total period of paid contributions of 520 weeks with ten years' full coverage. The State Pension is payable from age 66 with the age being increased to 67 in 2021 and 68 in 2028.

[ 71 ] Spain [ edit ] The history of pensions in Spain began in 1908 with the creation of the National Insurance Institute (INP) and the design of old-age pensions in a free affiliation scheme subsidised by the State. Although in 1919 the pension system was made compulsory and in 1931 an attempt was made to unify the different branches of insurance, the INP failed to ensure that pensions acted as immediate remedial measures for the old-age problem that was evident at the time. Public intervention in social insurance in Spain during these years was greatly determined by  the failure of private initiatives such as the Savings and Pension Fund of Barcelona.

The Mandatory Workers' Retirement (ROO) was the first compulsory social insurance in Spain and was aimed at wage earners between the ages of 16 and 65 who earned no more than 4,000 pesetas a year. This was followed by the creation of the Social Security system in 1963, early retirement and the possibility of partial retirement in 1978 and the special regime for self-employed workers in 1985.

[ 72 ] Various reforms and adjustments have been made over time, such as the 1995 reform that established the sustainability factor and the 2011 reform that raised the retirement age from 65 to 67.

[ 73 ] Currently, the pension system in Spain is still under debate to ensure its long-term sustainability with proposals such as the implementation of private pension plans and the revision of the conditions of access to public pensions.

United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Pensions in the United Kingdom See also: English Poor Laws and Timeline of pensions in the United Kingdom Public sector workers in Leeds striking over pension changes by the government in November 2011 The decline of Feudal systems and formation of national states throughout Europe led to the reemergence of standing armies with their allegiances to states. Consequently, the sixteenth century in England marked the establishment of standardised systems of military pensions. During its 1592–93 session, Parliament established disability payments or "reliefe for Souldiours ... [who] adventured their lives and lost their limbs or disabled their bodies" in the service of the Crown. This pension was again generous by contemporary standards, even though annual pensions were not to exceed ten pounds for "private soldiers", or twenty pounds for a "lieutenant".

[ 63 ] The beginning of the modern state pension came with the Old Age Pensions Act 1908 , that provided 5 shillings (£0.25) a week for those over 70 whose annual means do not exceed £31.50. It coincided with the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws and Relief of Distress 1905-09 and was the first step in the Liberal welfare reforms to the completion of a system of social security, with unemployment and health insurance through the National Insurance Act 1911 .

In 1921, The Finance Act introduced tax relief on pension contributions in line with savings and life insurance. As a consequence, the overall size of the fund was increased since the income tax was now added to the pension as well.

[ 74 ] Then in 1978, The State Earnings-Related Pension Scheme (SERPS) replaced The Graduated Pension Scheme from 1959, providing a pension related to earnings, in addition to the basic state pension. Employees and employers had the possibility to contribute to it between 6 April 1978 and 5 April 2002, when it was replaced by the State Second Pension .

After the Second World War, the National Insurance Act 1946 completed universal coverage of social security, introducing a State Pension for everybody on a contributory basis, with men being eligible at 65 and women at 60.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] The National Assistance Act 1948 ( 11 & 12 Geo. 6 . c. 29) formally abolished the poor law, and gave a minimum income to those not paying National Insurance.

The early-1990s established the existing framework for state pensions in the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act 1992 and Superannuation and other Funds (Validation) Act 1992. Following the highly respected Goode Report , occupational pensions were covered by comprehensive statutes in the Pension Schemes Act 1993 and the Pensions Act 1995 .

In 2002, the Pensions Commission was established as a cross-party body to review pensions in the United Kingdom. The first Act to follow was the Pensions Act 2004 that updated regulation by replacing OPRA with the Pensions Regulator and relaxing the stringency of minimum funding requirements for pensions while ensuring protection for insolvent businesses. In a major update of the state pension, the Pensions Act 2007 , which aligned and raised retirement ages. Following that, the Pensions Act 2008 has set up automatic enrolment for occupational pensions , and a public competitor designed to be a low-cost and efficient fund manager, called the National Employment Savings Trust (or "Nest").

United States [ edit ] Main article: Pensions in the United States In the U.S., average balances of retirement accounts, for households having such accounts, exceed median net worth across all age groups. For those 65 and over, 11.6% of retirement accounts have balances of at least $1 million, more than twice that of the $407,581 average (shown). Those 65 and over have a median net worth of about $250,000 (shown), about a quarter of the group's average (not shown).

[ 76 ] The first "American" pensions came in 1636, when Plymouth colony , and subsequently, other colonies such as Virginia, Maryland (1670s) and NY (1690s), offered the first colonial pension. The general assembly of the Virginia Company followed by approving a resolution known as Virginia Act IX of 1644 stating that "...all hurt or maymed men be relieved and provided for by the several counties, where such men reside or inhabit." [ 77 ] Furthermore, during King Philip's War , otherwise known as the First Indian War, this Act was expanded to widows and orphans in Virginia's Act of 1675.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Public pensions got their start with various 'promises', informal and legislated, made to veterans of the Revolutionary War and, more extensively, the Civil War . They were expanded greatly, and began to be offered by a number of state and local governments during the early Progressive Era in the late nineteenth century.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] Federal civilian pensions were offered under the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS), formed in 1920. CSRS provided retirement, disability and survivor benefits for most civilian employees in the U.S. Federal government, until the creation of a new Federal agency, the Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS), in 1987.

[ citation needed ] Pension plans became popular in the United States during World War II , when wage freezes prohibited outright increases in workers' pay. The defined benefit plan had been the most popular and common type of retirement plan in the United States through the 1980s; since that time, defined contribution plans have become the more common type of retirement plan in the United States and many other western countries.

[ citation needed ] In April 2012, the Northern Mariana Islands Retirement Fund filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. The retirement fund is a defined benefit type pension plan and was only partially funded by the government, with only $268.4 million in assets and $911 million in liabilities . The plan experienced low investment returns and a benefit structure that had been increased without raises in funding.

[ 82 ] According to Pensions and Investments , this is "apparently the first" U.S. public pension plan to declare bankruptcy.

[ 82 ] See also [ edit ] Elderly care Financial advisor and Fee-only financial advisor Fiscal sustainability Generational accounting Parent–offspring conflict Pension led funding Pension model Public debt Retirement planning Social contract Specific: Bankruptcy code Ham and Eggs Movement , California pension proposal of the 1930s-40s Individual Pension Plan (IPP) Pension Rights Center Provident Fund Roth 401(k) Universities Superannuation Scheme References [ edit ] ^ a b Thomas P. Lemke, Gerald T. Lins (2010).

ERISA for Money Managers .

Thomson Reuters .

ISBN 9780314902023 . Retrieved 11 October 2015 .

^ "WordNet Search - 3.1" .

princeton.edu .

^ "Industry SuperFunds - Home" . industrysuper.com . Retrieved 17 September 2010 .

^ "Retired Pay" .

myarmybenefits.us.army.mil . Retrieved 26 June 2022 .

^ "Country map" .

pension-watch.net .

^ "New Zealand Superannuation" .

workandincome.govt.nz .

^ Willmore, Larry (April 2003). "Universal Pensions in Mauritius: Lessons for the Rest of Us".

SSRN 398280 .

United Nations DESA Discussion Paper No. 32.

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.398280 .

^ "Old age pension" . GCIS . Retrieved 7 April 2013 .

^ Gruber, J. (2010) Public Finance and Public Policy, Worth Publishers. G-3 (Glossary) ^ Lemke and Lins, ERISA for Money Managers , §1:2 (Thomson West, 2013 ed.).

^ "The Pensions Advisory Service" . The Pensions Advisory Service. Archived from the original on 28 May 2010 . Retrieved 17 September 2010 .

^ Foster, Ann C.

"Early Retirement Provisions in Defined Benefit Pension Plans" (PDF) .

bls.gov .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 December 2003.

^ Shulman, Gary A. (1999).

Qualified Domestic Relations Order Handbook . Aspen Publishers Online. pp.

199– 200.

ISBN 978-0-7355-0665-7 .

^ Bauer, Elizabeth (7 June 2019).

"More Cautionary Tales From Illinois: Tier II Pensions (And Why Actuaries Matter)" .

Forbes . Retrieved 19 July 2020 .

^ Tufts, William; Fairbanks, Lee (2011), Pension Ponzi: How Public-sector Unions are Bankrupting Canada's Health Care, Education and Your Retirement , Mississauga, Ontario: Wiley, p. 210, ISBN 978-1118098738 , archived from the original on 28 May 2014 , retrieved 28 May 2014 ^ Walsh, Mary (14 April 2018).

"A$76,000 Monthly Pension: Why States and Cities Are Short on Cash" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 1 May 2018 .

Oregon – like many other states and cities, including New Jersey, Kentucky and Connecticut – is caught in a fiscal squeeze of its own making. Its economy is growing, but the cost of its state-run pension system is growing faster.

^ Gruber, J. Public Finance and Public Policy, Worth Publishers. G-3 (Glossary) ^ Cannon, Edmund; Ian Tonks (2012).

"The Value and Risk of Defined Contribution Pension Schemes: International Evidence" (PDF) .

Journal of Risk and Insurance .

80 : 95– 119.

doi : 10.1111/j.1539-6975.2011.01456.x .

hdl : 10036/86956 .

S2CID 7975555 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 April 2019.

^ "IRS Announces 2015 Pension Plan Limitations; Taxpayers May Contribute up to $18,000 to their 401(k) plans in 2015" .

^ Economic Policy Committee and European Commission (2006).

The impact of ageing on public expenditure . EU.

[ full citation needed ] ^ "Pensions - Private pension assets - OECD Data" .

theOECD . Retrieved 1 August 2021 .

^ "Unfunded Pension Plans" .

OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms . Retrieved 26 January 2009 .

^ "Falling Short" The Economist 7 April 2011. Retrieved 30 September 2012.

^ AARP.

"How is Social Security Funded?" .

AARP . Retrieved 1 August 2021 .

^ "Pensions at a Glance : Pension replacement rates" .

stats.oecd.org . Retrieved 2 August 2021 .

^ Bauer, Elizabeth.

"What Is Intergenerational Solidarity, And Why Does It Matter For The French - And For Us?" .

Forbes . Retrieved 2 August 2021 .

^ "Securing Employer-Based Pensions: An International Perspective" .

Pension Research Council . 23 July 2015 . Retrieved 2 August 2021 .

^ Klein, James P; Practising Law Institute (1985).

Foreign pension plans, 1985: the new rules under IRC section 404A . New York, N.Y.: Practising Law Institute.

OCLC 12414718 .

^ Foreign Pension Plans, 1985: The New Rules Under IRC Section 404A . Practising Law Institute. 1985. pp. search "security contract".

^ Taxes International . Taxes International. 1985.

^ "Largest U.S. pension plans assets fall $217 billion short" .

USA Today, citing a report by Watson Wyatt . 10 March 2009.

^ a b Hyndman, Rob J.; Zeng, Yijun; Shang, Han Lin (2021).

"Forecasting the old-age dependency ratio to determine a sustainable pension age" (PDF) .

Australian & New Zealand Journal of Statistics .

63 (2): 241– 256.

doi : 10.1111/anzs.12330 .

ISSN 1369-1473 . Retrieved 19 January 2025 .

^ a b Cigno, Alessandro (1 August 1992).

"Children and pensions" .

Journal of Population Economics .

5 (3): 175– 183.

doi : 10.1007/BF00172091 .

ISSN 1432-1475 . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

^ "Self-employment on the rise | Knowledge for policy" .

knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 28 April 2023 .

^ ( 高山 1983 ) harv error: no target: CITEREF高山1983 ( help ) , pp. 224, "年金問題における基本的な困難は、ほとんどの政治家たちが考慮に入れる当面の短い期間よりもはるかに長期間にわたって制度が維持されなければならないことにある.政治家たちは選挙民の歓心を買おうとして年金給付の充実のみに熱中し、そのツケを将来の世代(現在まだ生まれていない人々も含む)に回すという選択をしがちである.そのような政治家たちの選択によって、年金制度はその長期的安定の基礎を掘り崩されてしまう."(reverse translation from the Japanese edition: "The basic difficulty of pension problem is that institution must be sustained over far long times longer than the times almost politician assume. Politician tend to choice that only devoting themselves to full up pension payment for curry favor with voter, and make return its result to next generation (that contain a people have not born yet now). By such politician's choice, the base of long-time stability of pension institution is dug down thoroughly.") ^ ( 高山 1983 ) harv error: no target: CITEREF高山1983 ( help ) , pp. 11 "制度の国際比較はとくに重要である.国によって状況と制度が多様であるので、各国がそれぞれどのような困難をかかえているかを知ることができる一方、解決策を工夫するうえで有益な情報を国際比較の中から見出すことができるからである."(reverse translation from the Japanese edition: "An international comparing of institution among each countries is especially important, since we can find an interest information in such comparing while we try to seek good solution, and we can see what difficulties each countries have since the institution and situation of countries is varied by countries.") ^ "Falling Short: Workers are sleepwalking towards an impoverished old age" .

The Economist . Vol. 387, no. 8584. 14 June 2008. pp.

79– 81.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2018 . Retrieved 2 May 2011 .

^ Puro, Kari (2010).

"Ikääntymisen haasteet yhteiskunnalle" .

www.duodecimlehti.fi .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2022 . Retrieved 30 May 2022 .

^ "Kunnat käännekohdassa? Kuntien tilannekuva 2020 "Municipalities at a turning point? Information on the situation of municipalities in 2020" " (PDF) . 13 February 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 December 2021 . Retrieved 30 May 2022 .

^ "Perspectives : Réforme des retraites : les leviers d'action" .

Le Monde.fr (in French). 21 January 2003 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 .

^ a b c d "Les effets macroéconomiques des leviers d'équilibrage du système de retraite à l'aide du modèle e-mod.fr de l'OFCE" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 December 2019.

^ Fornero, Elsa; Lo Prete, Anna (2019).

"Voting in the aftermath of a pension reform: the role of financial literacy" (PDF) .

Journal of Pension Economics and Finance .

18 (1): 1– 30.

doi : 10.1017/S1474747218000185 .

ISSN 1474-7472 . Retrieved 2 March 2025 .

^ Barr, Nicholas; Diamond, Peter (Spring 2006). "The Economics of Pensions".

Oxford Review of Economic Policy .

22 (1): 15– 39.

doi : 10.1093/oxrep/grj002 .

ISSN 0266-903X .

^ Adams, Paul (1990).

"Children as Contributions in Kind: Social Security and Family Policy" .

Social Work .

35 (6): 492– 498.

doi : 10.1093/sw/35.6.492 .

ISSN 1545-6846 . Retrieved 20 July 2025 .

^ "Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA)" .

DOL . Retrieved 28 April 2023 .

^ "Defined-Benefit vs. Defined-Contribution Plans Explained" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 28 April 2023 .

^ Sinn, Hans-Werner (2004).

"The pay-as-you-go pension system as fertility insurance and an enforcement device" (PDF) .

Journal of Public Economics .

88 ( 7– 8): 1335– 1357.

doi : 10.1016/S0047-2727(03)00015-X . Retrieved 10 May 2025 .

^ Cigno, Alessandro; Werding, Martin (2007).

Children and Pensions . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-03369-5 .

^ Klos, Jonas; Krieger, Tim; Stöwhase, Sven (2022).

"Measuring intra-generational redistribution in PAYG pension schemes" (PDF) .

Public Choice .

190 ( 1– 2): 53– 73.

doi : 10.1007/s11127-021-00914-w .

ISSN 0048-5829 . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ OCDE (2021).

"Chaper 1: Assessing the gender gap in retirement saving arrangements" .

Towards Improved Retirement Savings Outcomes for Women . OCDE Publishing.

^ Samek Lodovici, Manuela; Drufuca, Serena; Patrizio, Monica; Pesce, Flavia (2016).

The gender pension gap: differences between mothers and women without children . Policy Department of the European Parliament's Committee on Women’s Rights and Gender Equality. pp.

28– 32.

^ Frericks, Patricia; Maier, Robert L.; De Graaf, Willibrord (2007).

"European Pension Reforms: Individualization, Privatization and Gender Pension Gaps" .

Social Politics .

14 (2): 212– 237.

doi : 10.1093/sp/jxm008 .

SSRN 1447686 .

^ Frericks, P.; Maier, R.; De Graaf, W. (October 2006).

"Shifting the Pension Mix: Consequences for Dutch and Danish Women" .

Social Policy and Administration .

40 (5): 475– 492.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9515.2006.00500.x .

^ OCDE (2021). "Chapter 2: Understanding the gender pension gap beyond labour market drivers through a literature review".

Towards Improved Retirement Savings Outcomes for Women . OCDE Publishing.

^ Society at a Glance 2024: OECD Social Indicators, Expected years after labour market exit , OECD, 20 June 2024, doi : 10.1787/bb2c49e5-en ^ "The gender pay gap situation in the EU" .

commission.europa.eu . Retrieved 28 April 2023 .

^ Averting the Old Age Crisis: Policies to Protect the Old and Promote Growth (PDF) (Report). A World Bank Policy Research Report. New York: Oxford University Press. 1994.

ISBN 0-19-520996-6 .

ISSN 1020-0851 .

^ a b OECD (2006). "Pension-system Typology".

OECD Pensions at a Glance 2005: Public Policies across OECD Countries . Paris: OECD Publishing. pp.

21– 25.

doi : 10.1787/pension_glance-2005-3-en .

ISBN 9789264018716 .

^ a b c Terziev, Venelin. (2019). Historical development and characteristics of pension systems. 5. 124-135.

^ a b c Holzmann, R., Hinz, R., von Gersdorff, H., Gill, I., Impavido, G., Musalem, A. R., … Subbarao, K. (2005). Old-Age Income Support in the 21st Century: An International Perspective on Pension Systems and Reform (pp. 10–10). N.W. Washington, DC, USA: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / THE WORLD BANK. Retrieved from http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPENSIONS/Resources/Old_Age_Inc_Supp_Full_En.pdf ^ "Welcome to World Bank Intranet" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 June 2013.

^ "Who was Augustus Caesar?" .

Culture . 20 May 2019. Archived from the original on 21 May 2019.

^ a b Clark RL, Craig LA, Wilson JW.

A History of Public Sector Pensions in the United States (PDF) . Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Press.

^ Haberman, Steven (1995).

History of Actuarial Science . Vol. 1. London: William Pickering. pp. xlviii.

ISBN 978-1-85196-160-3 .

OCLC 468359649 .

^ Hald, A. (1990).

A History of Probability and Statistics and Their Applications Before 1750 . John Wiley and Sons.

ISBN 978-0-471-50230-2 .

OCLC 19629739 .

^ Hinrichs, Karl; Lynch, Julia F. (2021). "28 Old-Age Pensions". In Béland, Daniel; Leibfried, Stephan; Morgan, Kimberly J.; Obinger, Herbert (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of the Welfare State . Oxford University Press. pp.

491– 505.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198828389.013.28 .

ISBN 978-0-19-882838-9 .

^ Gianasso, Alexandre.

"A Brief History of Pensions" .

Davidson Asset Management . Retrieved 29 June 2015 .

^ Holborn, Hajo: A History of Modern Germany – 1840–1945: Princeton University Press; 1969; pp. 291–93.

^ Lynn, Theodore G.; Clarke, Blanaid J. (19 August 2010). "The Irish Corporate Governance System".

SSRN 1661617 .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.1661617 .

^ "The Pensions Board Annual Report" .

pensionsboard.ie . 2010. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012 . Retrieved 15 December 2011 .

^ "Pension modelling results: Ireland" .

Pension at a glance . OECD. 19 November 2019.

doi : 10.1787/888934043359 . Retrieved 18 April 2022 .

^ Terán, Alexander Elu (13 January 2006).

"Las primeras pensiones públicas de vejez en España. Un estudio del Retiro Obrero, 1909-1936" .

Revista de Historia Industrial : 33– 68.

ISSN 2385-3247 .

^ Secretaría de Estado de la Seguridad Social (2019).

"Historia de la Seguridad Social" .

Seguridad Social: Conócenos (in Spanish).

^ a b "The Pension Timeline - complete history of pensions" . 22 February 2023.

^ "A Brief History of Pensions – Fix My Pension" . 27 February 2018.

^ Dagher, Veronica; Tergesen, Anne; Ettenheim, Rosie (31 March 2023).

"Here's What Retirement Looks Like in America in Six Charts" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2023.

(For Average household retirement savings account balance:) Estimates of 401(k), IRA, Keogh and other defined contribution account balances based on 2019 data. Source: Employee Benefit Research Institute. . . . (For median net worth:) Source: Federal Reserve.

^ Hening’s Laws of Virginia, Vol. I, page 287 ^ Hening’s Laws of Virginia, Vol. II, page 324 and page 331 ^ First American Colonial Pensions , Statutes and Stories, 18 November 2017 , retrieved 29 April 2020 ^ Davies, W. E. (1948). The Mexican War veterans as an organized group. The Mississippi Valley Historical Review, 35(2), 221-238.

^ Costa, D. L. (1995). Pensions and retirement: Evidence from union army veterans. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(2), 297-319.

^ a b Mercado, Darla (19 April 2012).

"In apparent first, a public pension plan files for bankruptcy" .

Pensions and Investments . Retrieved 28 April 2012 .

Further reading [ edit ] Franco Modigliani ; Arun Muralidhar (2 August 2004).

Rethinking Pension Reform . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-83411-7 .

Grünewald A. 2021. " From Benefits and Beneficiaries: The Historical Origins of Old-Age Pensions From a Political Regime Perspective ." Comparative Political Studies .

External links [ edit ] Look up pension in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

US Retirement UK State pension "Pension" .

The American Cyclopædia . 1879.

v t e Employment Classifications Academic tenure Casual Contingent work Full-time job Gig worker Job sharing Part-time job Self-employment Side job Skilled worker Journeyman Technician Tradesperson Independent contractor Labour hire Temporary work Laborer Wage labour Hiring Application Background check Business networking Cover letter Curriculum vitae Drug testing Employment contract Employment counsellor Executive search list Induction programme Job fair Job fraud Job hunting Job interview Letter of recommendation Onboarding Overqualification Person–environment fit Personality–job fit theory Personality hire Probation Realistic job preview Recruitment Résumé Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates Underemployment Work-at-home scheme Roles Cooperative Employee Employer Internship Job Labour hire Permanent employment Supervisor Volunteering Working class Blue-collar Green-collar Grey-collar Pink-collar Precariat White-collar Red-collar New-collar No-collar Orange-collar Scarlet-collar Black-collar Gold-collar Career and training Apprenticeship Artisan Master craftsman Avocation Career assessment Career counseling Career development Coaching Creative class Education Continuing education E-learning Employability Further education Graduate school Induction training Knowledge worker Licensure Lifelong learning Overspecialization Practice-based professional learning Professional association Professional certification Professional development Professional school Reflective practice Retraining Vocational education Vocational school Vocational university Mentorship Occupational Outlook Handbook Practice firm Profession Operator Professional Tradesman Vocation Attendance Break Break room Career break Furlough Gap year Leave of absence Long service leave No call, no show Sabbatical Sick leave Stress leave Time clock Schedules 35-hour workweek Four-day week Eight-hour day 996 working hour system Flextime On-call Overtime Remote work Six-hour day Shift work Working time Workweek and weekend Wages and salaries Frisch elasticity of labor supply Global labor arbitrage Labour economics Labor share Labour supply Living wage Maximum wage National average salary World Europe Minimum wage Canada Hong Kong Europe United States Price elasticity of demand Progressive wage Singapore Overtime rate Paid time off Performance-related pay Remuneration Salary cap Benefits Annual leave Casual Friday Child care Disability insurance Health insurance Life insurance Marriage leave Parental leave Pension By country Sick leave United States Take-home vehicle Taxes Payroll tax Tax bracket Income tax Negative Disposable income Salary packaging Unreported employment Safety and health Crunch Epilepsy and employment Human factors and ergonomics Karoshi List of countries by rate of fatal workplace accidents Occupational burnout Occupational disease Occupational exposure limit Occupational health psychology Occupational injury Occupational noise Occupational stress Personal protective equipment Repetitive strain injury Right to sit United States Sick building syndrome Work accident Occupational fatality Workers' compensation Workers' right to access the toilet Workplace health promotion Workplace phobia Workplace wellness Equal opportunity Affirmative action Discrimination Equal pay for equal work Gender pay gap Glass ceiling Infractions Corporate collapses and scandals Accounting scandals Control fraud Corporate behaviour Corporate crime Exploitation of labour Dress code Employee handbook Employee monitoring Evaluation Labour law Sexual harassment Sleeping while on duty Wage theft Whistleblower Workplace bullying Workplace harassment Workplace incivility Willingness Boreout Careerism Civil conscription Conscription Critique of work Dead-end job Job satisfaction McJob Organizational commitment Refusal of work Slavery Bonded labour Human trafficking Labour camp Penal labour Peonage Truck wages Unfree labour Wage slavery Work ethic Work–life interface Downshifting Slow living Workaholic Termination At-will employment Dismissal Banishment room Constructive dismissal Wrongful dismissal Employee offboarding Exit interview Layoff Notice period Pink slip Resignation Letter of resignation Restructuring Retirement Mandatory retirement Microretirement Retirement planning Retirement spend-down Severance package Golden handshake Golden parachute Turnover Unemployment Barriers to entry Discouraged worker Economic depression Great Depression Long Depression Frictional unemployment Full employment Graduate unemployment Involuntary unemployment Jobless recovery Phillips curve Recession Great Recession Job losses caused by the Great Recession Lists of recessions Recession-proof job Reserve army of labour Structural unemployment Technological unemployment Types of unemployment Unemployment benefits Unemployment Convention, 1919 Unemployment extension List of countries by unemployment rate Employment-to-population ratio List Wage curve Youth unemployment Public programs Workfare Unemployment insurance Make-work job Job creation program Job creation index Job guarantee Employer of last resort Guaranteed minimum income Right to work Historical: U.S.A.: Civil Works Administration Works Progress Administration Comprehensive Employment and Training Act See also Bullshit job Busy work Credentialism and educational inflation Emotional labor Evil corporation Going postal Kiss up kick down Labor rights Make-work job Narcissism in the workplace Post-work society Presenteeism Psychopathy in the workplace Sunday scaries Slow movement (culture) Toxic leader Toxic workplace Wage compression Working poor Workhouse See also templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of occupations Aspects of organizations Aspects of workplaces Corporate titles Critique of work Organized labor v t e Generations In the Western world Lost Generation Greatest Generation Silent Generation Baby boomers Generation X Millennials Generation Z Generation Alpha Generation Beta (proposed name) Cuspers Interbellum Generation Generation Jones Xennials Zillennials Related Boomerang Generation Coronials Me generation MTV Generation Country-specific China Post-70s Post-80s Post-90s Czechoslovakia Husák's Children Iran Burnt Generation Japan Satori generation Poland Generation of Columbuses Romania Decreței Singapore Pioneer Generation Merdeka Generation South Korea 386 Generation Sampo generation Taiwan Strawberry generation United States Millennials Generation Z Vietnam 9X Generation Types Future generations Immigrant generations Revolutionary generation Concepts Child tax credit Filial responsibility laws Generation gap Generational accounting Generationism Intergenerationality Equity Policy Shared site Struggle Parent–offspring conflict Parental dividend Parental investment Cost of raising a child Old-age-security hypothesis Sandwich generation Strauss–Howe generational theory Tax on childlessness Theory of generations Transgenerational design Voluntary childlessness Related Beat Generation Digital divide Digital native OK boomer The Greatest Generation Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐fxr5r
Cached time: 20250816154054
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.353 seconds
Real time usage: 1.615 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7976/1000000
Revision size: 71909/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 251998/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8050/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 305322/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.908/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19914111/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1357.486      1 -total
 43.23%  586.889      1 Template:Reflist
 11.98%  162.601     16 Template:Cite_book
 11.78%  159.883     31 Template:Cite_web
  8.78%  119.224      1 Template:Etymology
  6.97%   94.574      1 Template:Wikt-lang
  6.68%   90.740     12 Template:Cite_journal
  6.39%   86.811      1 Template:Personal_finance
  6.26%   85.040      1 Template:Sidebar
  5.45%   73.965      8 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43613:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816154054 and revision id 1303800276. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pension&oldid=1303800276 " Categories : Pensions Personal finance Hidden categories: All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from April 2023 Harv and Sfn no-target errors CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles needing additional references from October 2015 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles in need of updating from April 2020 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with unsourced statements from July 2016 Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pension 63 languages Add topic

