Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Achievements 3 Wprks 4 References Toggle the table of contents Al-Khazini 25 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa Kurdî مصرى 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Persian astronomer and mechanician (1100–1200) This article is about the 12th century scientist. For the 10th century astronomer and physician, see Abū Ja'far al-Khāzin .

al-Khazini Born 11th century Seljuk Empire Died 12th century Occupation Scientist Era Islamic Golden Age Scientific career Fields Astronomy , mathematics , physics , mechanics , metallurgy Abū al-Fath Abd al-Rahman Mansūr al-Khāzini or simply al-Khāzini ( Persian : أبوالفتح عبدالرحمن منصور الخازنی ; flourished 1115–1130) was an astronomer , mechanician and physicist of Byzantine Greek origin who lived during the Seljuk Empire .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] His astronomical tables , written under the patronage of Sultan Sanjar ( Zīj al-Sanjarī , 1115), are considered to be one of the major works in mathematical astronomy of the medieval period.

[ 5 ] : 107 He is considered to have been one of the greatest scientists of his era, [ 6 ] among the greatest makers of scientific instruments of any time, [ 7 ] and as "the physicist of all physicists".

[ 8 ] Al-Khazini is one of the few Islamic astronomers to be known for doing original observations.

[ 9 ] He provided the positions of fixed stars, and for oblique ascensions and time-equations for the latitude of Marv in which he was based.

[ 10 ] : 197 He also wrote extensively on various calendrical systems and on the various manipulations of the calendars.

[ 5 ] He also devised the world's most precise instrument for weighing ordinary objects, determining specific gravities, and even examining the composition of alloys. On the basis of his detailed description, it has been possible to reconstruct his complex mechanism, which he dubbed "The Comprehensive Balance".

[ 11 ] Modern study affirms his claim to its extraordinary accuracy of 1:60,000.

[ 11 ] Al-Khazini was the author of an encyclopedia on scales and water-balances called The Book of the Balance of Wisdom ( Kitab Mizan al-Hikmah, 1121 ), which explored theories of density, specific gravities of metals, precious stones, and liquids, as well as principles of equilibrium.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The book is thought to have been "one of the most sophisticated and advanced balances to be designed and manufactured in the medieval Islamic world", [ 14 ] and "the most comprehensive work on [ weighing ] in the Middle Ages , from any cultural area".

[ 11 ] Life [ edit ] Al-Khazini was an emancipated Greek slave in Marv, [ 10 ] : 197 [ 11 ] [ 15 ] which was then one of the most important cities of Khorasan . He got his name from his master ( Abu‘l Husayn ‘Alī ibn Muhammad al-Khāzin al-Marwazī ) who was the treasurer of Marv.

[ 5 ] : 107 The term khāzin was simply the title of the royal treasurer since the early Islamic period.

[ 16 ] His master made provisions so that al-Khazini could obtain a first-class education.

[ 5 ] Some believe that al-Khazini was a pupil of Omar Khayyam .

[ 15 ] While this is not known, he wrote about Khayyam, in particular, he gave a description of the water-balance invented by him (and improved upon by Al-Isfizari ).

[ 10 ] : 176 And according to some sources, he collaborated with him on the reformation of the Persian calendar in 1079.

[ 17 ] : 199 Al-Khazini was known for being a humble man. He refused thousands of Dinar for his works, saying he did not need much to live on because it was only his cat and himself in his household.

[ 12 ] Al-Khazini was one of only about twenty astronomers of the Islamic era who performed original observations.

[ 12 ] His works reached Byzantium in the 14th century, in particular, they were studied by George Chrysococces and later by Theodore Meliteniotes .

[ 5 ] : 107 Achievements [ edit ] Al Khazini seems to have been a high government official under Sanjar ibn Malikshah and the sultan of the Seljuk Empire . He did most of his work in Merv, where they are known for their libraries.

[ 12 ] His best-known works are "The Book of the Balance of Wisdom", "Treatise on Astronomical Wisdom", and "The Astronomical Tables for Sanjar".

[ 12 ] "The Book of the Balance of Wisdom" is an encyclopedia of medieval mechanics and hydrostatics composed of eight books with fifty chapters.

[ 12 ] It is a study of the hydrostatic balance and the ideas behind statics and hydrostatics, it also covers other unrelated topics.

[ 12 ] There are four different manuscripts of "The Book of the Balance of Wisdom" that have survived.

[ 12 ] The balance al-Khazini built for Sanjar's treasury was modeled after the balance al-Asfizari, who was a generation older than al-Khazini, built.

[ 12 ] Sanjar's treasurer out of fear destroyed al-Asfizari's balance; he was filled with grief when he heard the news.

[ 12 ] Al-Khazini called his balance "combined balance" to show honor towards Al-Asfizari.

[ 12 ] The meaning of the balance was a "balance of true judgment".

[ 12 ] The job of this balance was to help the treasury see what metals were precious and which gems were real or fake.

[ 12 ] In "The Book of the Balance of Wisdom" al-Khazini states many different examples from the Koran ways that his balance fits into religion.

[ 12 ] When al-Khazini explains the advantages of his balance he says that it "performs the functions of skilled craftsmen", its benefits are theoretical and practical precision.

[ 12 ] The "Treatise on Astronomical Wisdom" is a relatively short work.

[ 12 ] It has seven parts and each part is assigned to a different scientific instrument.

[ 12 ] The seven instruments include: a triquetrum, a dioptra, a "triangular instrument," a quadrant, devices involving reflection, an astrolabe, and simple tips for viewing things with the naked eye.

[ 12 ] The treatise describes each instrument and its uses.

[ 12 ] "The Astronomical Tables for Sanjar" is said to have been composed for Sultan Sanjar, the ruler of Merv and his balance was made for Sanjar's treasury.

[ 12 ] The tables in "The Astronomical Tables for Sanjar" are tables of holidays, fasts, etc.

[ 12 ] The tables are said to have the latitudes and longitudes of forty-three different stars, along with their magnitudes and (astrological) temperaments.

[ 12 ] It is said that al-Khazini's observations for this work were probably done in Merv in various observatories with high quality instruments.

[ 12 ] Wprks [ edit ] Al-Khazini, Book of the Balance of Wisdom (Eng).

A Wikimedia pdf of the English translation by Khanikoff and the editors of the Journal of the Oriental Society in 1859 from a single Arabic manuscript which is also reproduced. In 2015, the only available English translation.

Al-Khazini, Book of the Balance of Wisdom (English). A link to the same at the Internet Archive (see page 1 following).

References [ edit ] ^ Vernet, J. (2012-04-24).

"al-K̲h̲āzinī" .

Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

^ Winter, H. J. J. (February 1986). "Persian Science in Safavid Times".

The Cambridge History of Iran . pp.

581– 609.

doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521200943.012 .

ISBN 978-1-139-05498-0 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ "پژوهش‌های ایرانی | سرنوشت خازنی: داستان غم انگیز دانشمندان ایران" (in Persian) . Retrieved 2020-04-08 .

^ Durant, Will ; Durant, Ariel (2011) [1950].

The Story of Civilization: The Age of Faith .

Simon & Schuster . p. 352.

ISBN 9781451647617 .

^ a b c d e Montelle, C.

(2011). The ‘Well-Known Calendars’: Al-Khāzinī’s Description of Significant Chronological Systems for Medieval Mathematical Astronomy in Arabic. In Steele J. (Ed.), Calendars and Years II: Astronomy and Time in the Ancient and Medieval World (pp. 107-126). Oxford; Oakville: Oxbow Books.

^ Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (1992).

History of Civilizations of Central Asia . Motilal Banarsidass Publ. p. 215.

ISBN 978-81-208-1596-4 .

^ Robert E. Hall (1973). "Al-Khazini", Dictionary of Scientific Biography , Vol. VII, p. 336.

^ Afridi, Muhammad Adil (2013).

"Contribution of Muslim Scientists to the World: An Overview of Some Selected Fields" .

Revelation and Science .

3 (1): 44.

doi : 10.31436/revival.v3i01.86 (inactive 1 July 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Al-Khāzinī, Abu’l-Fath ‘Abd Al-Raḥmān [Sometimes Abū Manṣūr ’ Abd Al-Raḥmān or ’Abd Al-Rahmān Manṣūr] ., In: Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography ., 2008, pp. 335–351 ^ a b c Meyerhof, M. (1948). 'Alī al-Bayhaqī's Tatimmat Siwān al-Hikma: A Biographical Work on Learned Men of the Islam. Osiris, 8, 122-217.

^ a b c d Starr, S. Frederick (2015-06-02).

Lost Enlightenment: Central Asia's Golden Age from the Arab Conquest to Tamerlane . Princeton University Press. p. 397.

ISBN 978-0-691-16585-1 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w Al-Khāzinī, Abu'l-Fath 'Abd Al-Raḥmān [Sometimes Abū Manṣūr ' Abd Al-Raḥmān or 'Abd Al-Rahmān Manṣūr].

, Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography., 2008, pp.

335– 351 ^ Khanikoff, N. “Analysis and Extracts of كتاب ميزان الحكمة Book of the Balance of Wisdom, An Arabic Work on the Water-Balance, Written by ’Al-Khâzinî in the Twelfth Century.” Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. 6, 1858, pp. 1–128. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/592172 . Accessed 16 Dec. 2024.

^ Yassi, Yousef; Yassi, Reza (2020).

"Al-Khazini's Balance of Wisdom: A Masterpiece of Medieval Engineering" .

Nuncius .

36 (1): 49– 66.

doi : 10.1163/18253911-03503003 .

ISSN 0394-7394 .

^ a b Rosenfeld, B. (1994), Book reviews: Middle ages & renaissance.

, Journal of the History of Science in Society, pp. 85(4), 686 ^ Floor, Willem.

"kazinadar" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Retrieved 4 December 2017 .

^ Mehdi Aminrazavi, The Wine of Wisdom: The Life, Poetry and Philosophy of Omar Khayyam , Oneworld Publications (2007) v t e People of Khorasan Scientists Abu Hatam Isfizari Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Wafa Abu Ubayd Juzjani Abu Zayd Balkhi Alfraganus Ali Qushji Avicenna Birjandi Biruni Hasib Marwazi Ibn Hayyan Abu Ja'far al-Khazin Khazini Khojandi Khwarizmi Nasawi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Sijzi Philosophers Algazel Amiri Avicenna Farabi Haji Bektash Veli Nasir Khusraw Sijistani Shahrastani Islamic scholars Abu Dawud al-Sijistani Abu Barakat Nasafi Abu Hanifa Abu Hafs Nasafi Abu Layth Samarqandi Abu Mu'in Nasafi Abu Qasim Samarqandi Ansari Baghavi Bayhaqi Bazdawi Bukhari Dabusi Fatima Samarqandi Ghazali Ghaznawi Hakim Tirmidhi Hakim Nishapuri Ibn Hibban Ibn Mubarak Ishaq ibn Rahwayh Ibn Tayfour Sajawandi Juwayni Kasani Kashifi Lamishi Marghinani Maturidi Mulla al-Qari Muqatil Muslim Nasa'i Qushayri Razi Sabuni Sajawandi Sarakhsi Shaykh Tusi Taftazani Tha'labi Nishapuri Tirmidhi Yahya ibn Adam Zamakhshari Poets and artists Abu Sa'id Abu'l-Khayr Anvari Aruzi Samarqandi Asadi Tusi Attar Nishapuri Behzad Daqiqi Farrukhi Sistani Ferdowsi Jami Kashifi Nasir Khusraw Rabia Balkhi Rudaki Rumi Sanā'ī Historians and political figures Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu'l-Hasan Isfarayini Abu'l-Ma'ali Nasrallah Abu Muslim Khorasani Gardizi Ali-Shir Nava'i Ata-Malik Juvayni Aufi Abu Ali Bal'ami Gawhar Shad Ibn Khordadbeh Khalid ibn Barmak Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani Nizam al-Mulk Tahir ibn Husayn Yahya Barmaki Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk Shihab al-Nasawi v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Poland Israel Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Khazini&oldid=1305077627 " Categories : 12th-century alchemists 12th-century Iranian astronomers Astronomers of the medieval Islamic world 12th-century Iranian mathematicians Medieval Islamic philosophers Alchemists of the medieval Islamic world Greek Muslims Medieval physicists Iranian alchemists Medieval Iranian physicists Iranian slaves Iranian people of Greek descent Scholars from the Seljuk Empire Iranian chemists 12th-century deaths 11th-century births 12th-century slaves Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 22:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Al-Khazini 25 languages Add topic

