Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 On Machines Toggle On Machines subsection 2.1 Influence 3 Editions 4 Notes Toggle the table of contents Athenaeus Mechanicus 14 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano Magyar Malagasy Nederlands Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1st century BC author Illustration of a battering ram from an 11th- or 12th-century copy of On Machines Athenaeus Mechanicus is the author of a book on siegecraft , On Machines ( Ancient Greek : Περὶ μηχανημάτων , romanized : Perì mēchanēmátōn ). He is identified by modern scholars with Athenaeus of Seleucia , a member of the Peripatetic school active in the mid-to-late 1st century BC, at Rome and elsewhere.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Strabo mentions a contemporary of his, Athenaeus of Seleucia, a Peripatetic philosopher .

[ 3 ] He was for some time the leading demagogue in his native city, but afterwards came to Rome and became acquainted with Lucius Licinius Varro Murena . On the discovery of the plot which the latter, with Fannius Caepio , had entered into against Augustus , Athenaeus accompanied him in his flight. He was retaken, but pardoned by Augustus, as there was no evidence of his having taken a more active part in the plot.

[ 4 ] He is perhaps the same person as the writer mentioned by Diodorus , a historian who mentioned Semiramis .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] On Machines [ edit ] The treatise is addressed to Marcus Claudius Marcellus , and thus will have been composed before Marcellus' death in 23 BC (and possibly at a time when its addressee was preparing to go out on campaign).

[ 1 ] It describes a number of siege engines .  Among the earlier mechanicians cited as sources by Athenaeus are Agesistratus , Diades of Pella , and Philo of Byzantium .  Whitehead and Blyth analyze the treatise into a preface, a section on "good practice," a section on "bad practice," a section on Athenaeus' own innovations, and an epilogue "emphasizing preparation for war as a deterrent, and defending Athenaeus' own record against unnamed critics." [ 2 ] The work is technical but not without signs of Athenaeus' philosophical culture: "He comes across as a philosopher, and he expounds about time and opportunity, but also claims to be enough of a technical expert to devise new machines, and to describe old ones accurately." [ 1 ] Much of Athenaeus' work (9.4–27.6) is closely parallel to Vitruvius , De architectura 10.13–16, a fact probably to be explained by the two authors' shared reliance on a common source.

[ 6 ] Influence [ edit ] The tenth-century poliorketikon of Hero of Byzantium , Parangelmata Poliorcetica , draws on Athenaeus as a source.

Editions [ edit ] Carl(e) Wescher, Poliorcétique des Grecs .  Paris, 1867.  (online: Google Books , archive.org ) Rudolf Schneider, Griechische Poliorketiker .

Abhandlungen der königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen: philologisch-historische Klasse , neue Folge, 12:5.  Berlin, 1912.

George R. West, Athenaios Mechanicus, On Siege Machinery . M.A. thesis, University of British Columbia, 1969.

[1] David Whitehead, P.H. Blyth, Athenaeus Mechanicus, On Machines .

Historia-Einzelschrift , 182.   Stuttgart:  Franz Steiner Verlag, 2004.

ISBN 3-515-08532-7 Maurizio Gatto (ed.), Il Peri mechanematon di Ateneo meccanico. Edizione critica, traduzione, commento e note .

Aio 567.   Roma:  Aracne editrice, 2010.

ISBN 978-88-548-3102-5 Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Serafina Cuomo, review of Gatto 2010, Bryn Mawr Classical Review 2010.11.35 ^ a b Duncan B. Campbell, review of Whitehead and Blyth 2004, Bryn Mawr Classical Review 2005.07.63 ^ Strabo 14.5.4 ^ a b William Smith , Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology , p.

400 [ usurped ] .

^ Diodorus Siculus, 2.20.3 ^ Whitehead and Blyth 2004, p. 14 v t e Peripatetic philosophers Greek era Aristotle Eudemus Theophrastus Aristoxenus Chamaeleon Echecratides Phaenias Praxiphanes Neleus of Scepsis Dicaearchus Nicomachus Demetrius of Phalerum Strato of Lampsacus Clearchus Archestratus (music theorist) Hieronymus of Rhodes Lyco of Troas Aristo of Ceos Satyrus Critolaus Calliphon Diodorus of Tyre Erymneus Roman era Xenarchus of Seleucia Cratippus Apellicon of Teos Andronicus of Rhodes Aristo of Alexandria Boethus of Sidon Athenaeus Mechanicus Ammonius of Athens Alexander of Aegae Aristocles of Messene Aristocles of Pergamon Aristoxenus of Cyrene Aspasius Aristotle of Mytilene Adrastus Herminus Sosigenes Alexander of Aphrodisias Ptolemy-el-Garib Themistius Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Norway Sweden Vatican Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Athenaeus_Mechanicus&oldid=1292282443 " Categories : Ancient Greek military engineers Ancient Greek military writers Roman-era Peripatetic philosophers Roman-era philosophers in Rome 1st-century BC Greek philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 04:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Athenaeus Mechanicus 14 languages Add topic

