Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In European states Toggle In European states subsection 1.1 Scotland 1.2 United Kingdom 2 In United States 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Parental responsibility (access and custody) 11 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Italiano עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rights and privileges pertaining to parents and children "Parental rights" redirects here. For the civil rights movement related to family law, see Parents' rights movement . For the socially conservative movement related to education, see Parental rights movement .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Parental responsibility" access and custody – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Family law Family Marriage and other unions and status Types of marriages Cohabitation Concubinage Common-law marriage Civil union Domestic partnership Validity of marriages Marriage licence Marriage certificate Prenuptial agreement Matrimonial regime Void and Voidable marriages Annulment Marriageable age Sham marriage Amatonormativity Dissolution of marriages Divorce Adultery Grounds for divorce No-fault divorce Matrimonial Causes Act Legal separation Alimony Parenting plan Residence [UK (EW and NI)] Custody evaluator (US) Parenting coordinator (US) Children's issues Paternity DNA paternity testing Legitimacy Child custody Legal guardian Adoption Tender years doctrine Filial responsibility Contact & visitation CAFCASS [UK (EW)] Grandparent visitation UN Rights of the Child Children's rights Emancipation Foster care Ward Child support Paper abortion List of child abuse cases featuring long-term detention Private international law Private international law Divorce Marriage Hague Convention (adoption) International child abduction Hague Convention (child abduction) Hague Convention (maintenance) Family and criminal code (or criminal law) Bigamy Child abuse CPS (US) Child selling Domestic violence Incest Legality of incest Parental child abduction Parental duties Parents' rights Paternity fraud Paternal rights and abortion Right to family life v t e Parental responsibility [ 1 ] refers to the responsibility which underpin the relationship between the children and the children's parents and those adults who are granted parental responsibility by either signing a 'parental responsibility agreement' with the mother or getting a 'parental responsibility order' from a court. The terminology for this area of law now includes matters dealt with as contact (visitation in the United States) and residence (see Residence in English law ) in some states. Parental responsibilities are connected to Parents' rights and privileges .

[ 2 ] In European states [ edit ] Scotland [ edit ] In Scots law , issues relative to parental responsibilities are dealt with under the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, [ 3 ] which provides for the making of 'residence' (custody), 'contact' (access), and 'specific issue' orders. These may be applied for by anyone with an interest in a child, not merely parents.

[ 4 ] Under section 1 of the 1995 Act, parental responsibilities are, where practicable and in the best interests of the child, to: safeguard and promote the child's health, development and welfare; provide the child with appropriate direction and guidance; maintain personal relations and direct contact with the child; act as the child's legal representative.

These responsibilities last until the child is aged 16, with the exception of the responsibility to  provide the child with appropriate guidance, which lasts until the child is aged 18.  
Under section 2 of the 1995 Act those with parental responsibilities are given correlative rights to allow them to fulfill those responsibilities. These rights are: to have the child living with him or her or otherwise to regulate the child's residence; to appropriately control, direct or guide the child's upbringing; if the child is not living with him or her, to maintain personal relations and contact with the  child on a regular basis; to act as the child's legal representative.

Having PRRs entitles a parent to take key decisions relating to the child, such as where they will live and go to school, and what medical treatment they should receive. In addition, parents have an obligation to provide financial support for their children under the Family Law (Scotland) Act 1985 (c 37) and the Child Support Act 1991 (c 38). In certain circumstances, this obligation continues when the child in question is beyond the age at which the parents have parental responsibilities under section 1 of the 1995 Act. The child's mother (irrespective of whether she is married to the child's father (s3(1)(a))) and the child's father, if he is “married to the mother at the time of the child’s conception or subsequently” (s 3(1)(b)), have automatic rights. In line with Scottish Law Commission proposals in 1992, the Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006 has brought Scots law in line with English law to the extent that an unmarried father will obtain parental rights and responsibilities if he is registered as the father on the birth register. A married father's PRRs continue after divorce, unless they are specifically removed by a court.  If unmarried fathers or stepparents do not have PRRs, they must either make a Section 4 Agreement, or apply to the court under section 11 for rights.

United Kingdom [ edit ] According to the Children Act 1989 , Section 3, parental responsibility means "all the rights, duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which by law a parent of a child has in relation to the child and his property." [ 5 ] Section 2 states that if the mother and father are married to each other at the time of birth, both acquire parental responsibility, otherwise, the mother automatically acquires it and the father has three ways of acquiring it: a) he becomes registered as the child's father according to specific paragraphs or sub-paragraphs in the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953, the Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Scotland) Act 1965, or the Births and Deaths Registration (Northern Ireland) Order 1976 (b)he and the child's mother make a parental responsibility agreement in which he acquires parental responsibility for the child or (c)the court orders that he shall have parental responsibility for the child.

[ 5 ] This act also states the process for second female parents and step-parents, to acquire parental responsibility as well as the appointment of guardians. A court can only appoint a guardian to a child who has no parent with parental responsibility for him/her or if the individual with whom a child was to live according to an applicable child arrangement order has died.

[ 6 ] Parental responsibility cannot be transferred or surrendered, completely or in part. Individuals may delegate the responsibility to someone else but this doesn't mean that they aren't responsible anymore. In other words, they would still be liable for the child.

[ 7 ] In United States [ edit ] Citing a constitutional right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children, the U.S. Supreme Court in Troxel v. Granville , 530 U.S. 57 (2000), held that "the interest of parents in the care, custody and control of their children is perhaps the oldest of the fundamental liberty interests recognized by this Court."  This includes parents' fundamental right to make decisions concerning the care, custody, and control of their children, see, e. g., Stanley v. Illinois , 405 U. S. 645.

There is a presumption that fit parents act in their children's best interests, Parham v. J. R .

, 442 U. S. 584, 602. There is normally no reason for the State to inject itself into the private realm of the family to further question fit parents' ability to make the best decisions regarding their children, see, e.g., Reno v. Flores , 507 U. S. 292, 304.

In Meyer v. Nebraska , 262 U. S. 390, 399, 401 (1923), the Supreme Court held that the "liberty" protected by the Due Process Clause includes the right of parents to "establish a home and bring up children" and "to control the education of their own." Two years later, in Pierce v. Society of Sisters , 268 U. S. 510, 534-535 (1925), the Court again held that the "liberty of parents and guardians" includes the right "to direct the upbringing and education of children under their control." The Court explained in Pierce that "[t]he child is not the mere creature of the State; those who nurture him and direct his destiny have the right, coupled with the high duty, to recognize and prepare him for additional obligations." Id., at 535.

In Prince v. Massachusetts , 321 U. S. 158 (1944), the Court again confirmed that there is a constitutional dimension to the right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children. "It is cardinal with us that the custody, care and nurture of the child reside first in the parents, whose primary function and freedom include preparation for obligations the state can neither supply nor hinder." Id., at 166.  See also Wisconsin v. Yoder , 406 U. S. 205, 232 (1972) ("The history and culture of Western civilization reflect a strong tradition of parental concern for the nurture and upbringing of their children. This primary role of the parents in the upbringing of their children is now established beyond debate as an enduring American tradition"); Quilloin v. Walcott , 434 U. S. 246, 255 (1978) ("We have recognized on numerous occasions that the relationship between parent and child is constitutionally protected"); Parham v. J. R.

, 442 U. S. 584, 602 (1979) ("Our jurisprudence historically has reflected Western civilization concepts of the family as a unit with broad parental authority over minor children. Our cases have consistently followed that course"); and Santosky v. Kramer , 455 U. S. 745, 753 (1982) (discussing "[t]he fundamental liberty interest of natural parents in the care, custody, and management of their child").

"In light of this extensive precedent," the Court said in Troxel , "it cannot now be doubted that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment protects the fundamental right of parents to make decisions concerning the care, custody, and control of their children." See also [ edit ] Parents' rights movement Shared parenting Parenting plan Childrens centre List of parenting issues affecting separated parents Parental Rights Amendment to the United States Constitution References [ edit ] ^ "Parental rights and responsibilities: Who has parental responsibility - GOV.UK" .

www.gov.uk . Retrieved 2018-01-18 .

^ "European e-Justice Portal - Parental responsibility - child custody and contact rights" .

e-justice.europa.eu . Retrieved 2025-01-16 .

^ "Children (Scotland) Act 1995" .

www.legislation.gov.uk . Expert Participation . Retrieved 2018-02-17 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "Children (Scotland) Act 1995" .

www.legislation.gov.uk . Expert Participation . Retrieved 2018-02-17 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ a b "Children Act 1989" .

www.legislation.gov.uk . Expert Participation . Retrieved 2018-02-17 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "Family Law Act, 1995" .

^ "Children Act 1989" .

www.legislation.gov.uk . Expert Participation . Retrieved 2018-02-17 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) External links [ edit ] Rights and Obligations of Parents article in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Parenting Kinship terminology Parent Mother Father Adoptive Alloparenting Coparenting Extended family Foster care Noncustodial Nuclear family Orphaned Same-sex Shared parenting Single parent Blended family Surrogacy In loco parentis Theories · Areas Attachment theory Applied behavior analysis Behaviorism Child development Cognitive development Developmental psychology Human development Identity formation Introjection Love Maternal bond Nature versus nurture Parental investment Care work Cost of raising a child Paternal care Unpaid work Paternal bond Pediatrics Social emotional development Socialization Social psychology Styles Achievement ideology Atlas personality Attachment parenting Baby talk Buddha-like parenting Concerted cultivation Enmeshment Free-range parenting Gatekeeper parent Helicopter parent Nurturant parenting Reflective parenting Slow parenting Soccer mom Strict father model Taking Children Seriously Theybie Tiger parenting Work at home parent Techniques After-school activity Allowance Bedtime Child care Co-sleeping Dishabituation Education Habituation Homeschooling Identification (psychology) Introjection Kommune 1 Latchkey kid Moral development Normative social influence Parent management training Play ( date ) Role model Social integration Television The talk (race) The talk (sex education) Toy ( educational ) Positive Parenting Program Child discipline Blanket training Corporal punishment in the home Curfew Grounding Positive discipline Tactical ignoring Time-out Abuse Adverse childhood experiences Child abandonment Child abuse Child labour Child neglect Cinderella effect Codependency Deadbeat parent Dysfunctional family Effects of domestic violence Incest Management of domestic violence Narcissistic parent Parental abuse by children Parental alienation Stress in early childhood Legal Child custody Child support Disownment Family disruption Right to family life Marriage Parental leave Parental responsibility Parents' rights Paternity Shared parenting Experts Mary Ainsworth Diana Baumrind John Bowlby T. Berry Brazelton Rudolf Dreikurs David Elkind Jo Frost Haim Ginott Thomas Gordon Alan E. Kazdin Truby King Annette Lareau Penelope Leach Matthew Sanders William Sears B. F. Skinner Benjamin Spock Organizations Families Need Fathers Mothers' Union National Childbirth Trust National Fatherhood Initiative National Parents Organization Parent–teacher association Parents Against Child Exploitation v t e Family rights Elements Prenatal rights Children's rights Matrimonial rights Mothers' rights Youth rights Reproductive rights Right to family life Rights movements Children's Fathers' Mothers' rights Parents' Grandparents See also Family law Parental responsibility Parental liability Related Human rights Authority control databases : National Germany Japan Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parental_responsibility_(access_and_custody)&oldid=1288445716 " Categories : Parental responsibility (access and custody) Child custody European Union law Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2007 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 2 May 2025, at 17:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parental responsibility (access and custody) 11 languages Add topic

