Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Iran 2 Iraq 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Legacy and memory of the Iran–Iraq War 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Legacy and memory of the Iran–Iraq War" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs attention from an expert in military history .  See the talk page for details.

WikiProject Military history may be able to help recruit an expert.

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Iran–Iraq War was fought for nearly eight years and left a lasting legacy on Iran and Iraq . The Battle of al-Qadisiyya was the engagement between the Arab-Muslim army and the Sāsānian Iranian army during the first period of Muslim expansion which resulted in the Arab-Muslim conquest of Iran . In the centuries following the battle, Qādisiyyah became enshrined in Muslim collective memory as a symbol of the successes of early Islamic history. Already during the period of the Crusades, Muslim leaders referred to Qādisiyyah as a point of reference to which they compared their own achievements.

[ 1 ] Academic studies of the narratives of Qādisiyyah and other early Islamic battles have revealed numerous topoi that make up a common schema of the Arab-Muslim conquests; the generation of these literary layers seems to have begun immediately, as story-tellers ( quṣṣāṣ ) embellished their narrative in order to create an entertaining story or to glorify past ancestors.

[ 2 ] Iran [ edit ] The war is known is Iran as the Difa-e-Muqaddas ("Sacred Defence") and the Jang-e Tahmili ("the Imposed War").

[ 3 ] Iraq [ edit ] In modern times, Qādisiyyah saw a revival beginning with the tensions leading up to the Iran–Iraq War .

Ṣaddam Ḥussein and the Ba’ath régime of Iraq began referring frequently to the historical battle, seeking to cast the contemporary hostilities as a replay of the ancient encounter. In official Iraqi rhetoric, the war even became known as Qādisiyyat-Ṣaddām , or "Saddam's Qādisiyyah". The state reinforced this rhetoric through a conscious pattern of nomenclature, naming provinces, newspapers, army battalions, and awards after Qādisiyyah, issuing currency, stamps, and medals featuring the battle, and by producing an all-Arab film entitled Qādisiyyah .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] One of the more famous examples of the use of Qādisiyyah is the Victory Arch ( Arabic : قوس النصر ; transliteration , Qaws an-Naṣr ), an Iraqi monument constructed by Saddam's régime to commemorate its "victory" in the Iran–Iraq War. Iraq's leading sculptor , Adil Kamil , won the commission to design and execute the construction of the arches, which were based on a concept sketch made Saddam Hussein. The design consists of a pair of massive hands emerging from the ground, each holding a 140-foot (43m) long sword, modelled after the imagined sword used by the Muslim general at Qādisiyyah. A small flagpole rises from the point where the swords meet, at a point about 130 feet (40 m) above the ground. Kamil used photographs and plaster casts of Saddam's forearms to model for the design of the hands. When Kamil died in 1987, with the monument incomplete, his position was assumed by fellow artist Mohammed Ghani Hikmat . Ghani personally took an impression of one of Saddam's thumbs, and the resulting fingerprint was added to the mold for one of the arches' thumbs. Nearby this monument is the Monument to the Unknown Soldier , which housed in its museum Saddam's personal firearm alongside the alleged sword of Saʿd, the Muslim commander at Qādisiyyah.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Scholars have argued that Saddam's choice of Qādisiyyah reflects the emotive power of religious history in the Middle East; invoking its name imbues subconscious meaning to its audience.

[ 10 ] Qādisiyyah has continued to appear in the Middle East today, as many Muslims and Arab nationalists have named training bases, religious courts, and mosques after the engagement and have cited it in their speeches and sermons.

[ 11 ] In addition, Qādisiyyah graces the names of schools, sports clubs, bridges, businesses, and medical facilities across the Middle East and even in Europe.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Battle of al-Qadisiyyah Ṣaddam Ḥussein Victory Arch (also called the ‘Swords of Qādisīyah’) Iran–Iraq War Iran–Iraq relations Arab-Muslim conquest of Iran Arab-Muslim conquests Sasanian dynasty Shāh-nāmeh References [ edit ] ^ Lewental, ‘Qādisiyyah, then and now’, p. 379.

^ See Donner, Early Islamic conquests and Noth, Early Arabic historical tradition . See Lewental, ‘Qādisiyyah, then and now’, for a study of this process as it applies specifically to Qādisiyyah.

^ Khosronejad 2013 , p. 3.

^ Lewental, ‘Qādisiyyah, then and now’, pp. 390–399 ^ Rida, ‘Qadisiyya’, 40–43 ^ Bengio, Saddam's Word , pp. 172–175.

^ Makiya, The Monument , pp. 1–6 ^ Lewental, ‘Qādisiyyah, then and now’, pp. 396–397 ^ Lewental, ‘Battle of al-Qādisiyyah’, online .

^ Lewental, ‘Qādisiyyah, then and now’, pp. 436, 470.

^ Lewental, ‘Qādisiyyah, then and now’, pp. 453–457.

^ Lewental, ‘Battle of al-Qādisiyyah’, online .

Bibliography [ edit ] Baram, Amatzia.

Culture, history, and ideology in the formation of Baʿthist Iraq, 1968–69 . New York City: St Martin’s Press, 1991.

Bengio, Ofra.

Saddam’s word: Political discourse in Iraq . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.

Donner, Fred .

The Early Islamic conquests . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981.

Makiya, Kanan .

The Monument: Art, vulgarity, and responsibility in Iraq . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.

Lewental, D Gershon. ‘ The Battle of al-Qādisiyyah and modern Middle Eastern discourse ’.

DGLnotes.com . 21 November 2005.

Lewental, D Gershon. ‘ Qādisiyyah, then and now: A Case study of history and memory, religion, and nationalism in Middle Eastern discourse ’, Ph.D dissertation. UMI Dissertation Services, 2011.

Lewental, D Gershon. ‘ “Saddam’s Qadisiyyah”: Religion and history in the service of state ideology in Baʿthi Iraq ’.

Middle Eastern Studies 50.6 (November 2014): 891-910.

Khosronejad, Pedram (2013).

Unburied Memories: The Politics of Bodies of Sacred Defense Martyrs in Iran . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9781135711603 .

Noth, Albrecht (in collaboration with Lawrence Conrad ).

The Early Arabic historical tradition: A Source-critical study . Translated from German by Michael Bonner. Studies in late antiquity and early Islam, 3. 2nd edition. Princeton: Darwin Press, 1994.

Rida, Muhammad. ‘Qadisiyya: A New stage in Arab cinema’.

Ur 3 (1981): 40-43.

Vaglieri, Laura Veccia . ‘al-Ḳādisiyya’. In Encyclopaedia of Islam . 2nd edition. Leiden: Brill Publishers , 1960–2005. (pp. IV 384-387) v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legacy_and_memory_of_the_Iran–Iraq_War&oldid=1265001450 " Categories : 1980s in Iraq Muslim conquest of Persia Iran–Iraq War Historiography of Iran Cold War historiography Historiography of Iraq Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from April 2024 Articles needing expert attention from April 2024 All articles needing expert attention Military history articles needing expert attention Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 24 December 2024, at 15:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legacy and memory of the Iran–Iraq War 2 languages Add topic

