Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical development Toggle Historical development subsection 1.1 After denazification 1.2 Religion and education 1.3 Philosophy 1.4 Culture 2 Actions of other European countries 3 Analogous processes elsewhere 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Sources Toggle the table of contents Vergangenheitsbewältigung 17 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Societal activities for coping with the past You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,831 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Vergangenheitsbewältigung]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Vergangenheitsbewältigung}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe in Berlin , Germany Vergangenheitsbewältigung [ a ] ( German: [fɛɐ̯ˈɡaŋənhaɪtsbəˌvɛltɪɡʊŋ] , "struggle of overcoming the past" or "work of coping with the past") [ 1 ] is a German compound noun describing the moral and political effort to confront the crimes of the past. Since the late 20th century, this concept has played a central role in examining how post-1945 German literature , society and culture reflect on the catastrophic legacy of Nazism , a regime marked by militarism , expansionism and genocide . In Germany, the term arose from a profound reckoning with the atrocities of the Holocaust , the war crimes of the Wehrmacht and the ideological terror inflicted in the name of the German people .

Vergangenheitsbewältigung thus represents not just historical reflection but a rejection of Nazi ideology and an effort to build a future grounded in peace and accountability.

Following the reunification of 1990 and the subsequent fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, the scope of Vergangenheitsbewältigung broadened to include critical engagement with the socialist legacy of the former German Democratic Republic (GDR). While anti-communist narratives often overshadow this period, many historians and citizens continue to assert the GDR's contributions to antifascist memory and social equity. Unlike Nazi Germany, the GDR officially promoted antifascism and identified Nazism as the chief enemy of the working class . In this context, Vergangenheitsbewältigung may involve not only coming to terms with state surveillance or authoritarian excesses in the GDR, but also defending its historical efforts to resist Nazism.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Historical development [ edit ] Vergangenheitsbewältigung describes the attempt to analyze, digest and learn to live with the past, in particular the Holocaust . The focus on learning is much in the spirit of philosopher George Santayana 's oft-quoted observation that "those who forget the past are condemned to repeat it". It is a technical term also used in English that was coined after 1945 in West Germany, relating specifically to the atrocities committed in Nazi Germany , and to both historical and contemporary concerns about the extensive degree to which Nazism compromised and co-opted many German cultural, religious, and political institutions. The term therefore deals at once with the concrete responsibility of the German state ( West Germany assumed the legal obligations of the Reich ) and of individual Germans for what took place "under Hitler", and with questions about the roots of legitimacy in a society whose development of the Enlightenment collapsed in the face of Nazi ideology .

After denazification [ edit ] Historically, Vergangenheitsbewältigung often is seen as the logical "next step" after a denazification drive under both the Allied Occupation and by the Christian Democratic Union government of Konrad Adenauer , and began in the late 1950s and early 1960s, roughly the period in which the work of the Wiederaufbau (reconstruction) became less absorbing and urgent. Having replaced the institutions and power structures of Nazism, the aim of liberal Germans was to deal with the guilt of recent history.

Vergangenheitsbewältigung is marked by learning from the past in ways such as honestly admitting that such a past did indeed exist, attempting to remedy as far as possible the wrongs committed, and attempting to move on from that past.

Religion and education [ edit ] The German churches, of which only a minority played a significant role in the resistance to Nazism , have led the way in this process. They have notably developed a unique German postwar theology of repentance . At the regular mass church rallies, the Lutheran Kirchentag and the Catholic Katholikentag , for example, have developed this theme as a leitmotiv of Christian youth.

Vergangenheitsbewältigung has been expressed by the society through its schools, where in most German states the centrally-written curriculum provides each child with repeated lessons on different aspects of Nazism in German history, politics and religion classes from the fifth grade onwards, related to their maturity. Associated school trips may have destinations of concentration camps . Jewish Holocaust survivors are often invited to schools as guest speakers, though the passage of time limits these opportunities as their generation has aged.

Philosophy [ edit ] In philosophy, Theodor Adorno 's writings include the lecture "Was bedeutet: Aufarbeitung der Vergangenheit?" ("What is meant by 'working through the past'?"), a subject related to his thinking of "after Auschwitz" in his later work. He delivered the lecture on 9 November 1959 at a conference on education held in Wiesbaden.

[ 4 ] Writing in the context of a new wave of antisemitic attacks against synagogues and Jewish community institutions occurring in West Germany at that time, Adorno rejected the contemporary catch phrase "working through the past" as misleading. He argued that it masked a denial, rather than signifying the kind of critical self-reflection that Freudian theory called for in order to "come to terms" with the past.

[ 4 ] Adorno's lecture is often seen as consisting in part of a variably implicit and explicit critique of the work of Martin Heidegger , whose formal ties to the Nazi Party are well known. Heidegger had attempted to provide a historical conception of Germania as a philosophical notion of German origin and destiny (later he would speak of "the West").

Alexander García Düttmann 's Das Gedächtnis des Denkens. Versuch über Heidegger und Adorno ( The Memory of Thought: An Essay on Heidegger and Adorno , translated by Nicholas Walker) attempts to treat the philosophical value of these seemingly opposed and certainly incompatible terms "Auschwitz" and "Germania" in the philosophy of both men.

Culture [ edit ] In the cultural sphere, the term Vergangenheitsbewältigung is associated with a movement in German literature whose notable authors include Günter Grass and Siegfried Lenz . Lenz's novel Deutschstunde and Grass's Danziger Trilogie both deal with childhoods under Nazism.

The erection of public monuments to Holocaust victims has been a tangible commemoration of Germany's Vergangenheitsbewältigung .

Concentration camps , such as Dachau , Buchenwald , Bergen-Belsen and Flossenbürg , are open to visitors as memorials and museums. Most towns have plaques on walls marking the spots where particular atrocities took place.

When the seat of government was moved from Bonn to Berlin in 1999, an extensive "Holocaust memorial" , designed by architect Peter Eisenman , was planned as part of the extensive development of new official buildings in the district of Berlin-Mitte ; it was opened on 10 May 2005.  The informal name of this memorial, the Holocaust-Mahnmal, is significant. It does not translate easily: "Holocaust Cenotaph" would be one sense, but the noun Mahnmal, which is distinct from the term Denkmal (typically used to translate "memorial") carries the sense of "admonition", "urging", "appeal", or "warning", rather than "remembrance" as such. The work is formally known as Das Denkmal für die ermordeten Juden Europas (English translation, "The Memorial for the Murdered Jews of Europe"). Some controversy attaches to it precisely because of this formal name and its exclusive emphasis on Jewish victims. As Eisenman acknowledged at the opening ceremony, "It is clear that we won't have solved all the problems – architecture is not a panacea for evil – nor will we have satisfied all those present today, but this cannot have been our intention." Actions of other European countries [ edit ] In Austria , ongoing arguments about the nature and significance of the Anschluss , and unresolved disputes about legal expressions of obligation and liability, have led to very different concerns, and to a far less institutionalized response by the government. Since the late 20th century, observers and analysts have expressed concerns about the ascent of " Haiderism ".

[ b ] Poland has maintained a museum, archive, and research institute at Oświęcim (German: Auschwitz ) ever since a 2 July 1947 act of the Polish Parliament . In the same year, Czechoslovakia established what was known as the "National Suffering Memorial" and later as the Terezín memorial in Terezín , Czech Republic. This site during the Holocaust was known as the concentration camp of Theresienstadt . In the context of varying degrees of Communist orthodoxy in both countries during the period of Soviet domination of Eastern Europe through much of the late 20th century, historical research into the Holocaust was politicized to varying degrees.

Marxist doctrines of class struggle were often overlaid onto generally received histories, which tended to exclude both acts of collaboration and antisemitism in these nations.

The advance of the Einsatzgruppen , Aktion Reinhardt , and many other significant events in the Holocaust occurred in German-occupied Europe , outside the present-day borders of the Federal Republic. The history of the memorials and archives which have been erected at these sites in eastern Europe is associated with the Communist regimes that ruled these areas for more than four decades after World War II . The Nazis promoted an idea of an expansive German nation extending into territories where ethnic Germans had previously settled. They invaded and controlled much of Central and Eastern Europe, unleashing violence against various Slavic groups, as well as Jews, Communists , prisoners of war , etc. After the war, the eastern European nations expelled German settlers as well as long settled ethnic Germans (the Volksdeutsche ) as a reaction to Nazi Germany's attempt to claim the eastern lands on behalf of ethnic Germans.

Analogous processes elsewhere [ edit ] Main article: Truth and reconciliation commission In some of its aspects, Vergangenheitsbewältigung can be compared to the attempts of other democratic countries to raise consciousness and come to terms with earlier periods of governmental and insurgency abuses, such as the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission , which investigated human rights abuses by both the National Party Government in South Africa under apartheid and by senior members of the African National Congress including Winnie Mandela and by the ANC's paramilitary wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe .

Comparisons have been made with the Soviet process of glasnost and perestroika , though this was less focused on the past than achieving a level of open criticism necessary for progressive reform to take place.

It was widely assumed during this time that the Communist Party of the Soviet Union would maintain its monopoly on power. American journalist David Remnick has argued that once Memorial was founded by former Soviet dissidents in 1987 and began independently researching and publicizing accurate historical information about Soviet war crimes and the location of mass graves containing the victims of the Red Terror , Stalinism , and the Gulag ; the clock began ticking on the continued survival of the Communist system.

Since the collapse of the Soviet Union , the continuing efforts in nations of eastern Europe and the independent states of the former Soviet Union to research and publicize the Communist and Stalinist past, as well as its countless human rights abuses, is sometimes referred to as a post-communist equivalent to Vergangenheitsbewältigung.

The well-documented history of Japanese war crimes , both before and during World War II is something the then-future Emperor Naruhito expressed his concerns about in February 2015, regarding how accurately such events are remembered in 21st century Japan.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Functionalism versus intentionalism Bottom-up approach of the Holocaust Nazi foreign policy debate Auschwitz bombing debate Culture of Remembrance - Erinnerungskultur in German Historiography of Germany Historikerstreit Clean Wehrmacht Sonderweg Victim theory , a theory that Austria was a victim of Nazism following the Anschluss Street name controversy Transitional justice Transitional Justice Institute Truth-seeking Debate over the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki " I Apologize " campaign , a grassroots' initiative in Turkey German nationality law: Victims of Nazi persecution Stolpersteine , memorial-blocks placed outside the former homes of concentration camp victims Pact of forgetting War guilt question Notes [ edit ] ^ A compound noun of die Vergangenheit "the past" and Bewältigung "the overcoming of problems", often used in psychological contexts for coming to terms with repressed and incriminating mental injuries and guilt.

^ Haider's growing popularity was protested by many Austrians as proto- or neo-fascism after electoral successes in the Austrian legislative election of 1999 and his entry into coalition government with the Austrian People's Party .

References [ edit ] ^ "Vergangenheitsbewältigung" .

www.collinsdictionary.com . Collins German-English Dictionary . Retrieved 25 July 2025 .

^ Berdahl, Daphne (1999).

Where the World Ended: Reunification and Identity in the German Borderland . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. p. 215.

^ "Duden | Vergangenheitsbewältigung | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition" (in German). Duden.de . Retrieved 28 April 2017 .

Auseinandersetzung einer Nation mit einem problematischen Abschnitt ihrer jüngeren Geschichte, in Deutschland besonders mit dem Nationalsozialismus ^ a b Boos, Sonja (2014).

Introduction to Theodor W. Adorno's "Was bedeutet: Aufarbeitung der Vergangenheit" (The Meaning of Working through the Past). A media supplement to: Boos, Speaking the Unspeakable in Postwar Germany: Toward a Public Discourse on the Holocaust . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press . The website (under the banner of the "Signale" book series on modern German literature and culture) includes the audio recording of Adorno's lecture, along with links to the German text and an English translation.

^ Itasaka, Kiko (24 February 2015).

"World War II Should Not Be Forgotten, Japan's Prince Naruhito Says" .

nbcnews.com . NBC News . Retrieved 9 April 2015 .

Japan's Crown Prince has spoken about the need to "correctly" remember World War II in an extremely rare public statement that comes amid a chorus of calls to play down the country's war crimes..."It is important to look back on the past humbly and correctly," Crown Prince Naruhito said during a press conference marking his 55th birthday.

Sources [ edit ] Frei, Norbert; Vergangenheitspolitik. Die Anfänge der Bundesrepublik und die NS-Vergangenheit . Munich: C.H. Beck, 1996.  [In English as Adenauer's Germany and the Nazi Past: The Politics of Amnesty and Integration . New York: Columbia University Press ] Geller, Jay Howard; Jews in Post-Holocaust Germany . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 2005.

Herf, Jeffrey; Divided Memory: The Nazi Past in the Two Germanys . Cambridge: Harvard University Press , 1997.

Maier, Charles S.; The Unmasterable Past: History, Holocaust, and German National Identity . Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1988.

Maislinger, Andreas ; Coming to Terms with the Past: An International Comparison.

In Nationalism, Ethnicity, and Identity. Cross National and Comparative Perspectives , ed. Russel F. Farnen. New Brunswick and London: Transaction Publishers , 2004.

Moeller, Robert G.; War Stories: The Search for a Usable Past in the Federal Republic of Germany . Berkeley: University of California Press , 2001.

Moeller, Robert G. (ed.); West Germany Under Construction: Politics, Society and Culture in the Adenauer Era . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press , 1997.

Pross, Christian; Paying for the Past: The Struggle over Reparations for Surviving Victims of the Nazi Terror . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press , 1998.

Transitional Justice and Dealing with the Past" , in: Berghof Glossary on Conflict Transformation. 20 notions for theory and practice. Berlin: Berghof Foundation, 2012.

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Historical negationism Denialism Disinformation Knowledge falsification Pseudohistory school textbook controversies Rationalization Victim blaming Genocide denial / denial of mass killings and atrocities Armenian genocide Atrocities against Indigenous peoples Bosnian genocide Cambodian genocide Genocide of Serbs during WWII Croatian Wikipedia Holodomor Katyn massacre Khojaly massacre Nanjing Massacre U.S. cover-up of Japanese war crimes Rohingya genocide Rwandan genocide Denial of the 7 October attacks Holocaust Austria victim theory Clean Wehrmacht Rommel / Speer myth Italians, the good people Trivialization Double genocide theory Vichy syndrome Sonderaktion 1005 Other whitewashing of governments or time periods Cuba de ayer Czechoslovak myth Denial of state terrorism in Argentina Driftwood theory Ferdinand Marcos apologism Lost Cause of the Confederacy Dunning School Negationism of the military dictatorship of Brazil [ pt ] / Chile Merry England Neo-Stalinism Operation Legacy (UK) Other manifestations Allah as a lunar deity Ancient astronauts Ancient Egyptian race controversy Antiquization Book burnings list Censorship of Great Zimbabwe Christ myth theory Dacianism Damnatio memoriae Destruction of cultural heritage Islamic State Saudi Arabia Gaza Strip Lebanon Sudan Myth of English aid [ es ] Izbrisani Khazar hypothesis LGBT erasure Like sheep to the slaughter Myth of the golden exile Phantom time hypothesis / New chronology Western Pseudohistory Theory Shakespeare authorship question Territorial losses of Thailand Azerbaijan Destruction of Armenian heritage Cemetery in Julfa Nakhchivan [ ru ] Nizami Ganjavi Western Azerbaijan Germany Borussian myth Myth of Langemarck [ de ] Stab-in-the-back myth Israel / Palestine Denial of the 7 October attacks Nakba denial Temple denial There was no such thing as Palestinians Russia Allegations of genocide in Donbas All-Russian nation On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians Soviet Union Censorship of images Denial of Crimean Tatars Turkey Denial of Kurds History Thesis Sun Language Theory United States 1776 Commission Irish slaves myth Vietnam stab-in-the-back myth Organizations Adelaide Institute ASİMKK Centre for the Study of the Causes of the War CODOH Dalit Voice FactCheckArmenia.com Gesellschaft zur Rechtlichen und Humanitären Unterstützung HIAG Iğdır Genocide Memorial and Museum Institute for Armenian Research Institute for Historical Review Nippon Kaigi Turkish Historical Society United Daughters of the Confederacy Zeitgeschichtliche Forschungsstelle Ingolstadt Publications A Town Betrayed A Verdade Sufocada The Birth of a Nation Coverage of the Hillsborough disaster by The Sun Did Six Million Really Die?

Falsifiers of History Flatline Folk og Land A History of the Palestinian People (2017) Hitler Diaries The Hoax of the Twentieth Century I Am More Than a Wolf Whistle Jasenovac – istina Journal of Historical Review Leuchter report The Other Side: The Secret Relationship Between Nazism and Zionism The Ottoman Lieutenant Report about Case Srebrenica Conferences International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust Publishing houses Arndt Verlag J.J. Fedorowicz Publishing Munin Verlag Nation Europa Verlag Legal status Statute law Austria Belgium France Germany Case law R v Zundel (1992) Lehideux and Isorni v France (1998) Irving v Penguin Books Ltd (2000) Perinçek v. Switzerland (2013) International law Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime Right to truth Related Historical fiction Historical revisionism Historical misconceptions Accusation in a mirror Ash heap of history Censorship Cherry picking Conspiracy theories False attribution Furtive fallacy Genocide justification Propaganda Category v t e The Holocaust in Germany Part of The Holocaust By region Austria Bohemia and Moravia East Upper Silesia Luxembourg Sudetenland Preceding events Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses Anti-Jewish legislation Aryanization Judenvermögensabgabe Kristallnacht in Leipzig Mass arrests Emigration Deportation Fabrikaktion Camps Bergen-Belsen Buchenwald Dachau Flossenbürg Hinzert Mittelbau-Dora Neuengamme Ravensbrück Sachsenhausen Rescue Rosenstrasse protest Operation 7 Jews in hiding in Berlin Bund: Gemeinschaft für ein sozialistisches Leben Aftermath German collective guilt Vergangenheitsbewältigung Related articles History of the Jews in Germany Nazi Germany Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐hrnhg
Cached time: 20250814234018
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.679 seconds
Real time usage: 0.869 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7705/1000000
Revision size: 19402/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 404396/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12109/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 48/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 60681/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.307/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19485247/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  629.570      1 -total
 38.16%  240.239     21 Template:Navbox
 34.95%  220.062      1 Template:Historiography
 34.52%  217.320      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 18.33%  115.396     40 Template:Ill
 14.78%   93.053      2 Template:Reflist
 12.84%   80.868      1 Template:IPA
 11.78%   74.185      3 Template:Cite_web
 10.67%   67.197      2 Template:Ambox
  9.98%   62.839      1 Template:Expand_German Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1036945:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814234018 and revision id 1302366796. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vergangenheitsbewältigung&oldid=1302366796 " Categories : Vergangenheitsbewältigung German literature German philosophy Holocaust historiography Aftermath of the Holocaust Truth and reconciliation commissions German words and phrases Reconciliation Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2008 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from June 2024 Pages with German IPA Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 00:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vergangenheitsbewältigung 17 languages Add topic

