Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Use today 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Roman type 12 languages Català Español Euskara Français Frysk 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Русский Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Style of typeface Bembo is a roman typeface (shown with italic)  dating to 1928 based on punches cut by Francesco Griffo in 1494.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] In Latin script typography , roman is one of the three main kinds of historical type , alongside blackletter and italic . Sometimes called normal or regular , it is distinct from these two for its upright style (relative to the calligraphy-inspired italic) and its simplicity (relative to blackletter).

During the early Renaissance , roman (in the form of Antiqua ) and italic type were used separately. Today, roman and italic type are mixed, and most typefaces are composed of both an upright roman style and an associated italic or oblique style.

History [ edit ] Roman type was modelled from a European scribal manuscript style of the 15th century, based on the pairing of inscriptional capitals used in ancient Rome with Carolingian minuscules .

Early roman typefaces show a variety of designs, for instance resembling what would now be considered blackletter.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Printers and typefounders such as Nicolas Jenson and Aldus Manutius in Venice and later Robert Estienne in France codified the modern characteristics of Roman type, for instance an 'h' with a nearly straight right leg, serifs on the outside of the capital 'M' and 'N', and 'e' with level cross stroke, by the 1530s.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Use today [ edit ] Popular roman typefaces include Bembo , Baskerville , Caslon , Jenson , Times New Roman and Garamond .

The name roman is customarily applied uncapitalized distinguishing early Italian typefaces of the Renaissance period.

See also [ edit ] Gaelic type History of Western typography Serif Notes [ edit ] ^ Amert, Kay (April 2008). "Stanley Morison's Aldine Hypothesis Revisited".

Design Issues .

24 (2): 53– 71.

doi : 10.1162/desi.2008.24.2.53 .

S2CID 57566512 .

^ Vervliet, Hendrik D.L.

(2008).

The palaeotypography of the French Renaissance. Selected papers on sixteenth-century typefaces. 2 vols . Leiden: Koninklijke Brill NV. pp.

90– 91, etc.

ISBN 978-90-04-16982-1 .

[On Robert Estienne's typefaces of the 1530s]: Its outstanding design became standard for Roman type in the two centuries to follow...From the 1540s onwards French Romans and Italics had begun to infiltrate, probably by way of Lyons, the typography of the neighbouring countries. In Italy, major printers replaced the older, noble but worn Italian characters and their imitations from Basle.

^ Bergsland, David (29 August 2012).

"Aldine: the intellectuals begin their assault on font design" .

The Skilled Workman . Retrieved 14 August 2015 .

^ Parkes, Malcolm Beckwith (1992).

Pause and Effect: An Introduction to the History of Punctuation in the West . Aldershot, UK: Scolar Press. p. 215.

^ Boardley, John (18 April 2016).

"The first roman fonts" .

ilovetypography . Retrieved 21 September 2017 .

^ Boardley, John (7 February 2014).

"Unusual fifteenth-century fonts: part 1" .

i love typography . Retrieved 22 September 2017 .

^ Boardley, John (July 2015).

"Unusual fifteenth-century fonts: part 2" .

i love typography . Retrieved 22 September 2017 .

^ Olocco, Riccardo.

"The Venetian origins of roman type" .

Medium . C-A-S-T . Retrieved 27 January 2018 .

^ Carter, Harry (1969).

A View of Early Typography up to about 1600 (Second edition (2002) ed.). London: Hyphen Press. pp.

72– 4.

ISBN 0-907259-21-9 .

De Aetna was decisive in shaping the printers' alphabet. The small letters are very well made to conform with the genuinely antique capitals by emphasis on long straight strokes and fine serifs and to harmonise in curvature with them. The strokes are thinner than those of Jenson and his school...the letters look narrower than Jenson's, but are in fact a little wider because the short ones are bigger, and the effect of narrowness makes the face suitable for octavo pages...this Roman of Aldus is distinguishable from other faces of the time by the level cross-stroke in 'e' and the absence of top serifs from the insides of the vertical strokes of 'M', following the model of Feliciano. We have come to regard his small 'e' as an improvement on previous practice.

References [ edit ] Bringhurst, Robert (2008), The Elements of Typographic Style (version 3.2). Vancouver: Hartley & Marks.  Often referred to simply as "Bringhurst", Elements is widely respected as the current English-language authority on typographic style.

Nesbitt, Alexander The History and Technique of Lettering (1957), Dover Publications, Inc.

ISBN 0-486-40281-9 . The Dover edition is an abridged and corrected republication of the work originally published in 1950 by Prentice-Hall, Inc. under the title Lettering: The History and Technique of Lettering as Design .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of roman at Wiktionary v t e Typography Page Canons of page construction Column Even working Margin Page numbering Paper size Pagination Pull quote Recto and verso Intentionally blank page Paragraph Alignment Leading Line length River Runaround Widows and orphans runt Character Typeface anatomy Counter Diacritics Dingbat Glyph Ink trap Ligature Rotation Subscript and superscript Swash Text figures Tittle Capitalization All caps Camel case Initial Letter case Small caps Snake case Title case Visual distinction Blackboard bold Bold Color printing Italics Oblique Underline Whitespace Horizontal aspects Figure space Kerning Letter spacing Pitch Sentence spacing Thin space Word spacing Vertical aspects Ascender Baseline Body height Cap height Descender Mean line Overshoot x-height Typeface classifications Roman type Serif Antiqua Didone slab serif Sans-serif Blackletter type Fraktur Rotunda Schwabacher Gaelic type Insular Uncial Specialist Record type Display typeface script fat face reverse-contrast Punctuation ( List ) Bullet Dash Hanging punctuation Hyphen minus sign Interpunct Space Vertical bar Typesetting Etaoin shrdlu Font computer monospaced Font catalog For position only Letterpress Lorem ipsum Microprinting Microtypography Movable type Pangram Phototypesetting Punchcutting Reversing type Sort Type color Type design Typeface list Typographic units Agate Cicero Em En Metric units Pica Point traditional point-size names Twip Digital typography Character encoding Hinting Text shaping Rasterization Typographic features Web typography Bézier curves Desktop publishing Typography in other writing systems Arabic Cyrillic PT Fonts East Asian Thai National Fonts Related articles Penmanship Handwriting Handwriting script Calligraphy Style guide Type design Type foundry History of Western typography Intellectual property protection of typefaces Technical lettering Vox-ATypI classification Related template Punctuation and other typographic symbols Category This typography -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roman_type&oldid=1261172986 " Categories : Typography Typography stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 4 December 2024, at 17:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Roman type 12 languages Add topic

