Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Statements and proofs 2 Discussion and consequences 3 Historical notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cantor's paradox 20 languages বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Esperanto Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Paradox in set theory This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In set theory , Cantor's paradox states that there is no set of all cardinalities . This is derived from the theorem that there is no greatest cardinal number . In informal terms, the paradox is that the collection of all possible "infinite sizes" is not only infinite, but so infinitely large that its own infinite size cannot be any of the infinite sizes in the collection. The difficulty is handled in axiomatic set theory by declaring that this collection is not a set but a proper class ; in von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory it follows from this and the axiom of limitation of size that this proper class must be in bijection with the class of all sets. Thus, not only are there infinitely many infinities, but this infinity is larger than any of the infinities it enumerates.

This paradox is named for Georg Cantor , who is often credited with first identifying it in 1899 (or between 1895 and 1897). Like a number of "paradoxes" it is not actually contradictory but merely indicative of a mistaken intuition, in this case about the nature of infinity and the notion of a set. Put another way, it is paradoxical within the confines of naïve set theory and therefore demonstrates that a careless axiomatization of this theory is inconsistent.

Statements and proofs [ edit ] In order to state the paradox it is necessary to understand that the cardinal numbers are totally ordered , so that one can speak about one being greater or less than another. Then Cantor's paradox is: Theorem: There is no greatest cardinal number.

This fact is a direct consequence of Cantor's theorem on the cardinality of the power set of a set.

Proof: Assume the contrary, and let C be the largest cardinal number. Then (in the von Neumann formulation of cardinality) C is a set and therefore has a power set 2 C which, by Cantor's theorem, has cardinality strictly larger than C . Demonstrating a cardinality (namely that of 2 C ) larger than C , which was assumed to be the greatest cardinal number, falsifies the definition of C. This contradiction establishes that such a cardinal cannot exist.

Another consequence of Cantor's theorem is that the cardinal numbers constitute a proper class . That is, they cannot all be collected together as elements of a single set. Here is a somewhat more general result.

Theorem: If S is any set then S cannot contain elements of all cardinalities. In fact, there is a strict upper bound on the cardinalities of the elements of S .

Proof: Let S be a set, and let T be the union of the elements of S . Then every element of S is a subset of T , and hence is of cardinality less than or equal to the cardinality of T .

Cantor's theorem then implies that every element of S is of cardinality strictly less than the cardinality of 2 T .

Discussion and consequences [ edit ] Since the cardinal numbers are well-ordered by indexing with the ordinal numbers (see Cardinal number, formal definition ), this also establishes that there is no greatest ordinal number; conversely, the latter statement implies Cantor's paradox.  By applying this indexing to the Burali-Forti paradox we obtain another proof that the cardinal numbers are a proper class rather than a set, and (at least in ZFC or in von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory ) it follows from this that there is a bijection between the class of cardinals and the class of all sets.  Since every set is a subset of this latter class, and every cardinality is the cardinality of a set (by definition!) this intuitively means that the "cardinality" of the collection of cardinals is greater than the cardinality of any set: it is more infinite than any true infinity.  This is the paradoxical nature of Cantor's "paradox".

Historical notes [ edit ] While Cantor is usually credited with first identifying this property of cardinal sets, some mathematicians award this distinction to Bertrand Russell , who defined a similar theorem in 1899 or 1901.

References [ edit ] Anellis, I. H.

(1991). "The first Russell paradox". In Drucker, Thomas (ed.).

Perspectives on the History of Mathematical Logic . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Birkäuser Boston. pp.

33– 46.

Moore, G. H.; Garciadiego, A. (1981).

"Burali-Forti's paradox: a reappraisal of its origins" .

Historia Mathematica .

8 (3): 319– 350.

doi : 10.1016/0315-0860(81)90070-7 .

External links [ edit ] An Historical Account of Set-Theoretic Antinomies Caused by the Axiom of Abstraction : report by Justin T. Miller, Department of Mathematics, University of Arizona.

PlanetMath.org : article.

v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy projective Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement (i.e. set difference) De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Identities Intersection Power set Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Almost Cardinality Cardinal number ( large ) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Set-builder notation Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Amorphous Countable Empty Finite ( hereditarily ) Filter base subbase Ultrafilter Fuzzy Infinite ( Dedekind-infinite ) Recursive Singleton Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Paul Bernays Georg Cantor Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Abraham Fraenkel Kurt Gödel Thomas Jech John von Neumann Willard Quine Bertrand Russell Thoralf Skolem Ernst Zermelo NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐szh2g
Cached time: 20250812015652
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.360 seconds
Real time usage: 0.467 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 909/1000000
Revision size: 5619/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 92389/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2000/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 28163/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.232/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4825244/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  367.080      1 -total
 41.00%  150.504      5 Template:Navbox
 34.68%  127.299      1 Template:Mathematical_logic
 22.22%   81.552      1 Template:Cite_book
 19.73%   72.415      1 Template:Short_description
 16.38%   60.119      1 Template:No_footnotes
 14.50%   53.209      1 Template:Ambox
 12.50%   45.871      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.46%   16.387      7 Template:Main_other
  3.94%   14.481      1 Template:Portal-inline Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2732904:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015652 and revision id 1303059305. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cantor%27s_paradox&oldid=1303059305 " Categories : Cardinal numbers Georg Cantor Mathematical logic Paradoxes of naive set theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 21:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cantor's paradox 20 languages Add topic

