Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Publication 3 Reception 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Alciphron (book) 4 languages Čeština Français Nederlands Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1732 treatise by George Berkeley Alciphron title page (1732).

Alciphron , or The Minute Philosopher is a philosophical dialogue by the 18th-century Irish philosopher George Berkeley wherein Berkeley combated the arguments of free-thinkers such as Mandeville and Shaftesbury against the Christian religion . It was completed in 1731, and first published in 1732.

The dialogue is primarily between four characters, the free-thinkers Alciphron and Lysicles, Berkeley's spokesman Euphranor, and Crito, who serves as a spokesman for traditional Christianity. The mostly-silent narrator of the dialogue is given the name Dion.

Contents [ edit ] The work contains two especially notable sections: Dialogue IV, in which Berkeley presents a novel teleological argument for the existence of God based on Berkeley's theory of visual language, defended in the Essay Toward a New Theory of Vision (first published in 1709, and included with the first edition of Alciphron ).

[ 1 ] Dialogue VII, in which Berkeley presents a novel theory of language which has been compared with the theory of language advocated by Ludwig Wittgenstein in his Philosophical Investigations .

[ 2 ] In a later work, The Theory of Vision Vindicated and Explained (first published in 1733), Berkeley adduced the work of Alberto Radicati as evidence that the views advocated by the character Lysicles were not overly exaggerated (para. 5).

The work expressed Berkeley's anti-Catholicism . In it, he suggested that freethinking, by damaging Protestantism , would leave England open to conversion by Roman Catholic missionaries. In 1742, the Catholic Church responded to the work's anti-Catholic views by placing it on the Index of Forbidden Books , where it remained until the abolition of the Index in 1966.

[ 3 ] Publication [ edit ] It was originally published anonymously under the full title Alciphron: or, the minute philosopher. In seven dialogues. Containing an apology for the Christian religion, against those who are called free-thinkers , printed in London by J. Tonson in 2 volumes. The second volume contains his An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision and so it was not very anonymous.

[ 4 ] The posthumous 1755 edition was the first to include Berkeley's name as author. The book was begun while Berkeley was living at Whitehall Farm , Rhode Island , and then finished when he came back to London in 1731.

[ 5 ] Reception [ edit ] The book was criticised by a letter in the Daily Postboy (September 1732) to whom Berkeley replied in his Theory of Vision (1733).

Peter Browne , Bishop of Cork, responded to Berkeley in his Divine Analogy (1733).

Bernard Mandeville replied in a pamphlet entitled A Letter to Dion (1732).

Lord Hervey protested against Alciphron's rationalism in his Some Remarks on the Minute Philosopher (1732).

Francis Hutchenson 's philosophical criticism appeared in the fourth edition of his Inquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue (1738). The American clergyman Samuel Johnson wrote a more sympathetic review in the Elementa Philosophica (1752).

[ 6 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ See David Kline, "Berkeley's Divine Language Argument" in Ernest Sosa, ed., Essays on the Philosophy of George Berkeley (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1987), repr. in David Berman, ed., Alciphron in Focus (London: Routledge, 1993).

^ Antony Flew, "Was Berkeley a Precursor of Wittgenstein?" in W. B. Todd, ed.

Hume and the Enlightenment: Essays Presented to Ernest Campbell Mossner (Edinburgh: The University Press, 1974), repr. in Berman, ed., Alciphron .

^ Margaret Bald (14 May 2014).

Literature Suppressed on Religious Grounds . Infobase Publishing. p. 11.

ISBN 978-0-8160-7148-7 .

^ WorldCat https://www.worldcat.org/title/alciphron-or-the-minute-philosopher-in-seven-dialogues-containing-an-apology-for-the-christian-religion-against-those-who-are-called-free-thinkers/oclc/833957138 ^ David Berman, ed., Alciphron in Focus (London: Routledge, 1993).

^ David Berman, ed., Alciphron in Focus (London: Routledge, 1993).

External links [ edit ] Alciphron, or the Minute Philosopher 1803 ed. from Google Books Alciphron, or The Minute Philosopher ( The Works of George Berkeley . Ed. by Alexander Campbell Fraser . In 4 Volumes. Vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press , 1901) from Internet Archive Paraphrase of Alciphron at Early Modern Texts Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alciphron_(book)&oldid=1185686021 " Categories : 1731 books 1732 books 1732 in England 1730s in London 18th-century Christian texts 18th-century Catholicism Books by George Berkeley Christian apologetic works Philosophy of language literature Dialogues Freethought Arguments for the existence of God Theories of language Anti-Catholic publications Censored books Works published anonymously Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 November 2023, at 10:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alciphron (book) 4 languages Add topic

