Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Consumer decision process [ 2 ] Toggle Consumer decision process [ 2 ] subsection 1.1 Problem recognition 1.2 Information search 1.3 Evaluation of alternatives 1.4 Purchase decision 1.5 Post purchase behavior 2 Consumer behavior influence 3 Attitude, knowledge and behavior gap Toggle Attitude, knowledge and behavior gap subsection 3.1 Attitude and behavior gap 3.2 Knowledge and behavior gap 4 Three theories of explanation Toggle Three theories of explanation subsection 4.1 Rational explanations 4.2 Psychological explanations 4.3 Sociological explanations [ 13 ] 5 Forms Toggle Forms subsection 5.1 Material simplicity 5.2 Human scale 5.3 Self-determination 5.4 Ecological awareness 5.5 Personal growth 6 Sustainable consumption choices 7 Sustainable choices and motivational imbalance 8 Toward behavior change 9 See also 10 References Toggle the table of contents Sustainable consumer behaviour 2 languages فارسی Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sub-discipline of consumer behavior This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sustainable consumer behaviour" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( July 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Sustainable consumer behavior is the sub-discipline of consumer behavior that studies why and how consumers do or do not incorporate sustainability priorities into their consumption behavior. It studies the products that consumers select, how those products are used, and how they are disposed of in pursuit of consumers' sustainability goals.

[ 1 ] From a conventional marketing perspective, consumer behavior has focused largely on the purchase stage of the total consumption process. This is because it is the point at which a contract is made between the buyer and seller, money is paid, and the ownership of products transfers to the consumer. Yet from a social and environmental perspective, consumer behavior needs to be understood as a whole since a product affects all stages of a consumption process.

Consumer decision process [ 2 ] [ edit ] The buyer decision process or consumer decision process is described in three or five stages. The basic, three stage model [ 3 ] [ 4 ] of consumption describes obtaining, consuming, and disposing of products and services. The study of consumer decision making expands these into five stages, first described by John Dewey in 1910: [ 5 ] Problem recognition Information search Evaluation of alternatives Purchase decision Post purchase behavior Problem recognition [ edit ] Need and want recognition occur when a consumer senses a difference between what he or she perceives to be the ideal versus the actual state of affairs.

[ 6 ] Information search [ edit ] There are three key sources for searching information: personal, commercial, and public sources. Mass media, which is a public source, increasingly provides information about the environmental costs and benefits of consumption.

[ 7 ] Consumers become aware of such costs and benefits through these sources.

Evaluation of alternatives [ edit ] In this stage, environmental concerns which are expressed as environmental costs, risks, and benefits, will contribute to the evaluation of options as the consumer decides what to buy. One way to evaluate more sustainable consumption is to consider the total customer cost which incurs in acquisition, use, and post-use phases.

Purchase decision [ edit ] Consumers have to trade off the environmental benefits against other attributes such as price, performance, and design. In addition they may need to change their habitual manner of behavior.

Post purchase behavior [ edit ] In this stage, maintenance, repair, use frequency, and type of use are of interest.

[ 7 ] For some key products such as homes, cars, and domestic appliances, much of the sustainability impact accrues after the purchase phase during use or post-use.

[ 8 ] Post-purchase behavior may also include disposal where consumers can keep, reuse (for example by selling, trading, or giving a product to others), or dispose of a product. Some materials such as paper, glass, or metal can be recycled or reused in the production process. This phase has become important due to overloaded landfill communal waste disposal.

Consumer behavior influence [ edit ] Buying and consuming an individual product like a cup of coffee might seem such a trivial action that, although it refreshes us, leaves no lasting impression or memory. However, that action combines with those of other consumers to contribute to the economic success of the coffee retailer, the overall growth in the economy, and the volume of waste with which local government must deal. It influences the demand for, and the price of, coffee beans and milk, and so influences the lives and prosperity of farmers, and shapes their investment and planting decisions. It has knock-on impacts [ clarification needed ] in terms of the demand for pesticides, fertilizer, packaging materials, and energy. The economic impact of that coffee contributes to the share price of the retailers and the levels of income and investment they will enjoy. At a national level, it contributes to national prosperity and so influences future policies on taxation and interest rates.

Consumption is an economic phenomenon that addresses our individual wants and drives the economy through our collective behavior, but it is also a social and cultural process through which we express our identity and establish our place within society. It is also a physical process that consumes resources. What we eat, how we heat our homes, and how we travel to work or for pleasure may seem like nobody's businesses but our own. However, the collective consequences of such consumption decisions are a principal driver behind climate change that will have consequences for people, countries, and species across the globe.

Consumers’ purchasing behavior determines the success or failure of new products and services that are marketed on the basis of their sustainability performance. Because of the role of consumers in determining sustainability impacts during the use and disposal phases of the consumption process, their overall behavior also influences the sustainability performance of all goods and services.

[ 8 ] Attitude, knowledge and behavior gap [ edit ] There exist some inconsistencies in consumers’ behaviors.

Attitude and behavior gap [ edit ] Despite the increase in consumers’ environmental awareness, many have not changed their consumption choices and behaviors. This can be due to consumers’ selfishness, because they don't want to give up or change the way they live, or because of the associated costs and taxes.

A survey was conducted in October 2020 by McKinsey & Company in ten countries (primarily in the U.S.) to determine the important factors individuals consider while deciding to purchase a product.

[ 9 ] Overall sustainability was not highly considered compared to price, quality, brand, and convenience; and since the COVID-19 pandemic, consumers have stronger preferences for product packaging in regards to food safety and hygiene.

[ 9 ] However, it was found that more than half of the U.S. consumers are concerned about the environmental impact of packaging and are willing to pay more for sustainable options.

[ 9 ] Additionally, consumers show interest in better availability and labeling for eco-friendly products as well as interest in both recyclable plastics and fiber-based alternatives.

[ 9 ] More recent findings from the 2023 Buying Green Report indicate a significant shift in consumer behavior toward sustainable packaging.

[ 10 ] The report reveals that 82% of consumers across various age groups are willing to pay more for products in sustainable packaging, marking an increase from previous years.

[ 10 ] Notably, 90% of Gen-Z consumers express this willingness, highlighting a strong preference among younger demographics.

[ 10 ] Additionally, 71% of consumers have chosen a product in the past six months based on its sustainability credentials, and 80% are interested in purchasing products with refillable packaging to reduce environmental impact.

[ 10 ] These trends point to a growing consumer demand for eco-friendly packaging options, even amidst rising prices.

Knowledge and behavior gap [ edit ] There is a discrepancy between what behavior consumers think is socially and environmentally sustainable and what their behavior actually is. For instance, many people in the U.S. limit their use of spray cans as they want to minimize their contribution to the impact on the ozone layer . Their behavior is not environmentally significant because the substances that affect the ozone layer were banned in the U.S. long ago.

[ 11 ] Consumers’ lack knowledge about the environmental impacts of consumption.

In the same survey 60–70% of people reported to be willing to pay more for sustainability and 35–36% would buy sustainable products if these products were available and better labeled as such.

[ 9 ] These results demonstrate a knowledge gap that prevents people from making the best choices. Consumers rely on perception and may make ignorant decisions. For example, cereal in a cardboard box is considered [ who?

] to be more environmentally friendly than cereal in a bag, even though the bag contains less packaging (as the box also contains a bag inside). The outward appearance of the recyclable cardboard masks the plastic inside.

[ 12 ] Three theories of explanation [ edit ] Rational explanations [ edit ] These theories emphasize the economics of sustainable consumption, and how consumers weigh up the functional benefits and relatively affordability of a product and service. Behavioral models based around economical rationality tend to assume a high degree of self-interest on the part of the consumer.

Psychological explanations [ edit ] Research into the psychology of sustainable consumption, and of the more emotional and irrational explanations of our behavior, focuses on consumers` attitudes and beliefs about sustainable issues. Three important sets of attitudes that influence consumers willingness to engage with sustainability issues are perceived personal relevance, social responsibility , and trust.

[ citation needed ] Sociological explanations [ 13 ] [ edit ] Consumer behavior is also explained by how we think our consumption activities will be perceived by others, and how that might be reflect and influence our place in society.

[ 14 ] Forms [ edit ] Sustainable consumption is not simply a question of what products and services are purchased, but is also about the adoption of a lifestyle in which sustainability is reflected in all aspects of consumers' behavior. Voluntary simplifiers' lifestyle is based around five key values: Material simplicity [ edit ] This involves consuming fewer products and services, and tending to seek out products that are resource efficient, durable, and with a reduced ecological impact.

Human scale [ edit ] Following the principle of "small is beautiful" this favors working and living environments that are smaller, simpler and less centralized.

Self-determination [ edit ] This means to meet one's needs, or even to influence what those needs might be, through a reduced reliance on large commercial businesses, or even large public-sector organizations.

Ecological awareness [ edit ] People can change their behavior through marketing campaigns to encourage recycling and reducing CO 2 emissions and the adoption of conservation of resources and reduction of waste in order to protect the environment.

Personal growth [ edit ] This emphasizes satisfaction through experiences and development of personal abilities instead of through commercially provided consumption experiences.

[ 15 ] Many of the key traits of voluntary simplification have been exhibited in a less extreme, but more widespread way, through the phenomenon of "downshifting." Downshifting involves a change of lifestyle and consumption patterns that exchange a relatively highly paid/lower stress but more rewarding, and shifting to a lower level of material consumption but a higher level of quality of life and personal satisfaction.

[ clarification needed ] [ 16 ] Sustainable consumption choices [ edit ] All types of consumption are not equally important in terms of their sustainability impacts. The European Environmental Impact of Product Project provides a rigorous analysis of research into the environmental impact of products consumed by households.

[ 17 ] The project's input/output-based methodology assesses 255 domestic product types against a wide range of environmental impacts. It concludes that 70–80% of total impacts relate to food and drink consumption; housing (including domestic energy use); and transport (including commuting, leisure, and holiday travel). Additionally, plastics pollution is a growing issue as they can be found in 40 percent of the world's ocean surfaces and contain 15–51 trillion pieces of plastics according to studies.

[ 18 ] Ideally, all aspects of our consumption behaviors and production systems will become oriented toward sustainability, but significant progress would be achieved through the following: Sustainable food and drink consumption choices —Consumption level that are more conducive to health; a reduced consumption of meat products due to their contribution to climate change ; choosing organically produced and locally sourced, seasoned produce; and greater composting of biodegradable food waste Sustainable housing consumption choices —More emphasis on purchasing homes constructed using sustainable materials and choosing and creating homes with high levels of insulation and energy efficiency. This also involves energy usage within the home based on sustainable energy source, and the avoidance of energy waste while living in the home (e.g. through energy-efficient refrigerators and energy saving bulbs).

Sustainable travel behavior —Reducing the amount of travel (e.g. through home-working or teleconference service) or finding alternative transport means for journeys, such as cycling for leisure rather than driving. Seeking tourism offerings that try to protect the global and local environment and also the cultures within tourism destinations.

[ 19 ] Sustainable fashion choices – Opting for clothing made from organic, recycled, or sustainably sourced materials, supporting brands with ethical production practices, and prioritizing durability over fast fashion. Repairing and reusing clothing, as well as donating or recycling garments, also contributes to reducing waste in the fashion industry.

[ 20 ] Sustainable everyday items – Carry reusable water bottles, coffee cups, and shopping bags to avoid single-use plastics. Switching to reusable containers and avoiding plastic straws, cutlery, and packaging can significantly cut down on plastic waste. This reduces environmental harm and conserves resources, contributing to a more sustainable daily routine.

Sustainable choices and motivational imbalance [ edit ] Individuals may experience motivational imbalance in which they believe a particular choice has positive personal outcomes but is subject to disapproval by important social referents [ clarification needed ] or that the choice does not comply with their moral standards.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Motivational imbalance can generate further ramifications on consumer sustainable choices.

[ 23 ] Toward behavior change [ edit ] Behavior change in consumption is a guiding principle for sustainable development policy. However, switching unsustainable consumer behaviors to sustainable ones is far from straightforward. Individual behaviors are rooted in social and institutional contexts. We are influenced by what others around us say and do and by institutional rules. We have been already locked into unsustainable behaviors regardless of our intentions.

Sustainable consumption choices are influenced by habit and routine. Habits can be thought of as procedural strategies to reduce the cognitive effort associated with making choices, particularly in situations that are relatively stable. They allow us to perform routine actions with a minimum of deliberation and often only limited awareness. Evidence suggests that habit is a crucial component in a wide variety of environmentally-significant activities: travel behavior , shopping patterns, household chores, waste disposal , leisure activities, and even personal hygiene. Habits are formed through repetition and reinforcement.

Andersen (1982) identifies three stages in the formation of a new habit: [ 24 ] The declarative stage involves information processing relating to a particular choice or action. At this stage the attitudinal and affective responses to this information are both important. The information challenges the existing choice, but at this stage does not actually change (e.g.) coffee-buying behavior.

In the knowledge compilation stage, however, this information is converted into a new routine by exercising a different choice in practice.

When the action itself is associated with a clear positive reinforcement, and repeated over time, a "cognitive script" is developed which enables one to repeat the same action in similar circumstances with very little cognitive effort. This final procedural stage locks into a new habit. At this stage, the behavior is more or less automatized and bypasses rational deliberation almost completely.

In many cases, people appear to be locked into behaviors and behavioral patterns that resist change. In fact, they change continually and sometimes radically in a short period. The uptake of smart phones, widescreen plasma TVs, standby modes in electronic appliances, patterns of holiday travel and travel behavior: these are examples of technological and behavioral change that have occurred in only a decade. These sorts of changes are a kind of "creeping evolution" of social and technological norms. Individuals alter their behaviors and sometimes individual behavior initiates new social trends. At some level, individuals find themselves responding to societal and technological changes that are initiated elsewhere. Policies to encourage pro-environmental and pro-social consumer behaviors can be informed by understanding of the dimensions of and possibilities for behavioral change.

[ 25 ] Consumption is a holistic process, part of a broader consumer lifestyle, that is strongly influenced by the social context in which it takes place. Individual changes in purchasing behavior can contribute to progress toward sustainability, but progress also depends on supports from deeper changes occurring within consumer lifestyle and throughout society.

[ 26 ] There are now many media [ clarification needed ] that support consumers in making their lifestyles more sustainable.

[ 27 ] Experts can play a crucial role in shaping sustainable consumer choices by providing credible information, guidance, and raising awareness about the environmental and ethical implications of various products and practices. This is especially true for individuals who are alienated or removed from a direct connection to the environment and environmental feedback. Expert influence extends across multiple domains, including academia, non-governmental organizations and industry. Experts contribute to the discourse on sustainability by conducting research, evaluating things such as the life cycle of products, carbon footprints and climate change projections, and then disseminating their findings to the public. The dissemination of expert knowledge can be a tool for behavior change towards sustainable consumerism , aiding individual consumers as they navigate the complexities of sustainability, eco-friendly alternatives, ethical sourcing and environmentally responsible products and companies.

[ 28 ] Overall, the influence of experts on sustainable consumer choices can be instrumental in driving positive change towards a more sustainable global marketplace and society. However, as expert knowledge tends to rely on technical, scientific data and an urban-dominant perspective, it thus issues solutions that are also technical and suited for urban environments. With over half of the world's population living in urban areas, [ 29 ] this approach has the potential to create large-scale movements of sustainable consumerism. However, it risks the exclusion of alternative perspectives on sustainable lifestyles, especially those that are not urban.

[ 30 ] See also [ edit ] Consumer behavior Sustainability Sustainable development Sustainability marketing Sustainable transport Efficient energy use Environmental impact Behavioral pattern References [ edit ] ^ Belz, Frank-Martin & Peattie, Ken (2009) Sustainability Marketing: A Global Perspective. John Wiley & Sons, 73 ^ Belz, Frank-Martin & Peattie, Ken (2009) Sustainability Marketing: A Global Perspective John Wiley & Sons, 74 ^ Tsiotsou, Rodoula H.; Wirtz, Jochen (2015). "The three-stage model of service consumption".

Handbook of Service Business : 105– 128.

doi : 10.4337/9781781000410.00015 .

ISBN 9781781000410 .

^ Madichie, Nnamdi O. (2009-05-22). "Consumer Behavior: Buying, Having, and Being (8th ed.)".

Management Decision .

47 (5): 845– 848.

doi : 10.1108/00251740910960169 .

ISSN 0025-1747 .

^ Dewey, John, 1859-1952. (2007).

How we think . New York: Cosimo.

ISBN 978-1-60520-099-6 .

OCLC 236096698 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Blackwell, R., Miniard, P., & Engel J. (2006) Consumer Behavior, Thomson ^ a b Antonides, Gerrit & Fred van Raaij, W (1998) Consumer Behaviour: A European Perspective John Wiley & Sons ^ a b Belz, Frank-Martin & Peattie, Ken (2009) Sustainability Marketing: A Global Perspective John Wiley & Sons ^ a b c d e Feber, D., Granskog, A., Lingqvist, O., & Nordigården, D. (2020, October 21).

Sustainability in PACKAGING: Inside the minds of US consumers.

Retrieved from: https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/paper-forest-products-and-packaging/our-insights/sustainability-in-packaging-inside-the-minds-of-us-consumers# ^ a b c d Packaging, Trivium.

"NEW DATA REVEALS CONSUMERS INCREASINGLY CHOOSE PRODUCTS IN SUSTAINABLE PACKAGING GLOBALLY, DESPITE RISING PRICES" .

www.prnewswire.com . Retrieved 2025-02-27 .

^ Gust, I (2004) Strategies to promote sustainable consumer behavior-The use of the lifestyle approach, LUMES ^ Young, S. (2008). "Packaging and the environment." Flexible Packaging, 10(5), 24-27.

^ Lang, Bodo; Lawson, Rob (2013). "Dissecting Word-of-Mouth's Effectiveness and How to Use It as a Proconsumer Tool".

Journal of Nonprofit & Public Sector Marketing .

25 (4): 374– 399.

doi : 10.1080/10495142.2013.845419 .

S2CID 168011975 .

^ Belz, Frank-Martin & Peattie, Ken (2009) Sustainability Marketing: A Global Perspective.

John Wiley & Sons, 82-85 ^ Belz, Frank-Martin & Peattie, Ken (2009) Sustainability Marketing: A Global Perspective.

John Wiley & Sons, 86-87 ^ Peattie, K. & Peattie, S. (2009) Social marketing: A pathway to consumption reduction?, Journal of Business Research 62: 260-268 ^ Tukker, A., Huppes, G., Guinée, J.et al. (2005) Environmental Impact of Products (EIPRO): Analysis of the Life Circle Environmental Impacts Related to the Total Final Consumption of the EU25, Brussels: IPTS/ESTO, European Commission Joint Research Center.

^ "Ocean Plastics Pollution" .

www.biologicaldiversity.org . Retrieved 2025-02-27 .

^ Belz, Frank-Martin & Peattie, Ken (2009) Sustainability Marketing: A Global Perspective.

John Wiley & Sons, 80-81 ^ "Simple Ways to Build Sustainability Into Your Everyday Life" .

Harvard Business Review . 2023-04-12.

ISSN 0017-8012 . Retrieved 2025-02-27 .

^ Elhoushy, Sayed (2020-08-01).

"Consumers' sustainable food choices: Antecedents and motivational imbalance" .

International Journal of Hospitality Management .

89 : 102554.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijhm.2020.102554 .

ISSN 0278-4319 .

S2CID 219503863 .

^ Sparks, Paul; Conner, Mark; James, Rhiannon; Shepherd, Richard; Povey, Rachel (2001).

"Ambivalence about health-related behaviours: An exploration in the domain of food choice" .

British Journal of Health Psychology .

6 (1): 53– 68.

doi : 10.1348/135910701169052 .

ISSN 2044-8287 .

PMID 14596738 .

^ Elhoushy, Sayed (2020-08-01).

"Consumers' sustainable food choices: Antecedents and motivational imbalance" .

International Journal of Hospitality Management .

89 : 102554.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijhm.2020.102554 .

ISSN 0278-4319 .

S2CID 219503863 .

^ Andersen, J (1982) Acquisition of Cognitive Skill.

Psychological Review 89, 369-406 ^ Jackson, T (2005) Motivating Sustainable Consumption: A review of evidence on consumer behaviour and behavioural change ^ Belz, Frank-Martin & Peattie, Ken (2009) Sustainability Marketing: A Global Perspective . John Wiley & Sons, 92 ^ "The Considerate Consumer" .

^ Isenhour, Cindy. 2011. How the Grass Became Greener in the City: On UrbanImaginings and Practices of Sustainable Living in Sweden. City and Society 23(2): 117-134.

^ United Nations (UN) 2007 State of the World Population 2007: Unleashing the Potential of Urban Growth. New York: UNFPA.

^ Isenhour, Cindy. 2011. How the Grass Became Greener in the City: On UrbanImaginings and Practices of Sustainable Living in Sweden. City and Society 23(2): 117-134.

v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sustainable_consumer_behaviour&oldid=1291881710 " Categories : Sustainability by subject Ethical consumerism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2011 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2011 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 23:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sustainable consumer behaviour 2 languages Add topic

