Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 2.1 Intensives 2.2 MA Program at Prescott College 2.3 Summer colloquia 2.4 Activism 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Institute for Social Ecology 2 languages Español Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Educational institution in Vermont, US Part of a series on Green politics Core topics Climate change litigation Fossil fuels lobby Green party List of topics Politics of climate change Four pillars Ecological wisdom Social justice Grassroots democracy Nonviolence Perspectives Alter-globalization Bright green environmentalism Criticisms of globalization Deep ecology Degrowth Dirty hands Disinvestment Ecoauthoritarianism Eco-capitalism Ecocentrism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green Zionism Social ecology Queer ecology Intellectuals Abbey Albert Anderson Bari Best Beuys Berry Bookchin Brown (Lester) Brower Carson Dodds d'Eaubonne Gandhi George Hawken Jackson Khosla Klein Kovel LaDuke Latouche Linkola Löwy Maathai Mason Næss Negri Nussbaum Porritt Raworth Rendueles Salleh Sassen Schumacher Scruton Shiva Singer Snyder Sukhdev Thoreau Zerzan Politicians Bandt Bausch Benčić Bennett Betancourt Brélaz Brown (Bob) Camejo Cohn-Bendit Cuffe Emsis Fajardo Feinstein Fischer Frassoni Grodzka Habeck Halsema Harris Hourigan Joly Kelly Kogler Kretschmann Kuhn Lalonde Lipietz López Lucas Lunacek Martin Manning May Nader O'Gorman Roth Schmidt-Nielsen Silva Sirkis Stein Trittin Van der Bellen Vējonis Wall Organizations Asia Pacific Greens Federation European Green Party Federation of Green Parties of Africa Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas Federation of Young European Greens Global Greens Global Young Greens World Ecological Parties Related topics Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Circular economy Climate change mitigation Climate finance Climate justice Climate target Conservation movement Corporate political activism Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological modernization Ecomodernism Eco-tariff Ecotax Eco-terrorism Environmental conflict effects of agriculture effects of aviation finance issues justice movement planning pricing reform racism technology Environmentalism opposition Environmental skepticism Stewardship in music Fossil fuel phase-out Green development economy growth grabbing greening imperialism industrial policy infrastructure job New Deal recovery retrofit state theory transport hierarchy vehicle washing Localism Low-carbon economy List of environmental incidents conflicts killings Political ecology Progressivism Renewable energy Sustainable design development energy engineering refurbishment transport War on coal Water conflict Environment portal Politics portal v t e The Institute for Social Ecology ( ISE ) is an educational institution in Plainfield, Vermont , dedicated to the study of social ecology , "an interdisciplinary field drawing on philosophy, political and social theory, anthropology, history, economics, the natural sciences, and feminism." [ 1 ] Founded in 1974, ISE offered some of the first courses in the country on urbanism and ecology , radical technology, ecology and feminism, activist art and community; [ 2 ] it "won an international reputation" for its courses in social theory, eco-philosophy and alternative technologies.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The Institute for Social Ecology was established at Goddard College in Plainfield, Vermont, in 1974 by cultural anthropologist Daniel Chodorkoff and author Murray Bookchin .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The ISE became independent from Goddard in 1981, establishing its own campus at Cate farm in Plainfield.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In 1974, Dan Chodorkoff arranged for 20 members of the Lower East Side activist group Charas to visit the Institute; they were doing similar work in their neighborhoord, including the creation of a community garden, building a geodesic dome, and the rehabilitation of abandoned buildings into housing and an arts center.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The group included future actor Luis Guzman , who recalled, "I discovered a new sense of freedom when I came up here. The fresh air, the vibe, growing your own food, solar energy. These guys were doing all that type of stuff. I was going to the quarry and swimming and everybody was butt naked. Oh, hell, yeah!" [ 9 ] In 1986, members of the Maple Hill neighborhood in Rochester, Vermont, hired a lawyer to challenge state and local building permits for the Institute, based on a variety of concerns that included water pollution, traffic congestion, and the subject matter taught at the school.

[ 5 ] In 2014, after forty years of operation, Dan Chodorkoff reflected on the founding in 1974, "People thought we were kind of crazy back then but the ideas have percolated into the larger society and I think that's particularly true in Vermont: ideas around de-centralization and ecological forms of food production." [ 11 ] While the three-month summer programs had hosted an estimated 300 participants, [ 2 ] the Institute has since become smaller, but continues to offer smaller programs.

[ 6 ] The Institute for Social Ecology has been involved in the exploration of ecological approaches to food production , alternative technologies, and urban design . It has been involved with the anti-nuclear movement of the 1970s, [ 4 ] : 56 and affiliated with the Occupy movement [ 4 ] : 60 and climate movement .

[ 11 ] Over time, the ISE developed what The Guardian described as an "international reputation for its courses in social theory, eco-philosophy and alternative technologies." [ 3 ] Activities [ edit ] The ISE hosts summer programs, a year-round B.A. degree program, workshops on issues such as biotechnology and a speakers bureau. The ISE is involved in research as well as publishing and activist projects.

[ citation needed ] Intensives [ edit ] The ISE organizes educational 'intensive seminars' about human/nature relationships, directly democratic movements, climate change , and the historical unfolding of Left politics . At ISE intensives, students establish links between their current political work on the ground to the ' grounded theory ' of social ecology.

[ citation needed ] MA Program at Prescott College [ edit ] The ISE works in collaboration with the Prescott College Master of Arts Program (MAP) to offer a concentration in social ecology for Prescott MAP students. Students attend colloquia in Prescott, Arizona , and in Vermont, while working independently in their home communities in collaboration with an ISE graduate advisor.

[ citation needed ] Summer colloquia [ edit ] The Institute for Social Ecology has held annual summer colloquia since 2007. The weekend gatherings are an opportunity for new and longtime associates of the Institute to discuss current issues, workshop writing projects, and renew a sense of community.

[ 12 ] Activism [ edit ] Dan Chordokoff told VPR in 2014, "I think we've always seen our role as one of educating other educators and activists," and "as a place which was involved in praxis, really trying to take the ideas and see how they can be applied in the world. And invariably, inevitably that's led to involvement in a number of ecologically oriented social movements over the years." [ 11 ] In the early 2000s, the ISE Biotechnology Project activist focus included opposition to genetic engineering of food.

[ 4 ] : 61–62 ISE has also been involved in the movement for climate justice , including protests that occurred on the day after Earth Day in 1990.

[ 4 ] : 59 The ISE's approach to grassroots organizing is rooted in the principles of decentralism , community control, and face-to-face, direct democracy that have broadly inspired many movements for global justice.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal Energy portal Sustainability Biodiversity Food sovereignty Social justice References [ edit ] ^ "Institute for Social Ecology" .

Guidestar . Retrieved March 3, 2021 .

^ a b "Murray Bookchin's New Life" .

jacobinmag.com .

^ a b Small, Mike (August 7, 2006).

"Murray Bookchin" .

The Guardian . Retrieved March 3, 2021 .

^ a b c d e Tokar, Brian (March 2008).

"On Bookchin's Social Ecology and its Contributions to Social Movements" .

Capitalism Nature Socialism .

19 (1): 51– 66.

doi : 10.1080/10455750701859430 .

S2CID 143576068 . Retrieved March 9, 2021 .

: 56 ^ a b "Neighbors Say Ecology School Wouldn't Fit" .

The New York Times . November 9, 1986 . Retrieved March 3, 2021 .

^ a b Kelley, Kevin J.

"Institute for Social Ecology Marks 40 Years of Anarchy" .

Seven Days . Retrieved March 19, 2018 .

^ Enzinna, Wes (May 4, 2017).

"Bizarre and Wonderful" .

London Review of Books . Retrieved March 3, 2021 .

^ "History | Institute for Social Ecology" .

Institute for Social Ecology . Retrieved March 16, 2018 .

^ a b Kalish, Jon (September 25, 2020).

"Luis Guzman: Vermont one of safest places in world right now" .

VTDigger . Retrieved March 3, 2021 .

^ Dan Chodorkoff (November 2019). Venturini, Federico; Değirmenci, Emet; Bernardos, Inés Morales (eds.).

Social Ecology and the Right to the City : Towards Ecological and Democratic Cities . Montréal, QC: Black Rose Books. p. 41.

ISBN 978-1-55164-681-7 . Retrieved March 9, 2021 .

^ a b c Kalish, Jon (August 23, 2014).

"The Incubator For Social Change; Institute For Social Ecology Celebrates 40 Years" .

VPR . Retrieved March 3, 2021 .

^ "Annual Summer Gatherings | Institute for Social Ecology" .

Institute for Social Ecology . Retrieved March 16, 2018 .

^ "Projects | Institute for Social Ecology" . Institute for Social Ecology . Retrieved March 16, 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Education & Community Action: A History of the Institute for Social Ecology's Programs Social Ecology and Social Movements: From the 1960s to the Present Prescott College Master of Arts Program (MAP) Archived March 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Chodorkoff, Dan (June 19, 2016).

"What is social ecology? And what is the Institute for Social Ecology?" (Video) . Union for Radical Political Economics (URPE) – via YouTube .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Institute_for_Social_Ecology&oldid=1303375134 " Categories : Environmental organizations based in Vermont Organizations established in 1974 Plainfield, Vermont Culture of Vermont Anarchist organizations in the United States Social ecology (Bookchin) Anti-consumerist groups Education in Washington County, Vermont Goddard College 1974 establishments in Vermont Socialism in Vermont Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 16:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Institute for Social Ecology 2 languages Add topic

