Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Sensors, actuators and transceivers Toggle Sensors, actuators and transceivers subsection 2.1 Active vs passive transducers 3 Characteristics 4 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 4.1 Electromagnetic 4.2 Electrochemical 4.3 Electromechanical 4.4 Electroacoustic 4.5 Electro-optical 4.6 Electrostatic 4.7 Thermoelectric 4.8 Radioacoustic 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Transducer 42 languages العربية বাংলা Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kurdî Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Transducers ) Device that converts energy from one form to another This article is about an engineering device. For the similarly named concept in computer science, see Finite-state transducer .

Not to be confused with Transductor .

A transducer is a device that usefully converts energy from one form to another.

[ 1 ] Usually a transducer converts a signal in one form of energy to a signal in another.

[ 2 ] Transducers are often employed at the boundaries of automation , measurement , and control systems , where electrical signals are converted to and from other physical quantities (energy, force, torque, light, motion, position, etc.). The process of converting one form of energy to another is known as transduction.

[ 3 ] Types [ edit ] Mechanical transducer Mechanical transducers convert physical quantities into mechanical outputs or vice versa; Electrical transducers convert physical quantities into electrical outputs or signals. Examples of these are: a thermocouple that changes temperature differences into a small voltage; a linear variable differential transformer (LVDT), used to measure displacement (position) changes by means of electrical signals.

Sensors, actuators and transceivers [ edit ] Transducers can be categorized by the direction information passes through them: A sensor is a transducer that receives and responds to a signal or stimulus from a physical system.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 3 ] It produces a signal , which represents information about the system, which is used by some type of telemetry, information or control system .

An actuator is a device that is responsible for moving or controlling a mechanism or system. It is controlled by a signal from a control system or manual control.  It is operated by a source of energy, which can be mechanical force, electrical current, hydraulic fluid pressure, or pneumatic pressure, and converts that energy into motion. An actuator is the mechanism by which a control system acts upon an environment. The control system can be simple (a fixed mechanical or electrical system), software -based (e.g. a printer driver, robot control system), a human , or any other input.

[ 3 ] Bidirectional transducers can convert physical phenomena to electrical signals and electrical signals into physical phenomena. An example of an inherently bidirectional transducer is an antenna , which can convert radio waves ( electromagnetic waves ) into an electrical signal to be processed by a radio receiver , or translate an electrical signal from a transmitter into radio waves.  Another example is a voice coil , which is used in loudspeakers to translate an electrical audio signal into sound , and in dynamic microphones to translate sound waves into an audio signal.

[ 3 ] Transceivers integrate simultaneous bidirectional functionality. The most ubiquitous example are likely radio transceivers (called transponders in aircraft), used in virtually every form of wireless (tele-)communications and network device connections. Another example is ultrasound transceivers that are used for instance in medical ultrasound (echo) scans.

Active vs passive transducers [ edit ] Passive transducers require an external power source to operate, which is called an excitation signal. The signal is modulated by the sensor to produce an output signal. For example, a thermistor does not generate any electrical signal, but by passing an electric current through it, its resistance can be measured by detecting variations in the current or voltage across the thermistor.

[ 6 ] [ 3 ] Active transducers in contrast, generate electric current in response to an external stimulus which serves as the output signal without the need of an additional energy source. Such examples are a photodiode , and a piezoelectric sensor , photovoltaic, thermocouple .

[ 6 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Some specifications that are used to rate transducers: Dynamic range : This is the ratio between the largest amplitude signal and the smallest amplitude signal the transducer can effectively translate.

[ 3 ] Transducers with larger dynamic range are more "sensitive" and precise.

Repeatability : This is the ability of the transducer to produce an identical output when stimulated by the same input.

Noise : All transducers add some random noise to their output. In electrical transducers this may be electrical noise due to thermal motion of charges in circuits.  Noise corrupts small signals more than large ones.

Hysteresis : This is a property in which the output of the transducer depends not only on its current input but its past input. For example, an actuator which uses a gear train may have some backlash , which means that if the direction of motion of the actuator reverses, there will be a dead zone before the output of the actuator reverses, caused by play between the gear teeth.

Applications [ edit ] Transducers are used in electronic communications systems to convert signals of various physical forms to electronic signals , and vice versa . In this example, the first transducer could be a microphone , and the second transducer could be a speaker .

Electromagnetic [ edit ] Antennae – converts propagating electromagnetic waves to and from conducted electrical signals Magnetic cartridges – converts relative physical motion to and from electrical signals Tape head , disk read-and-write heads – converts magnetic fields on a magnetic medium to and from electrical signals Hall effect sensors – convert a magnetic field level into an electrical signal Variable reluctance sensors – the movement of nearby ferrous metal objects induce an alternating current electrical signal Pickups – detect movement of metal strings and induce an electrical signal (AC voltage) Electrochemical [ edit ] pH probes Electro-galvanic oxygen sensors Hydrogen sensors Potentiometric sensor Electromechanical [ edit ] Electromechanical input feeds meters and sensors, while electromechanical output devices are generically called actuators ): Accelerometers Air flow sensors Electroactive polymers Rotary motors , linear motors Galvanometers Linear variable differential transformers or rotary variably differential transformers Load cells – converts force to mV/V electrical signal using strain gauges Microelectromechanical systems Potentiometers (when used for measuring position) Pressure sensors String potentiometers Tactile sensors Vibration powered generators Vibrating structure gyroscopes Electroacoustic [ edit ] Loudspeakers , earphones – convert electrical signals into sound ( amplified signal → magnetic field → motion → air pressure) Microphones – convert sound into an electrical signal (air pressure → motion of conductor/coil → magnetic field → electrical signal) [ 3 ] Tactile transducers – convert electrical signal into vibration (electrical signal → vibration) Thermophones – convert electrical signals into temperature fluctuations, which become sound (electrical signal → periodic heating of a thin conductor → temperature waves → sound waves) Piezoelectric crystals – convert deformations of solid-state crystals (vibrations) to and from electrical signals Geophones – convert a ground movement (displacement) into voltage (vibrations → motion of conductor/coil → magnetic field → signal) Gramophone pickups – (air pressure → motion → magnetic field → electrical signal) Hydrophones – convert changes in water pressure into an electrical signal Sonar transponders (water pressure → Motion of conductor/coil → magnetic field → electrical signal) Ultrasonic transceivers , transmitting ultrasound (transduced from electricity) as well as receiving it after sound reflection from target objects, availing for imaging of those objects Electro-optical [ edit ] Also known as photoelectric : Fluorescent lamps – convert electrical power into incoherent light Incandescent lamps – convert electrical power into incoherent light Light-emitting diodes – convert electrical power into incoherent light Laser diodes – convert electrical power into coherent light Photodiodes , photoresistors , phototransistors , photomultipliers – convert changing light levels into electrical signals Photodetector or photoresistor or light dependent resistor (LDR) – convert changes in light levels into changes in electrical resistance Cathode-ray tube (CRT) – convert electrical signals into visual signals Electrostatic [ edit ] Electrometers Thermoelectric [ edit ] Resistance temperature detectors (RTD) – convert temperature into an electrical resistance signal Thermocouples – convert relative temperatures of metallic junctions to electrical voltage Thermistors (includes PTC resistor and NTC resistor) Radioacoustic [ edit ] Geiger-Müller tubes – convert incident ionizing radiation to an electrical impulse signal Radio receivers – convert electromagnetic transmissions to electrical signals.

Radio transmitters – convert electrical signals to electromagnetic transmissions.

See also [ edit ] Cybernetics Horn analyzer List of sensors Tactile sensor References [ edit ] ^ Stonier, Tom (2012).

Information and the Internal Structure of the Universe: An Exploration into Information Physics . Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

96– 98.

ISBN 9781447132653 .

^ Agarwal, Anant; Lang, Jeffrey H. (2005).

Foundations of analog and digital electronic circuits . Amsterdam: Elsevier. p. 43.

ISBN 9780080506814 .

^ a b c d e f g Winer, Ethan (2013). "Part 3".

Plasma Speaker . New York and London: Focal Press.

ISBN 978-0-240-82100-9 .

^ Fraden J. (2016). Handbook of Modern Sensors: Physics, Designs, and Applications 5th ed. Springer. p.1 ^ Kalantar-zadeh, K. (2013). Sensors: An Introductory Course 2013th Edition. Springer. p.1 ^ a b Fraden J. (2016). Handbook of Modern Sensors: Physics, Designs, and Applications 5th ed. Springer. p.7 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Transducers .

Introduction to Closed Loop Hall Effect Current Transducers Federal Standard 1037C, August 7, 1996: transducer A sound transducer with a flat flexible diaphragm working with bending waves Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transducer&oldid=1303724813 " Category : Transducers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 18:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transducer 42 languages Add topic

