Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Cutting garden 3 Modern alternatives 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Flower garden 21 languages Беларуская Čeština فارسی Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Nedersaksies नेपाली Нохчийн Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Žemaitėška Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Garden where flowers are grown and displayed For other uses, see Flower garden (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Flower garden at the Botanic Gardens, Churchtown, Southport, Merseyside, England Flower garden in Norway, Arboretum in Bergen Flower gardens combine plants of different heights, colors, textures, and fragrances to create interest and delight the senses.

A flower garden or floral garden is any garden or part of a garden where plants that flower are grown and displayed.  This normally refers mostly to herbaceous plants, rather than flowering woody plants, which dominate in the shrubbery and woodland garden , although both these types may be part of the planting in any area of the garden.

Most herbaceous flowering plants, especially annuals , grow best in a flowerbed, with soil that is regularly dug over and supplemented with organic matter and fertilizer.

Because flowers bloom at varying times of the year, and some plants are annuals, dying each winter, the design of flower gardens usually needs to take into consideration maintaining a sequence of bloom and consistent color combinations through varying seasons. Besides organizing the flowers in bedding-out schemes limited to annual and perennial flower beds, careful design also takes the labour time, and the color pattern of the flowers into account.

Flower color is another important feature of both the herbaceous border and the mixed border that includes shrubs as well as herbaceous plants . Flower gardens are sometimes tied in function to other kinds of gardens, like knot gardens or herb gardens , many herbs also having decorative function, and some decorative flowers being edible.

History [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Many, if not most, plants considered decorative flowers originated as weeds , which if attractive enough would sometimes be tolerated by farmers because of their appeal. This led to an artificial selection process, producing ever-prettier (to humans) flowers. This is thought to have occurred for the entire history of agriculture, perhaps even slightly earlier, when people tended to favor naturally occurring food-gathering spots. This may also explain why many flowers function as companion plants to more useful agricultural plants; they had evolved that symbiotic relationship with the food plants before either was domesticated, and therefore was found in the same area, convenient to be selected as an attractive plant.

Sunflower Once domesticated, though, most flowers were grown either separately or as part of gardens having some other primary function. In the West, the idea of parts of gardens dedicated to flowers perhaps did not become common until the 16th century.

Flower gardens are a key factor in modern landscape design and even architecture. This is especially true for large businesses, some of which pay to have large flower gardens torn out and replaced entirely each season, in order to keep the color patterns consistent.

The labour time can be decreased by using techniques such as mulching . In flower meadows, grass growth can be moderated by planting parasitic plants such as Rhinanthus .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Cutting garden [ edit ] See also: Cut flowers A functional garden used to grow flowers for indoor use rather than outdoor display is known as a cutting garden.  It is usually only a feature of large residences .

[ 4 ] The cutting garden is typically placed in a fertile and sunlight position out of public view and is not artistically arranged, as it contains flowers for cutting . Very often flowers for cutting are grown in greenhouses , to protect them from severe weather, and control their time of flowering. The cutting garden may also include a herb garden and ornamental vegetables as well.

Modern alternatives [ edit ] A simpler alternative to the designed flower garden is the "wildflower" seed mix, with assortments of seeds which will create a bed that contains flowers of various blooming seasons, so that some portion of them should always be in bloom. The best mixtures even include combinations of perennial and biennials , which may not bloom until the following year, and also annuals that are "self-seeding", so they will return, creating a permanent flowerbed.

Another, even more recent trend is the "flower garden in a box", where the entire design of a flower garden is pre-packaged, with separate packets of each kind of flower, and a careful layout to be followed to create the proposed pattern of color in the garden-to-be.

See also [ edit ] Gardens portal Bedding (horticulture) Herbaceous border List of garden types Raised-bed gardening References [ edit ] ^ "Eén - Groenland - Natuurlijk aangelegde tuinen - Eén" . 26 June 2015. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015.

^ "Natuurtuinen door Groenvoorziening Geys te Mol" .

www.natuurtuinen.be .

^ "Het ratelaar-experiment - de theorie - AnneTannes Tuin" .

annetanne.be . 22 September 2008.

^ Dishan, Varun (10 January 2018).

"Selecting and growing flowers for all seasons" .

Flowers N Fruits . Retrieved 27 June 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flower gardens .

National Garden Bureau National Gardening Association Winnipeg In Bloom Documentary produced by Prairie Public Television v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐f9d2k
Cached time: 20250812030215
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.377 seconds
Real time usage: 0.492 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 951/1000000
Revision size: 6326/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 50991/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1057/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 33619/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.252/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5933225/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  411.544      1 -total
 26.73%  109.985      1 Template:Reflist
 23.02%   94.749      1 Template:Horticulture_and_gardening
 22.62%   93.086      1 Template:Navbox
 20.81%   85.655      3 Template:Cite_web
 13.43%   55.288      1 Template:Short_description
 10.08%   41.463      1 Template:More_footnotes
  9.32%   38.374      2 Template:Ambox
  9.03%   37.147      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.56%   35.238      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5908341:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812030215 and revision id 1297819360. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flower_garden&oldid=1297819360 " Category : Types of garden Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from June 2018 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 18:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Flower garden 21 languages Add topic

