Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 20th century 1.2 21st century 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Bailey Hall (Ithaca, New York) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°26′56.5″N 76°28′48.5″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.449028°N 76.480139°W ﻿ / 42.449028; -76.480139 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia United States historic place Bailey Hall U.S. National Register of Historic Places Bailey Hall, the largest auditorium at Cornell University Show map of New York Show map of the United States Location Cornell University , Ithaca, New York , U.S.

Coordinates 42°26′56.5″N 76°28′48.5″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.449028°N 76.480139°W ﻿ / 42.449028; -76.480139 Built 1912 Architect Green and Wicks Architectural style Greek Revival MPS New York State College of Agriculture TR NRHP reference No.

84003113 Added to NRHP September 24, 1984 Bailey Hall seen from the southwest in February 2009 Bailey Plaza seen from the steps of Bailey Hall with the inclined fountain visible on the right in March 2009 Bailey Hall is the largest auditorium at Cornell University , an Ivy League university in Ithaca, New York . The auditorium seats 1,300 people, and it is named for Liberty Hyde Bailey , the first dean of what is now Cornell's College of Agriculture and Life Sciences .

History [ edit ] 20th century [ edit ] Bailey Hall was constructed in 1912, according to the Greek Revival architecture design of Buffalo -based architect Edward Brodhead Green , an 1878 graduate of Cornell University. It is shaped as an amphitheatre, with a colonnaded portico wrapping around its south side, and monumental stairs leading up to 11-foot main doors.

[ 1 ] It was built by New York state and initially intended for use by Cornell University agriculture students, but it also filled the  need for a large auditorium that could be used by the entire university.

[ 2 ] As originally configured, Bailey seated 1,948. It was described as having "acoustics by God, seats by Torquemada ," a reference to its wooden seats and severely raked floor.

[ 2 ] In 1984, Bailey Hall was added to the National Register of Historic Places .

21st century [ edit ] In 2006, the building reopened after a major rehabilitation which brought it up to modern building codes and made it handicapped-accessible , albeit at the cost of several hundred seats of audience capacity.

The road and small parking lot immediately in front of Bailey were converted into a pedestrian plaza which was opened to the public in 2007. The flagstones of the plaza are hewn from bluestone , similar to the material used to construct the Stone Row on the Arts Quad. Some of the stones were thermally treated to alter their colors to achieve a cosmetic effect.

The benches ringing the plaza extend to 300 feet in length, each having been hewn from a single Oregon Douglas fir . A fountain carved from local stone into a natural, sloping shape invoking Ithaca 's gorges is featured on the southern edge of the plaza.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Crawford, Franklin (September 13, 2006).

"Coming back home to a rebuilt Bailey Hall" . Cornell News Service.

Archived from the original on July 13, 2007 . Retrieved July 21, 2007 .

^ a b "About Bailey Hall" .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2008 . Retrieved November 24, 2008 .

^ Cai, YunYun (October 21, 2007).

"C.U. Celebrates Bailey Plaza" . Cornell Daily Sun. Archived from the original on December 3, 2008 . Retrieved February 17, 2009 .

External links [ edit ] "Bailey Hall at Cornell University v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places in New York Topics Contributing property Keeper of the Register Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places National Park Service Property types Lists by county Albany Allegany Bronx Broome Cattaraugus Cayuga Chautauqua Chemung Chenango Clinton Columbia Cortland Delaware Dutchess Erie Essex Franklin Fulton Genesee Greene Hamilton Herkimer Jefferson Kings (Brooklyn) Lewis Livingston Madison Monroe Montgomery Nassau New York (Manhattan) Niagara Oneida Onondaga Ontario Orange Orleans Oswego Otsego Putnam Queens Rensselaer Richmond (Staten Island) Rockland Saratoga Schenectady Schoharie Schuyler Seneca St. Lawrence Steuben Suffolk Sullivan Tioga Tompkins Ulster Warren Washington Wayne Westchester Northern Southern Wyoming Yates Lists by city Albany Buffalo New Rochelle New York City Bronx Brooklyn Queens Staten Island Manhattan Below 14th St.

14th–59th St.

59th–110th St.

Above 110th St.

Minor islands Niagara Falls Peekskill Poughkeepsie Rhinebeck Rochester Syracuse Yonkers Other lists Bridges and tunnels National Historic Landmarks New York City Outside New York City Category List National Register of Historic Places Portal Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National United States Geographic MusicBrainz place Other SNAC This article about a historic property or district  in Tompkins County , New York , that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places , is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bailey_Hall_(Ithaca,_New_York)&oldid=1301319590 " Categories : 1912 establishments in New York (state) Cornell University buildings Green & Wicks buildings National Register of Historic Places in Tompkins County, New York School buildings completed in 1912 Tourist attractions in Tompkins County, New York University and college buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in New York (state) Finger Lakes, New York Registered Historic Place stubs Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 05:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bailey Hall (Ithaca, New York) Add languages Add topic

