Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Prehistory 2.2 Metal Ages 2.3 Viking Age 2.4 High Middle Ages 2.4.1 Kalmar Union 2.5 Early modern period 2.6 Later modern period 2.7 Dissolution of the union and the First World War 2.8 Second World War 2.9 Post–World War II history 3 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 3.1 Climate 3.2 Biodiversity 3.3 Environment 4 Politics and government Toggle Politics and government subsection 4.1 Administrative divisions 4.1.1 Dependencies of Norway 4.2 Largest populated areas 4.3 Judicial system and law enforcement 4.4 Human rights 4.5 Foreign relations 4.6 Military 5 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 5.1 Resources 5.1.1 Oil industry 5.2 Transport 5.3 Research 5.4 Tourism 6 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 6.1 Population 6.2 Migration 6.3 Religion 6.3.1 Church of Norway 6.3.2 Religious affiliation 6.3.3 Indigenous religions 6.4 Health 6.5 Education 6.6 Languages 6.6.1 Norwegian 6.6.2 Sámi and Kven 6.6.3 Other languages 7 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 7.1 Cinema 7.2 Music 7.3 Literature 7.4 Architecture 7.5 Art 7.6 Cuisine 7.7 Sports 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Citations 10.2 Sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Norway 305 languages Acèh Адыгэбзэ Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti Arpetan Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Авар Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Bamanankan বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ГӀалгӀай 贛語 Gĩkũyũ گیلکی ગુજરાતી 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Iñupiatun Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Ikirundi Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladin Ladino Лакку ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban.

Luganda Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch Pangasinan Pangcah پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Patois Перем коми ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Ποντιακά Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Română Romani čhib Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sängö ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ سرائیکی Sardu Scots Seediq Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça တႆး Tayal తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Thuɔŋjäŋ ትግርኛ Тоҷикӣ Lea faka-Tonga ᏣᎳᎩ Tsetsêhestâhese Tshivenda Türkçe Türkmençe Twi Тыва дыл Удмурт Basa Ugi Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Obolo Batak Toba Betawi Jaku Iban Kumoring ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Tolışi ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 61°N 8°E ﻿ / ﻿ 61°N 8°E ﻿ / 61; 8 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Country in Northern Europe This article is about the European country. For other uses, see Norway (disambiguation) .

Kingdom of Norway Kongeriket Norge ( Bokmål ) Kongeriket Noreg ( Nynorsk ) (in other official languages) [ 1 ] Kven Norjan kuninkhaanvaltakunta Northern Sami Norgga gonagasriika Southern Sami Nöörjen gånkarïjhke Lule Sami Vuona gånågisrijkka Flag Coat of arms Anthem: Ja, vi elsker dette landet (English: "Yes, we love this country" ) Royal anthem : Kongesangen (English: "King's Song" ) Show globe Show map of Europe Show overseas territories and dependencies Location of the Kingdom of Norway (green) in Europe (green and dark grey) Capital and largest city Oslo 59°56′N 10°41′E ﻿ / ﻿ 59.933°N 10.683°E ﻿ / 59.933; 10.683 Official languages Norwegian [ note 1 ] Sámi [ 2 ] [ note 2 ] Recognised national languages Kven Romani Scandoromani [ 3 ] Norwegian Sign Language Ethnic groups (2024) [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ failed verification ] 79.2% Norwegian [ note 3 ] 20.8% non-Norwegian Religion (2024) [ 10 ] [ 11 ] 68.5% Christianity 61.7% Church of Norway [ note 4 ] 6.8% other Christian 27.3% no religion 3.4% Islam 0.8% other Demonym(s) Norwegian Government Unitary parliamentary constitutional monarchy • Monarch Harald V • Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre • President of the Storting Masud Gharahkhani • Chief Justice Toril Marie Øie Legislature Storting Unification of the petty kingdoms • State established 872 • Peak extent of the Old Kingdom 1263 • Kalmar Union (personal union) 1397 • Denmark–Norway (real union) 1524 • State re-established [ 13 ] 25 February 1814 • Constitution 17 May 1814 • Kingdoms of Sweden–Norway (personal union) 4 November 1814 • Union dissolved 7 June 1905 Area • Total 385,207 km 2 (148,729 sq mi) [ 15 ] ( 61st b ) • Water (%) 5.32 (2015) [ 14 ] Population • 2025 estimate 5,601,049 [ 16 ] ( 116th ) • Density 14.5/km 2 (37.6/sq mi) ( 224th ) GDP ( PPP ) 2025 estimate • Total $606.590 billion [ 17 ] ( 49th ) • Per capita $107,890 [ 18 ] ( 5th ) GDP (nominal) 2025 estimate • Total $504.280 billion [ 19 ] ( 31st ) • Per capita $89,690 [ 20 ] ( 6th ) Gini (2020) 25.3 [ 21 ] low inequality HDI (2023) 0.970 [ 22 ] very high ( 2nd ) Currency Norwegian krone ( NOK ) Time zone UTC +1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC +2 ( CEST ) Date format dd .

mm .

yyyy Calling code +47 ISO 3166 code NO Internet TLD .no d Website norge.no Includes the mainland, Svalbard and Jan Mayen .

[ 15 ] Without the integral territories, it is the 67th largest country at 323,802 [ 23 ] square kilometres.

This percentage is for the mainland, Svalbard, and Jan Mayen. This percentage counts glaciers as "land". It's calculated as 19,940.14/(365,246.17+19,940.14).

[ citation needed ] Two more TLDs have been assigned, but are not used: .sj for Svalbard and Jan Mayen; .bv for Bouvet Island .

Norway , [ a ] officially the Kingdom of Norway , [ b ] is a Nordic country located on the Scandinavian Peninsula in Northern Europe . The remote Arctic island of Jan Mayen and the archipelago of Svalbard also form part of the Kingdom of Norway.

[ note 5 ] Bouvet Island , located in the Subantarctic , is a dependency , and not a part of the Kingdom; Norway also claims the Antarctic territories of Peter I Island and Queen Maud Land . Norway has a population of 5.6 million. Its capital and largest city is Oslo . The country has a total area of 385,207 square kilometres (148,729 sq mi).

[ 15 ] The country shares a long eastern border with Sweden , and is bordered by Finland and Russia to the northeast. Norway has an extensive coastline facing the Skagerrak strait, the North Atlantic Ocean, and the Barents Sea .

The unified kingdom of Norway was established in 872 as a merger of petty kingdoms and has existed continuously for 1,152–1,153 years. From 1537 to 1814, Norway was part of Denmark–Norway , and, from 1814 to 1905, it was in a personal union with Sweden. Norway was neutral during the First World War , and in the Second World War until April 1940 when it was invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany until the end of the war.

Harald V of the House of Glücksburg is the current King of Norway .

Jonas Gahr Støre has been Prime Minister of Norway since 2021. As a unitary state with a constitutional monarchy , Norway divides state power between the parliament , the cabinet , and the supreme court , as determined by the 1814 constitution . Norway has both administrative and political subdivisions on two levels: counties and municipalities . The Sámi people have a certain amount of self-determination and influence over traditional territories through the Sámi Parliament and the Finnmark Act . Norway maintains close ties with the European Union and the United States . Norway is a founding member of the United Nations , NATO , the European Free Trade Association , the Council of Europe , the Antarctic Treaty , and the Nordic Council ; a member of the European Economic Area , the WTO , and the OECD ; and a part of the Schengen Area . The Norwegian dialects share mutual intelligibility with Danish and Swedish .

Norway maintains the Nordic welfare model with universal health care and a comprehensive social security system, and its values are rooted in egalitarian ideals.

[ 25 ] The Norwegian state has large ownership positions in key industrial sectors, having extensive reserves of petroleum , natural gas , minerals, lumber , seafood , and fresh water. The petroleum industry accounts for around a quarter of the country's gross domestic product ( GDP ).

[ 26 ] On a per-capita basis, Norway is the world's largest producer of oil and natural gas outside of the Middle East.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] The country has the fourth- and eighth-highest per-capita income in the world on the World Bank 's and IMF 's list, respectively.

[ 29 ] It has the world's largest sovereign wealth fund , with a value of US$1.3 trillion.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Etymology Main article: Etymology of Norway Opening of Ohthere 's Old English account, translated: "Ohthere told his lord Ælfrede king that he lived northmost of all Norwegians…" Norway has two official names: Norge in Bokmål and Noreg in Nynorsk . The English name Norway comes from the Old English word Norþweg mentioned in 880, meaning "northern way" or "way leading to the north", which is how the Anglo-Saxons referred to the coastline of Atlantic Norway.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] The Anglo-Saxons of Britain also referred to the kingdom of Norway in 880 as Norðmanna land .

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] There is some disagreement about whether the native name of Norway originally had the same etymology as the English form. According to the traditional dominant view, the first component was originally norðr , a cognate of English north , so the full name was Norðr vegr , "the way northwards", referring to the sailing route along the Norwegian coast, and contrasting with suðrvegar "southern way" (from Old Norse suðr ) for (Germany), and austrvegr "eastern way" (from austr ) for the Baltic .

[ 35 ] History Main articles: History of Norway and History of Scandinavia Prehistory Main article: Scandinavian prehistory Nordic Bronze Age rock carvings at Steinkjer , Central Norway The earliest traces of human occupation in Norway are found along the coast, where the huge ice shelf of the last ice age first melted between 11,000 and 8000 BC. The oldest finds are stone tools dating from 9500 to 6000 BC, discovered in Finnmark ( Komsa culture ) in the north and Rogaland ( Fosna culture ) in the southwest. Theories about the two cultures being separate were deemed obsolete in the 1970s.

[ 36 ] Between 3000 and 2500 BC, new settlers ( Corded Ware culture ) arrived in eastern Norway . They were Indo-European farmers who grew grain and kept livestock, and gradually replaced the hunting-fishing population of the west coast.

Metal Ages Main articles: Nordic Bronze Age and Iron Age Scandinavia From about 1500 BC, bronze was gradually introduced. Burial cairns built close to the sea as far north as Harstad and also inland in the south are characteristic of this period, with rock carving motifs that differ from those of the Stone Age , depicting ships resembling the Hjortspring boat , while large stone burial monuments known as stone ships were also erected.

[ 37 ] There is little archaeological evidence dating to the early Iron Age (the last 500 years BC). The dead were cremated, and their graves contained few goods. During the first four centuries AD, the people of Norway were in contact with Roman-occupied Gaul ; about 70 Roman bronze cauldrons, often used as burial urns, have been found. Contact with countries farther south brought a knowledge of runes ; the oldest known Norwegian runic inscription dates from the third century.

Viking Age Main articles: Petty kingdoms of Norway and Viking Age See also: Unification of Norway and Hereditary Kingdom of Norway The Oseberg ship at the Viking Ship Museum in Oslo Viking swords found in Norway, preserved at the Bergen Museum By the time of the first historical records of Scandinavia, about the 8th century, several small political entities existed in Norway. It has been estimated that there were nine petty realms in Western Norway during the early Viking Age .

[ 38 ] Archaeologist Bergljot Solberg on this basis estimates that there would have been at least 20 in the whole country.

[ 39 ] In the Viking period, Norwegian Viking explorers discovered Iceland by accident in the ninth century when heading for the Faroe Islands , and eventually came across Vinland , known today as Newfoundland , in Canada. The Vikings from Norway were most active in the northern and western British Isles and eastern North America isles .

[ 40 ] The Gjermundbu helmet found in Buskerud is the only known reconstructable Viking Age helmet.

According to tradition, Harald Fairhair unified them into one in 872 after the Battle of Hafrsfjord in Stavanger , thus becoming the first king of a united Norway.

[ 41 ] Harald's realm was mainly a South Norwegian coastal state. Fairhair ruled with a strong hand and according to the sagas, many Norwegians left the country to live in Iceland, the Faroe Islands , Greenland , and parts of Britain and Ireland.

[ 42 ] Haakon I the Good was Norway's first Christian king, in the mid-10th century, though his attempt to introduce the religion was rejected.

Norse traditions were replaced slowly by Christian ones in the late 10th and early 11th centuries. This is largely attributed to the missionary kings Olaf I Tryggvasson and Olaf II Haraldsson (St. Olaf). Olaf Tryggvasson conducted raids in England, including attacking London. Arriving back in Norway in 995, Olaf landed in Moster where he built a church which became the first Christian church in Norway. From Moster, Olaf sailed north to Trondheim where he was proclaimed King of Norway by the Eyrathing in 995.

[ 43 ] One of the most important sources for the history of the 11th century Vikings is the treaty between the Icelanders and Olaf II Haraldsson, king of Norway circa 1015 to 1028.

[ 44 ] Feudalism never really developed in Norway or Sweden, as it did in the rest of Europe. However, the administration of government took on a very conservative feudal character. The Hanseatic League forced royalty to cede to them greater and greater concessions over foreign trade and the economy, because of the loans the Hansa had made to the royals and the large debt the kings were carrying. The League's monopolistic control over the economy of Norway put pressure on all classes, especially the peasantry, to the degree that no real burgher class existed in Norway.

[ 45 ] High Middle Ages Main article: Kingdom of Norway (872–1397) See also: Greater Norway and Civil war era in Norway The Norwegian Kingdom at its greatest extent during the 13th century, including the Open Border with the Novgorod Republic From the 1040s to 1130, the country was at peace.

[ 46 ] In 1130, the civil war era broke out on the basis of unclear succession laws , which allowed the king's sons to rule jointly. The Archdiocese of Nidaros was created in 1152 and attempted to control the appointment of kings.

[ 47 ] The church inevitably had to take sides in the conflicts. The wars ended in 1217 with the appointment of Håkon IV Håkonsson , who introduced clear laws of succession.

[ 48 ] From 1000 to 1300, the population increased from 150,000 to 400,000, resulting both in more land being cleared and the subdivision of farms. While in the Viking Age farmers owned their own land, by 1300, seventy per cent of the land was owned by the king, the church, or the aristocracy, and about twenty per cent of yields went to these landowners.

[ 49 ] The 14th century is described as Norway's golden age , with peace and increase in trade, especially with the British Islands, although Germany became increasingly important towards the end of the century. Throughout the High Middle Ages , the king established Norway as a sovereign state with a central administration and local representatives.

[ 50 ] In 1349, the Black Death spread to Norway and within a year killed a third of the population. Later plagues reduced the population to half the starting point by 1400. Many communities were entirely wiped out, resulting in an abundance of land, allowing farmers to switch to more animal husbandry . The reduction in taxes weakened the king's position, [ 51 ] and many aristocrats lost the basis for their surplus. High tithes to church made it increasingly powerful and the archbishop became a member of the Council of State .

[ 52 ] Bryggen in Bergen , once the centre of trade in Norway under the Hanseatic League trade network, now preserved as a World Heritage Site The Hanseatic League took control over Norwegian trade during the 14th century and established a trading centre in Bergen . In 1380, Olaf Haakonsson inherited both the Norwegian (as Olaf IV) and Danish thrones (as Olaf II), creating a union between the two countries.

[ 52 ] In 1397, under Margaret I , the Kalmar Union was created between the three Scandinavian countries. She waged war against the Germans, resulting in a trade blockade and higher taxation on Norwegian goods, which led to a rebellion . However, the Norwegian Council of State was too weak to pull out of the union.

[ 53 ] Margaret pursued a centralising policy which inevitably favoured Denmark because of its greater population.

[ 54 ] Margaret also granted trade privileges to the Hanseatic merchants of Lübeck in Bergen in return for recognition of her rule, and these hurt the Norwegian economy. The Hanseatic merchants formed a state within a state in Bergen for generations.

[ 55 ] The " Victual Brothers " launched three devastating pirate raids on the port (the last in 1427).

[ 56 ] Norway slipped ever more to the background under the Oldenburg dynasty (established 1448). There was one revolt under Knut Alvsson in 1502.

[ 57 ] Norway took no part in the events which led to Swedish independence from Denmark in the 1520s.

[ 58 ] Kalmar Union Main article: Kalmar Union Main article: First Swedish–Norwegian union Upon the death of King Haakon V in 1319, Magnus Eriksson , at just three years old, inherited the throne as King Magnus VII. A simultaneous movement to make Magnus King of Sweden proved successful (he was a grandson of King Magnus Ladulås of Sweden), and both the kings of Sweden and of Denmark were elected to the throne by their respective nobles. Thus Sweden and Norway were united under King Magnus VII.

[ 59 ] In 1349, the Black Death killed between 50% and 60% of Norway's population [ 60 ] and led to a period of social and economic decline.

[ 61 ] Although the death rate was comparable with the rest of Europe, economic recovery took much longer because of the small, scattered population.

[ 61 ] Even before the plague, the population was only about 500,000.

[ 62 ] After the plague, many farms lay idle while the population slowly increased.

[ 61 ] However, the few surviving farms' tenants found their bargaining positions with their landlords greatly strengthened.

[ 61 ] The Kalmar Union , c.

1500 King Magnus VII ruled Norway until 1350, when his son, Haakon, was placed on the throne as Haakon VI .

[ 63 ] In 1363, Haakon married Margaret , daughter of King Valdemar IV of Denmark .

[ 61 ] Upon the death of Haakon in 1379, his 10-year-old son Olaf IV acceded to the throne.

[ 61 ] As Olaf had already been elected to the throne of Denmark in 1376, [ 61 ] Denmark and Norway entered a personal union .

[ 64 ] Olaf's mother and Haakon's widow, Queen Margaret, managed the foreign affairs of Denmark and Norway during Olaf's minority.

[ 61 ] Margaret was on the verge of achieving a union of Sweden with Denmark and Norway when Olaf IV suddenly died.

[ 61 ] Denmark made Margaret temporary ruler on the death of Olaf. On 2 February 1388, Norway followed suit and crowned Margaret.

[ 61 ] Queen Margaret knew that her power would be more secure if she were able to find a king to rule in her place. She settled on Eric of Pomerania , grandson of her sister. Thus at an all-Scandinavian meeting held at Kalmar, Erik of Pomerania was crowned king of all three Scandinavian countries, bringing the thrones of Norway, Denmark, and Sweden under the control of Queen Margaret when the country entered into the Kalmar Union .

Early modern period Main article: Denmark–Norway After Sweden broke out of the Kalmar Union in 1521, Norway tried to follow suit, [ citation needed ] but the subsequent rebellion was defeated, and Norway remained in a union with Denmark until 1814. This period was by some referred to as the "400-Year Night", since all of the kingdom's intellectual and administrative power was centred in Copenhagen .

The Battle of the Sound between an allied Dano-Norwegian– Dutch fleet and the Swedish navy, 8 November 1658 (29 October OS ) With the introduction of Protestantism in 1536, the archbishopric in Trondheim was dissolved; Norway lost its independence and effectually became a colony of Denmark. The Church's income and possessions were instead redirected to the court in Copenhagen. Norway lost the steady stream of pilgrims to the relics of St. Olav at the Nidaros shrine and, with them, much of the contact with cultural and economic life in the rest of Europe.

Eventually restored as a kingdom (albeit in legislative union with Denmark) in 1661, Norway saw its land area decrease in the 17th century with the loss of the provinces Båhuslen , Jemtland , and Herjedalen to Sweden, as the result of a number of disastrous wars. In the north, its territory was increased by the acquisition of the provinces of Troms and Finnmark , at the expense of Sweden and Russia.

The famine of 1695–1696 killed roughly 10% of Norway's population.

[ 65 ] The harvest failed in Scandinavia at least nine times between 1740 and 1800, with great loss of life.

[ 66 ] Later modern period Main article: United Kingdoms of Sweden and Norway See also: Norwegian protectorate and Norwegian romantic nationalism The 1814 constitutional assembly, painted by Oscar Wergeland After Denmark–Norway was attacked by the United Kingdom at the 1807 Battle of Copenhagen , it entered into an alliance with Napoleon , with the war leading to dire conditions and mass starvation in 1812. As the Danish kingdom was on the losing side in 1814, it was forced by the Treaty of Kiel to cede Norway to Sweden, while the old Norwegian provinces of Iceland, Greenland, and the Faroe Islands remained with the Danish crown.

[ 67 ] Norway took this opportunity to declare independence, adopted a constitution based on American and French models, and elected the Crown Prince of Denmark and Norway, Christian Frederick , as king on 17 May 1814 – celebrated as the Syttende mai (Seventeenth of May) holiday.

Norwegian opposition to the decision to link Norway with Sweden caused the Norwegian–Swedish War to break out as Sweden tried to subdue Norway by military means. As Sweden's military was not strong enough to defeat the Norwegian forces outright, and Norway's treasury was not large enough to support a protracted war, and as British and Russian navies blockaded the Norwegian coast, [ 68 ] the belligerents were forced to negotiate the Convention of Moss . Christian Frederik abdicated the Norwegian throne and authorised the Parliament of Norway to make the necessary constitutional amendments to allow for the personal union that Norway was forced to accept. On 4 November 1814, the Parliament (Storting) elected Charles XIII of Sweden as king of Norway, thereby establishing the union with Sweden .

[ 69 ] Under this arrangement, Norway kept its liberal constitution and its own independent institutions, though it shared a monarch and foreign policy with Sweden. Following the recession caused by the Napoleonic Wars , economic development of Norway remained slow until 1830.

[ 70 ] This period also saw the rise of Norwegian romantic nationalism , as Norwegians sought to define and express a distinct national character. The movement covered all branches of culture, including literature ( Henrik Wergeland , Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson , Peter Christen Asbjørnsen , Jørgen Moe ), painting ( Hans Gude , Adolph Tidemand ), music ( Edvard Grieg ), and even language policy, where attempts to define a native written language for Norway led to today's two official written forms for Norwegian: Bokmål and Nynorsk .

King Charles III John came to the throne of Norway and Sweden in 1818 and reigned to 1844. He protected the constitution and liberties of Norway and Sweden during the age of Metternich .

[ neutrality is disputed ] As such, he was regarded as a liberal monarch. However, he was ruthless in his use of paid informers, secret police and restrictions on the freedom of the press to put down public movements for reform—especially the Norwegian national independence movement.

[ 71 ] The Romantic Era that followed the reign of Charles III John brought some significant social and political reforms. In 1854, women won the right to inherit property. In 1863, the last trace of keeping unmarried women in the status of minors was removed. Furthermore, women were eligible for different occupations, particularly the common school teacher.

[ 72 ] By mid-century, Norway's democracy was limited; voting was limited to officials, property owners, leaseholders and burghers of incorporated towns.

[ 73 ] A Sámi family in Norway, c.

1900 Norway remained a conservative society. Life in Norway (especially economic life) was "dominated by the aristocracy of professional men who filled most of the important posts in the central government".

[ 74 ] There was no strong bourgeois class to demand a breakdown of this aristocratic control.

[ 75 ] Thus, even while revolution swept over most of the countries of Europe in 1848, Norway was largely unaffected.

[ 75 ] Marcus Thrane was a Utopian socialist who in 1848 organised a labour society in Drammen . In just a few months, this society had a membership of 500 and was publishing its own newspaper. Within two years, 300 societies had been organised all over Norway, with a total membership of 20,000 drawn from the lower classes of both urban and rural areas.

[ 76 ] In the end, the revolt was easily crushed; Thrane was captured and jailed.

[ 77 ] In 1898, all men were granted universal suffrage , followed by all women in 1913.

Dissolution of the union and the First World War Main articles: Union dissolution referendum and Dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden Christian Michelsen , Prime Minister of Norway from 1905 to 1907, played a central role in the peaceful separation of Norway from Sweden on 7 June 1905. A national referendum confirmed the people's preference for a monarchy over a republic. However, no Norwegian could legitimately claim the throne, since none of Norway's noble families could claim royal descent .

The government then offered the throne of Norway to Prince Carl of Denmark, a prince of the Dano-German royal house of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg and a distant relative of Norway's medieval kings. Following the plebiscite, he was unanimously elected king by the Norwegian Parliament ; he took the name Haakon VII .

Throughout the First World War , Norway remained neutral; however, diplomatic pressure from the British government meant that it heavily favoured the Allies . During the war, Norway exported fish to both Germany and Britain, until an ultimatum from the British government and anti-German sentiments as a result of German submarines targeting Norwegian merchantmen led to a termination of trade with Germany. 436 Norwegian merchantmen were sunk by the Kaiserliche Marine , with 1,150 Norwegian sailors killed.

[ 78 ] [ disputed – discuss ] Second World War See also: German occupation of Norway , Reichskommissariat Norwegen , and Quisling regime Bombing of Kristiansund . The German invasion resulted in 24 towns being bombed in the spring of 1940.

Norway once more proclaimed its neutrality during the Second World War , but was invaded by German forces on 9 April 1940. Although Norway was unprepared for the German surprise attack (see: Battle of Drøbak Sound , Norwegian Campaign , and Invasion of Norway ), military and naval resistance lasted for two months. Norwegian armed forces in the north launched an offensive against the German forces in the Battles of Narvik , but were forced to surrender on 10 June after losing British support which had been diverted to France during the German invasion of France .

King Haakon and the Norwegian government escaped to Rotherhithe in London. Throughout the war they sent radio speeches and supported clandestine military actions against the Germans. On the day of the invasion, the leader of the small National-Socialist party Nasjonal Samling , Vidkun Quisling , tried to seize power, but was forced by the German occupiers to step aside. Real power was wielded by the leader of the German occupation authority, Josef Terboven . Quisling, as minister president , later formed a collaborationist government under German control . Up to 15,000 Norwegians volunteered to fight in German units, including the Waffen-SS .

[ 79 ] Adolf Hitler meets the Norwegian Prime Minister Vidkun Quisling and minister Albert Viljam Hagelin , 13 February 1942 Many Norwegians and persons of Norwegian descent joined the Allied forces as well as the Free Norwegian Forces . In June 1940, a small group had left Norway following their king to Britain. This group included 13 ships, five aircraft, and 500 men from the Royal Norwegian Navy. By the end of the war, the force had grown to 58 ships and 7,500 men in service in the Royal Norwegian Navy, 5 squadrons of aircraft in the newly formed Norwegian Air Force, and land forces including the Norwegian Independent Company 1 and 5 Troop as well as No. 10 Commandos .

[ citation needed ] During German occupation , Norwegians built a resistance movement which incorporated civil disobedience and armed resistance including the destruction of Norsk Hydro 's heavy water plant and stockpile of heavy water at Vemork , which crippled the German nuclear programme . More important to the Allied war effort, however, was the role of the Norwegian Merchant Marine , the fourth-largest merchant marine fleet in the world. It was led by the Norwegian shipping company Nortraship under the Allies throughout the war and took part in every war operation from the evacuation of Dunkirk to the Normandy landings . Every December Norway gives a Christmas tree to the United Kingdom as thanks for the British assistance during the war.

[ 80 ] Svalbard was not occupied by German troops, but Germany secretly established a meteorological station there in 1944.

[ 81 ] Post–World War II history Since the 1970s oil production has helped to expand the Norwegian economy and finance the Norwegian state ( Statfjord oil field ).

From 1945 to 1962, the Labour Party held an absolute majority in the parliament. The government, led by prime minister Einar Gerhardsen , embarked on a programme inspired by Keynesian economics , emphasising state financed industrialisation and co-operation between trade unions and employers' organisations . Many measures of state control of the economy imposed during the war were continued, although the rationing of dairy products was lifted in 1949, while price controls and rationing of housing and cars continued until 1960.

The wartime alliance with the United Kingdom and the United States continued in the post-war years. Although pursuing the goal of a socialist economy, the Labour Party distanced itself from the Communists, especially after the Communists' seizure of power in Czechoslovakia in 1948, and strengthened its foreign policy and defence policy ties with the US. Norway received Marshall Plan aid from the United States starting in 1947, joined the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) one year later, and became a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in 1949.

Oil was discovered at the small Balder field in 1967, but production only began in 1999.

[ 82 ] In 1969, the Phillips Petroleum Company discovered petroleum resources at the Ekofisk field west of Norway. In 1973, the Norwegian government founded the State oil company, Statoil (now Equinor ). Oil production did not provide net income until the early 1980s because of the large capital investment required. Around 1975, both the proportion and absolute number of workers in industry peaked. Since then labour-intensive industries and services like factory mass production and shipping have largely been outsourced.

Norway was a founding member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Norway was twice invited to join the European Union , but ultimately declined after referendums that failed by narrow margins in 1972 and 1994 .

[ 83 ] Town Hall Square in Oslo filled with people with roses mourning the victims of the Utøya massacre of 22 July 2011.

In 1981, a Conservative Party government led by Kåre Willoch replaced the Labour Party with a policy of stimulating the stagflated economy with tax cuts, economic liberalisation, deregulation of markets, and measures to curb record-high inflation (13.6% in 1981).

Norway's first female prime minister Gro Harlem Brundtland of the Labour Party continued many of the reforms, while backing traditional Labour concerns such as social security , high taxes, the industrialisation of nature, and feminism. By the late 1990s, Norway had paid off its foreign debt and had started accumulating a sovereign wealth fund . Since the 1990s, a divisive question in politics has been how much of the income from petroleum production the government should spend, and how much it should save.

In 2011, Norway suffered two terrorist attacks by Anders Behring Breivik which struck the government quarter in Oslo and a summer camp of the Labour party's youth movement at Utøya island, resulting in 77 deaths and 319 wounded.

[ 84 ] Jens Stoltenberg led Norway as prime minister for eight years from 2005 to 2013.

[ 85 ] The 2013 Norwegian parliamentary election brought a more conservative government to power, with the Conservative Party and the Progress Party winning 43% of the electorate's votes.

[ 86 ] In the Norwegian parliamentary election 2017 the centre-right government of Prime Minister Erna Solberg won re-election.

[ 87 ] The 2021 Norwegian parliamentary election saw a big win for the left-wing opposition in an election fought on climate change, inequality, and oil; [ 88 ] Labour leader Jonas Gahr Støre was sworn in as prime minister.

[ 89 ] Geography Main articles: Geography of Norway and Geology of Norway A satellite image of continental Norway and nearby countries in winter Norway's core territory comprises the western and northernmost portion of the Scandinavian Peninsula ; the remote island of Jan Mayen and the archipelago of Svalbard are also included.

[ note 5 ] The Antarctic Peter I Island and the sub-Antarctic Bouvet Island are dependent territories and thus not considered part of the Kingdom. Norway also claims a section of Antarctica known as Queen Maud Land .

[ 90 ] Norwegian possessions in the North Atlantic, Faroe Islands , Greenland , and Iceland , remained Danish when Norway was passed to Sweden at the Treaty of Kiel .

[ 91 ] Norway also comprised Bohuslän until 1658, Jämtland and Härjedalen until 1645, [ 90 ] Shetland and Orkney until 1468, [ 92 ] and the Hebrides and Isle of Man until the Treaty of Perth in 1266.

[ 93 ] Norway comprises the western and northernmost part of Scandinavia in Northern Europe, [ 94 ] between latitudes 57° and 81° N , and longitudes 4° and 32° E . Norway is the northernmost of the Nordic countries and if Svalbard is included also the easternmost.

[ 95 ] Norway includes the northernmost point on the European mainland.

[ 96 ] The rugged coastline is broken by huge fjords and thousands of islands. The coastal baseline is 2,532 kilometres (1,573 mi). The coastline of the mainland including fjords stretches 28,953 kilometres (17,991 mi), when islands are included the coastline has been estimated to 100,915 kilometres (62,706 mi).

[ 97 ] Norway shares a 1,619-kilometre (1,006 mi) land border with Sweden, 727 kilometres (452 mi) with Finland, and 196 kilometres (122 mi) with Russia to the east. To the north, west and south, Norway is bordered by the Barents Sea , the Norwegian Sea , the North Sea , and Skagerrak .

[ 98 ] The Scandinavian Mountains form much of the border with Sweden.

At 385,207 square kilometres (148,729 sq mi) (including Svalbard and Jan Mayen ; 323,808 square kilometres (125,023 sq mi) without), [ 15 ] much of the country is dominated by mountainous or high terrain, with a great variety of natural features caused by prehistoric glaciers and varied topography . The most noticeable of these are the fjords.

Sognefjorden is the world's second deepest fjord, and the world's longest at 204 kilometres (127 mi). The lake Hornindalsvatnet is the deepest lake in Europe.

[ 99 ] Norway has about 400,000 lakes [ 100 ] [ 101 ] and 239,057 registered islands.

[ 94 ] Permafrost can be found all year in the higher mountain areas and in the interior of Finnmark county.

Numerous glaciers are found in Norway. The land is mostly made of hard granite and gneiss rock, but slate , sandstone , and limestone are also common, and the lowest elevations contain marine deposits.

Climate Köppen climate classification types of Norway 1991–2020 (0C/32F isotherm for coldest month dividing C and D climates).

Map of Norway showing the normal precipitation (annual average). Period 1961–1990.

Because of the Gulf Stream and prevailing westerlies, Norway experiences higher temperatures and more precipitation than expected at such northern latitudes, especially along the coast. The mainland experiences four distinct seasons, with colder winters and less precipitation inland. The northernmost part has a mostly maritime Subarctic climate , while Svalbard has an Arctic tundra climate. The southern and western parts of Norway, fully exposed to Atlantic storm fronts, experience more precipitation and have milder winters than the eastern and far northern parts. Areas to the east of the coastal mountains are in a rain shadow , and have lower rain and snow totals than the west. The lowlands around Oslo have the warmest summers, but also cold weather and snow in wintertime. The sunniest weather is along the south coast, but sometimes even the coast far north can be very sunny – the sunniest month with 430 sun hours was recorded in Tromsø.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] Because of Norway's high latitude , there are large seasonal variations in daylight. From late May to late July, the sun never completely descends beneath the horizon in areas north of the Arctic Circle , and the rest of the country experiences up to 20 hours of daylight per day. Conversely, from late November to late January, the sun never rises above the horizon in the north, and daylight hours are very short in the rest of the country.

Temperature anomalies found in coastal locations are exceptional, with southern Lofoten and Bø Municipality having all monthly means above freezing in spite of being north of the Arctic Circle. The very northernmost coast of Norway would be ice-covered in winter if not for the Gulf Stream.

[ 104 ] The east of the country has a more continental climate, and the mountain ranges have subarctic and tundra climates. There is also higher rainfall in areas exposed to the Atlantic, especially the western slopes of the mountain ranges and areas close, such as Bergen. The valleys east of the mountain ranges are the driest; some of the valleys are sheltered by mountains in most directions.

Saltdal Municipality in Nordland is the driest place with 211 millimetres (8.3 inches) precipitation annually (1991–2020). In southern Norway, Skjåk Municipality in Innlandet county gets 295 millimetres (11.6 inches) precipitation.

Finnmarksvidda and some interior valleys of Troms county receive around 400 millimetres (16 inches) annually, and the high Arctic Longyearbyen 217 millimetres (8.5 inches).

[ 105 ] Parts of southeastern Norway including parts of Mjøsa have a humid continental climate ( Köppen Dfb), the southern and western coasts and also the coast north to Bodø have an oceanic climate (Cfb), and the outer coast further north almost to North Cape has a subpolar oceanic climate (Cfc). Further inland in the south and at higher altitudes, and also in much of Northern Norway, the subarctic climate (Dfc) dominates. A small strip of land along the coast east of North Cape (including Vardø) earlier had tundra/alpine/polar climate (ET), but this is mostly gone with the updated 1991–2020 climate normals, making this also subarctic. Large parts of Norway are covered by mountains and high altitude plateaus, and about one third of the land is above the treeline and thus exhibit tundra/alpine/polar climate (ET).

[ 102 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 103 ] [ 108 ] Biodiversity Main article: Wildlife of Norway Norway has a larger number of different habitats than almost any other European country. There are approximately 60,000 species in Norway and adjacent waters (excluding bacteria and viruses). The Norwegian Shelf large marine ecosystem is considered highly productive.

[ 109 ] The total number of species include 16,000 species of insects (probably 4,000 more species yet to be described), 20,000 species of algae , 1,800 species of lichen , 1,050 species of mosses , 2,800 species of vascular plants , up to 7,000 species of fungi , 450 species of birds (250 species nesting in Norway), 90 species of mammals, 45 fresh-water species of fish, 150 salt-water species of fish, 1,000 species of fresh-water invertebrates , and 3,500 species of salt-water invertebrates.

[ 110 ] About 40,000 of these species have been described by science. The red list of 2010 encompasses 4,599 species.

[ 111 ] Norway contains five terrestrial ecoregions: Sarmatic mixed forests , Scandinavian coastal conifer forests , Scandinavian and Russian taiga , Kola Peninsula tundra , and Scandinavian montane birch forest and grasslands .

[ 112 ] Seventeen species are listed mainly because they are endangered on a global scale, such as the European beaver , even if the population in Norway is not seen as endangered. The number of threatened and near-threatened species equals to 3,682; it includes 418 fungi species, many of which are closely associated with the small remaining old-growth forests, [ 113 ] 36 bird species, and 16 species of mammals. In 2010, 2,398 species were listed as endangered or vulnerable; of these 1,250 were listed as vulnerable (VU), 871 as endangered (EN), and 276 species as critically endangered (CR), among which were the grey wolf , the Arctic fox , and the pool frog .

[ 111 ] The largest predator in Norwegian waters is the sperm whale , and the largest fish is the basking shark . The largest predator on land is the polar bear , while the brown bear is the largest predator on the Norwegian mainland. The largest land animal on the mainland is the elk (American English: moose ).

Environment Attractive and dramatic scenery and landscape are found throughout Norway.

[ 114 ] The west coast of southern Norway and the coast of northern Norway present some of the most visually impressive coastal sceneries in the world.

National Geographic has listed the Norwegian fjords as the world's top tourist attraction.

[ 115 ] The country is also home to the natural phenomena of the Midnight sun (during summer), as well as the Aurora borealis known also as the Northern lights.

[ 116 ] The 2024 Environmental Performance Index from Yale University , Columbia University and the World Economic Forum put Norway in seventh place, immediately below United Kingdom and Sweden.

[ 117 ] The index is based on environmental risks to human health, habitat loss, and changes in CO 2 emissions. The index notes over-exploitation of fisheries, but not Norway's whaling or oil exports .

[ 118 ] Norway had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.98/10, ranking it 60th globally out of 172 countries.

[ 119 ] Politics and government Main articles: Politics of Norway and Law of Norway See also: 2021 Norwegian parliamentary election The Royal Palace in Oslo King of Norway , Harald V and his consort, Queen Sonja (reigning since 17 January 1991) Prime Minister of Norway , Jonas Gahr Støre (since 14 October 2021) The Storting is the Parliament of Norway .

Norway is considered to be one of the most developed democracies and states of justice in the world. Since 2010, Norway has been classified as the world's most democratic country by the Democracy Index .

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] According to the Constitution of Norway , which was adopted on 17 May 1814 [ 123 ] and was inspired by the United States Declaration of Independence and French Revolution , Norway is a unitary constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system of government, wherein the King of Norway is the head of state and the prime minister is the head of government . Power is separated among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government, as defined by the Constitution, which serves as the country's supreme legal document.

The monarch officially retains executive power. But following the introduction of a parliamentary system of government, the duties of the monarch became strictly representative and ceremonial.

[ 124 ] The Monarch is commander-in-chief of the Norwegian Armed Forces , and serves as chief diplomatic official abroad and as a symbol of unity.

Harald V of the House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg ascended to the Norwegian throne in 1991, the first since the 14th century who has been born in the country.

[ 125 ] Haakon, Crown Prince of Norway , is the heir to the throne.

In practice, the Prime Minister exercises the executive powers. Constitutionally, legislative power is vested with both the government and the Parliament of Norway, but the latter is the supreme legislature and a unicameral body.

[ 126 ] Norway is fundamentally structured as a representative democracy . The Parliament can pass a law by simple majority of the 169 representatives, of which 150 are elected directly from 19 constituencies, and an additional 19 seats ("levelling seats") are allocated on a nationwide basis to make the representation in parliament correspond better with the popular vote for the political parties. A 4% election threshold is required for a party to gain levelling seats in Parliament.

[ 127 ] The Parliament of Norway, called the Storting , ratifies national treaties developed by the executive branch. It can impeach members of the government if their acts are declared unconstitutional. If an indicted suspect is impeached, Parliament has the power to remove the person from office.

The position of prime minister is allocated to the member of Parliament who can obtain the confidence of a majority in Parliament, usually the current leader of the largest political party or, more effectively, through a coalition of parties; Norway has often been ruled by minority governments. The prime minister nominates the cabinet, traditionally drawn from members of the same political party or parties in the Storting, making up the government. The PM organises the executive government and exercises its power as vested by the Constitution.

[ 128 ] Norway has a state church, the Lutheran Church of Norway , which has gradually been granted more internal autonomy in day-to-day affairs, but which still has a special constitutional status. Formerly, the PM had to have more than half the members of cabinet be members of the Church of Norway; this rule was removed in 2012. The issue of separation of church and state in Norway has been increasingly controversial. A part of this is the evolution of the public school subject Christianity, a required subject since 1739. Even the state's loss in a battle at the European Court of Human Rights at Strasbourg [ 129 ] in 2007 did not settle the matter. As of 1 January 2017, the Church of Norway is a separate legal entity, and no longer a branch of the civil service.

[ 130 ] Through the Council of State , a privy council presided over by the monarch, the prime minister and the cabinet meet at the Royal Palace and formally consult the Monarch. All government bills need formal approval by the monarch before and after introduction to Parliament. The Council approves all of the monarch's actions as head of state.

[ 125 ] Members of the Storting are directly elected from party-list proportional representation in nineteen multiwinner voting constituencies in a national multi-party system .

[ 131 ] Historically, both the Norwegian Labour Party and Conservative Party have played leading political roles. In the early 21st century, the Labour Party has been in power since the 2005 election , in a Red–Green Coalition with the Socialist Left Party and the Centre Party .

[ 132 ] Since 2005, both the Conservative Party and the Progress Party have won numerous seats in the Parliament.

[ 133 ] In national elections in September 2013, two political parties, Høyre and Fremskrittspartiet , were elected on promises of tax cuts, more spending on infrastructure and education, better services and stricter rules on immigration, formed a government.

Erna Solberg became prime minister, the second female prime minister after Gro Harlem Brundtland and the first conservative prime minister since Jan P. Syse . Solberg said her win was "a historic election victory for the right-wing parties".

[ 134 ] Her centre-right government won re-election in the 2017 Norwegian parliamentary election .

[ 87 ] Norway's new centre-left cabinet under Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre , the leader of the Labour Party, took office on 14 October 2021.

[ 135 ] Administrative divisions Main articles: Administrative divisions of Norway , Counties of Norway , Municipalities of Norway , and List of towns and cities in Norway See also: Sápmi (area) A municipal and regional reform: "From 14 June 2022, the Storting decided the following division of counties." Norway, a unitary state , is divided into fifteen first-level administrative counties ( fylke ).

[ 136 ] The counties are administered through directly elected county councils who elect the County Mayor . Additionally, the King and government are represented in every county by a County Governor ( Norwegian : statsforvalteren ).

[ 137 ] The counties are then sub-divided into 357 second-level municipalities ( Norwegian : kommuner ), which in turn are administered by directly elected municipal council , headed by a mayor and a small executive cabinet. The capital of Oslo is considered both a county and a municipality. Norway has two integral overseas territories out of mainland: Jan Mayen and Svalbard , the only developed island in the archipelago of the same name, located far to the north of the Norwegian mainland.

[ 138 ] There are 108 settlements that have town/city status in Norway (the Norwegian word by is used to represent these places and that word can be translated as either town or city in English). Cities/towns in Norway were historically designated by the King and used to have special rules and privileges under the law. This was changed in the late 20th century, so now towns/cities have no special rights and a municipality can designate an urban settlement as a city/town. Towns and cities in Norway do not have to be large. Some cities have over a million residents such as Oslo, while others are much smaller such as Honningsvåg with about 2,200 residents. Usually, there is only one town within a municipality, but there are some municipalities that have more than one town within it (such as Larvik Municipality which has the town of Larvik and the town of Stavern .

[ 139 ] Dependencies of Norway Main article: Dependencies of Norway There are three Antarctic and Subantarctic dependencies : Bouvet Island , Peter I Island , and Queen Maud Land . On most maps, there was an unclaimed area between Queen Maud Land and the South Pole until 12 June 2015 when Norway formally annexed that area.

[ 140 ] Norway and its overseas administrative divisions Largest populated areas Main article: List of towns and cities in Norway v t e Largest cities or towns in Norway According to Statistics Dec. 2018 Rank Name County Pop.

Rank Name County Pop.

1 Oslo Oslo 1,000,467 11 Moss Østfold 46,618 2 Bergen Vestland 255,464 12 Haugesund Rogaland 44,830 3 Stavanger/Sandnes Rogaland 222,697 13 Sandefjord Vestfold 43,595 4 Trondheim Trøndelag 183,378 14 Arendal Agder 43,084 5 Drammen Buskerud 117,510 15 Bodø Nordland 40,705 6 Fredrikstad/Sarpsborg Østfold 111,267 16 Tromsø Troms 38,980 7 Porsgrunn/Skien Telemark 92,753 17 Hamar Innlandet 27,324 8 Kristiansand Agder 61,536 18 Halden Østfold 25,300 9 Ålesund Møre og Romsdal 52,163 19 Larvik Vestfold 24,208 10 Tønsberg Vestfold 51,571 20 Askøy Vestland 23,194 Judicial system and law enforcement Main article: Judiciary of Norway Norway uses a civil law system where laws are created and amended in Parliament and the system regulated through the Courts of justice of Norway . It consists of the Supreme Court of 20 permanent judges and a Chief Justice , appellate courts , city and district courts , and conciliation councils .

[ 141 ] The judiciary is independent of executive and legislative branches. While the Prime Minister nominates Supreme Court Justices for office, their nomination must be approved by Parliament and formally confirmed by the Monarch. Usually, judges attached to regular courts are formally appointed by the Monarch on the advice of the Prime Minister.

The Courts' formal mission is to regulate the Norwegian judicial system, interpret the Constitution, and implement the legislation adopted by Parliament. In its judicial reviews, it monitors the legislative and executive branches to ensure that they comply with provisions of enacted legislation.

[ 141 ] The law is enforced in Norway by the Norwegian Police Service . It is a Unified National Police Service made up of 27 Police Districts and several specialist agencies, such as Norwegian National Authority for the Investigation and Prosecution of Economic and Environmental Crime , known as Økokrim ; and the National Criminal Investigation Service , known as Kripos , each headed by a chief of police. The Police Service is headed by the National Police Directorate , which reports to the Ministry of Justice and the Police. The Police Directorate is headed by a National Police Commissioner. The only exception is the Norwegian Police Security Agency , whose head answers directly to the Ministry of Justice and the Police.

Norway abolished the death penalty for regular criminal acts in 1902 and for high treason in war and war-crimes in 1979. Norwegian prisons are humane, rather than tough, with emphasis on rehabilitation. At 20%, Norway's re-conviction rate is among the lowest in the world.

[ 142 ] Reporters Without Borders , in its 2024 World Press Freedom Index , ranked Norway in first place out of 180 countries.

[ 143 ] In general, the legal and institutional framework in Norway is characterised by a high degree of transparency, accountability and integrity, and the perception and the occurrence of corruption are very low.

[ 144 ] Human rights Main article: Human rights in Norway Norway has been considered a progressive country, which has adopted legislation and policies to support women's rights, minority rights, and LGBT rights . As early as 1884, 171 of the leading figures, among them five Prime Ministers, co-founded the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights .

[ 145 ] They successfully campaigned for women's right to education , women's suffrage , the right to work , and other gender equality policies. From the 1970s, gender equality also came high on the state agenda, with the establishment of a public body to promote gender equality, which evolved into the Gender Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombud . Civil society organisations also continue to play an important role; women's rights organisations are today organised in the Norwegian Women's Lobby umbrella organisation.

In 1990, the Norwegian constitution was amended to grant absolute primogeniture to the Norwegian throne, meaning that the eldest child, regardless of gender, takes precedence in the line of succession. As it was not retroactive, the current successor to the throne is the eldest son of the King, rather than his eldest child.

[ 146 ] The Sámi people have for centuries been the subject of discrimination and abuse by the dominant cultures in Scandinavia and Russia, those countries claiming possession of Sámi lands.

[ 147 ] Norway has been greatly criticised by the international community for the politics of Norwegianization of and discrimination against the indigenous population of the country.

[ 148 ] Nevertheless, Norway was, in 1990, the first country to recognise ILO-convention 169 on indigenous people recommended by the UN.

Norway was the first country in the world to enact an anti-discrimination law protecting the rights of gay men and lesbians. In 1993, Norway became the second country to legalise civil union partnerships for same-sex couples, and on 1 January 2009, Norway became the sixth country to legalise same-sex marriage .

[ 149 ] As a promoter of human rights, Norway has held the annual Oslo Freedom Forum conference, a gathering described by The Economist as "on its way to becoming a human-rights equivalent of the Davos economic forum".

[ 150 ] Foreign relations Main article: Foreign relations of Norway See also: Norway and the European Union and Whaling in Norway Royal Norwegian Navy Fridtjof Nansen class frigate Norway maintains embassies in 75 countries.

[ 151 ] 73 countries maintain an embassy in Norway, all of them in the capital, Oslo.

Norway is a founding member of the United Nations (UN), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Council of Europe and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Norway issued applications for accession to the European Union (EU) and its predecessors in 1962, 1967 and 1992, respectively. While Denmark, Sweden and Finland obtained membership, the Norwegian electorate rejected the treaties of accession in referendums in 1972 and 1994 .

After the 1994 referendum, Norway maintained its membership in the European Economic Area (EEA), granting the country access to the internal market of the Union, on the condition that Norway implements the Union's pieces of legislation which are deemed relevant.

[ 152 ] Successive Norwegian governments have, since 1994, requested participation in parts of the EU's co-operation that go beyond the provisions of the EEA agreement. Non-voting participation by Norway has been granted in, for instance, the Union's Common Security and Defence Policy , the Schengen Agreement , and the European Defence Agency , as well as 19 separate programmes.

[ 153 ] Norway participated in the 1990s brokering of the Oslo Accords , an unsuccessful attempt to resolve the Israeli–Palestinian conflict .

Military Main article: Norwegian Armed Forces The first Norwegian F-35 Lightning II lands at Luke Air Force Base.

The Norwegian Armed Forces numbers about 25,000 personnel, including civilian employees. According to 2009 mobilisation plans, full mobilisation produces approximately 83,000 combatant personnel. Norway has conscription (including 6–12 months of training); [ 154 ] in 2013, the country became the first in Europe and NATO to draft women as well as men. However, due to less need for conscripts after the Cold War , few people have to serve if they are not motivated.

[ 155 ] The Armed Forces are subordinate to the Norwegian Ministry of Defence . The Commander-in-Chief is King Harald V . The military of Norway is divided into the Norwegian Army , the Royal Norwegian Navy , the Royal Norwegian Air Force , the Norwegian Cyber Defence Force and the Home Guard .

The country was one of the founding nations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 4 April 1949. Norway contributed in the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan .

[ 156 ] Additionally, Norway has contributed in several missions in contexts of the United Nations, NATO, and the Common Security and Defence Policy of the European Union.

Economy Main articles: Economy of Norway , Energy in Norway , European Economic Area , and Exclusive economic zone § Norway Norway's claimed economic zones Members of the European Free Trade Association (green) participate in the European Single Market and are part of the Schengen Area .

Norwegians enjoy the second-highest GDP per capita among European countries (after Luxembourg ), and the sixth-highest GDP (PPP) per capita in the world. Norway ranks as the second-wealthiest country in monetary value, with the largest capital reserve per capita of any nation.

[ 157 ] According to the CIA World Factbook, Norway is a net external creditor of debt.

[ 98 ] Norway reclaimed first place in the world in the UNDP Human Development Index (HDI) in 2009.

[ 158 ] The standard of living in Norway is among the highest in the world.

Foreign Policy magazine ranks Norway last in its Failed States Index for 2009 and 2023, judging Norway to be the world's most well-functioning and stable country. The OECD ranks Norway fourth in the 2013 equalised Better Life Index and third in intergenerational earnings elasticity according to a 2010 study.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] The Norwegian economy is an example of a mixed economy ; a prosperous capitalist welfare state , it features a combination of free market activity and large state ownership in certain key sectors, influenced by both liberal governments from the late 19th century and later by social democratic governments in the postwar era.

[ citation needed ] Public healthcare in Norway is free (after an annual charge of around 2000 kroner for those over 16), and parents have 46 weeks paid [ 161 ] parental leave. The state income derived from natural resources includes a significant contribution from petroleum production. As of February 2025 [update] , Norway has an unemployment rate of 3.9%, with 69.7% of the population aged 15–74 employed.

[ 162 ] People in the labour force are either employed or looking for work.

[ 163 ] As of 2023 [update] , 10.6% of the population aged 18–67 receive a disability benefit [ 164 ] and 30% of the labour force are employed by the government, the highest in the OECD .

[ 165 ] The hourly productivity levels, as well as average hourly wages in Norway, are among the highest in the world.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] The egalitarian values of Norwegian society have kept the wage difference between the lowest paid worker and the CEO of most companies as much less than in comparable western economies.

[ 168 ] This is also evident in Norway's low Gini coefficient .

The state has large ownership positions in key industrial sectors, such as the strategic petroleum sector (Equinor), hydroelectric energy production ( Statkraft ), aluminium production ( Norsk Hydro ), the largest Norwegian bank ( DNB ), and telecommunication provider ( Telenor ). Through these big companies, the government controls approximately 30% of the stock values at the Oslo Stock Exchange.

[ 169 ] When non-listed companies are included, the state has even higher share in ownership (mainly from direct oil licence ownership).

[ citation needed ] Norway is a major shipping nation and has the world's sixth largest merchant fleet , with 1,412 Norwegian-owned merchant vessels.

[ 170 ] By referendums in 1972 and 1994 , Norwegians rejected proposals to join the European Union (EU). However, Norway, together with Iceland and Liechtenstein , participates in the European Union's single market through the European Economic Area (EEA) agreement. The EEA Treaty between the European Union countries and the EFTA countries—transposed into Norwegian law via "EØS-loven" [ 171 ] —describes the procedures for implementing European Union rules in Norway and the other EFTA countries. Norway is a highly integrated member of most sectors of the EU internal market. Some sectors, such as agriculture, oil and fish, are not wholly covered by the EEA Treaty. Norway has also acceded to the Schengen Agreement and several other intergovernmental agreements among the EU member states.

The country is richly endowed with natural resources including petroleum, hydropower , fish, forests , and minerals. Large reserves of petroleum and natural gas were discovered in the 1960s, which led to an economic boom.

[ 172 ] Norway has obtained one of the highest standards of living in the world in part by having a large amount of natural resources compared to the size of the population.

[ 173 ] In 2011, 28% of state revenues were generated from the petroleum industry.

[ 174 ] [ failed verification ] Norway was the first country to ban deforestation, with a view to preventing its rain forests from vanishing. The country declared its intention at the UN Climate Summit in 2014 alongside Great Britain and Germany.

[ 175 ] Resources Agriculture is a significant sector, in spite of the mountainous landscape ( Øysand ).

Stockfish has been exported from Lofoten in Norway for at least 1,000 years.

Oil industry Oil production has been central to the Norwegian economy since the 1970s, with a dominating state ownership ( Heidrun oil field ).

Export revenues from oil and gas have risen to over 40% of total exports and constitute almost 20% of the GDP.

[ 176 ] Norway is the fifth-largest oil exporter and third-largest gas exporter in the world, but it is not a member of OPEC . In 1995, the Norwegian government established the sovereign wealth fund ( "Government Pension Fund – Global" ) to be funded with oil revenues.

The government controls its petroleum resources through a combination of state ownership in major operators in the oil fields (with approximately 62% ownership in Equinor in 2007) and the fully state-owned Petoro , which has a market value of about twice Equinor, and SDFI . Finally, the government controls licensing of exploration and production of fields. The fund invests in developed financial markets outside Norway. Spending from the fund is constrained by the budgetary rule ( Handlingsregelen ), which limits spending over time to no more than the real value yield of the fund, lowered in 2017 to 3% of the fund's total value.

[ 177 ] Between 1966 and 2013, Norwegian companies drilled 5,085 oil wells, mostly in the North Sea .

[ 178 ] Oil fields not yet in the production phase include: Wisting Central —calculated size in 2013 at 65–156 million barrels of oil and 10 to 40 billion cubic feet (0.28 to 1.13 billion cubic metres), ( utvinnbar ) of gas.

[ 179 ] and the Castberg Oil Field ( Castberg-feltet [ 179 ] )—calculated size at 540 million barrels of oil, and 2 to 7 billion cubic feet (57 to 198 million cubic metres) ( utvinnbar ) of gas.

[ 180 ] Both oil fields are located in the Barents Sea .

Norway is also the world's second-largest exporter of fish (in value, after China).

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] Fish from fish farms and catch constitutes the second largest (behind oil/natural gas) export product measured in value.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Norway is the world's largest producer of salmon, followed by Chile .

[ 185 ] Hydroelectric plants generate roughly 98–99% of Norway's electric power, more than any other country in the world.

[ 186 ] Norway contains significant mineral resources, and in 2013, its mineral production was valued at US$1.5 billion (Norwegian Geological Survey data). The most valuable minerals are calcium carbonate ( limestone ), building stone, nepheline syenite , olivine , iron, titanium , and nickel .

[ 187 ] In 2017, the Government Pension Fund controlled assets surpassed a value of US$1 trillion (equal to US$190,000 per capita), [ 188 ] about 250% of Norway's 2017 GDP.

[ 189 ] It is the largest sovereign wealth fund in the world.

[ 190 ] Other nations with economies based on natural resources, such as Russia, are trying to learn from Norway by establishing similar funds. The investment choices of the Norwegian fund are directed by ethical guidelines ; for example, the fund is not allowed to invest in companies that produce parts for nuclear weapons. Norway's highly transparent investment scheme [ 191 ] is lauded by the international community.

[ 192 ] Transport Main articles: Transport in Norway , Rail transport in Norway , and List of airports in Norway Due to the low population density, narrow shape and long coastlines of Norway, its public transport is less developed than in many European countries, especially outside the major cities. The country has long-standing water transport traditions, but the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications has in recent years implemented rail, road, and air transport through numerous subsidiaries to develop the country's infrastructure.

[ 193 ] Under discussion is development of a new high-speed rail system between the nation's largest cities.

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] Norway's main railway network consists of 4,114 kilometres (2,556 mi) of standard gauge lines, of which 242 kilometres (150 mi) is double track and 64 kilometres (40 mi) high-speed rail (210 km/h) while 62% is electrified at 15 kV  16.7 Hz AC . In 2023, the railways transported 78,220,000 passengers, 3,153 million passenger-kilometres , and 32,230,000 tonnes of cargo for 3,928 million tonne-kilometres .

[ 196 ] The entire network is owned by Bane NOR .

[ 197 ] Domestic passenger trains are operated by various companies, including Vy , SJ , Go-Ahead and Flytoget , while freight trains are operated by CargoNet and OnRail .

[ 198 ] Investment in new infrastructure and maintenance is financed through the state budget, [ 199 ] and subsidies are provided for passenger train operations.

[ 200 ] NSB operates long-haul trains, including night trains , regional services and four commuter train systems, around Oslo , Trondheim , Bergen and Stavanger .

[ 201 ] Oslo Airport, Gardermoen Norway has approximately 95,120 kilometres (59,100 mi) of road network, of which 72,033 kilometres (44,759 mi) are paved and 664 kilometres (413 mi) are motorway.

[ 98 ] The four tiers of road routes are national, county, municipal and private, with national and primary county roads numbered en route. The most important national routes are part of the European route scheme. The two most prominent are the European route E6 going north–south through the entire country, and the E39 , which follows the West Coast. National and county roads are managed by the Norwegian Public Roads Administration .

[ 202 ] Norway has the world's largest registered stock of plug-in electric vehicles per capita .

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] [ 205 ] In March 2014, Norway became the first country where over 1 in every 100 passenger cars on the roads is a plug-in electric.

[ 206 ] The plug-in electric segment market share of new car sales is also the highest in the world.

[ 207 ] According to a report by Dagens Næringsliv in June 2016, the country would like to ban sales of gasoline and diesel powered vehicles as early as 2025.

[ 208 ] Of the 146 airports in Norway, [ 98 ] 52 are public, [ 209 ] and 43 are operated by the state-owned Avinor .

[ 210 ] Seven airports have more than one million passengers annually.

[ 209 ] A total of 41,089,675 passengers passed through Norwegian airports in 2007, of whom 13,397,458 were international.

[ 209 ] The central gateway to Norway by air is Oslo Airport, Gardermoen .

[ 209 ] Located about 35 kilometres (22 mi) northeast of Oslo, it is hub for the two major Norwegian airlines: Scandinavian Airlines [ 211 ] and Norwegian Air Shuttle , [ 212 ] and for regional aircraft from Western Norway.

[ 213 ] There are departures to most European countries and some intercontinental destinations.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] A direct high-speed train connects to Oslo Central Station every 10 minutes for a 20 min ride.

Research Niels Henrik Abel made pioneering contributions in a variety of fields. The Abel Prize in mathematics, originally proposed in 1899 to complement the Nobel Prizes , is named in his honour.

Norway has a rich history of contributions to science, mathematics, and technology, with several internationally recognized scientists and innovators.

In mathematics, Niels Henrik Abel and Sophus Lie made groundbreaking contributions to analysis and group theory .

Caspar Wessel was the first to describe vectors and complex numbers in the complex plane , laying the foundation for modern vector and complex analysis.

Thoralf Skolem made revolutionary contributions to mathematical logic , while Øystein Ore and Ludwig Sylow advanced group theory.

Atle Selberg , a major figure in 20th-century mathematics, was honored with the Fields Medal , Wolf Prize , and Abel Prize .

Ernst S. Selmer 's work significantly influenced modern cryptographic algorithms .

In physics, notable figures include Kristian Birkeland , known for his work on the aurora borealis , and Ivar Giaever , a Nobel laureate in physics.

Carl Anton Bjerknes and Christopher Hansteen made contributions to hydrodynamics and geomagnetism , respectively. The meteorologists Vilhelm Bjerknes and Ragnar Fjørtoft were instrumental in the development of numerical weather prediction .

Norwegian chemists like Lars Onsager , a Nobel laureate, and Odd Hassel , recognized for his work in stereochemistry , have left a lasting legacy.

Peter Waage and Cato Maximilian Guldberg formulated the law of mass action , fundamental to chemical reaction theory.

In technology, Victor Goldschmidt is regarded as a founder of modern geochemistry .

Håkon Wium Lie pioneered Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), a cornerstone of web design.

Pål Spilling contributed to the development of the Internet Protocol , bringing the Internet to Europe. Computer scientists Ole-Johan Dahl and Kristen Nygaard developed Simula , the first object-oriented programming language , earning them the prestigious Turing Award .

Norwegian academics have also advanced social sciences.

Arne Næss founded deep ecology , while Johan Galtung established the field of peace studies . Criminologists Nils Christie and Thomas Mathiesen , sociologists Vilhelm Aubert , Harriet Holter , and Erik Grønseth , and political scientist Stein Rokkan made pioneering contributions to their fields. Economists Ragnar Frisch , Trygve Haavelmo , and Finn E. Kydland were honored with Nobel Prizes for their work in econometrics and macroeconomics .

As of 2024, Norway is ranked 21st in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

[ 216 ] The country has produced fourteen Nobel laureates across various disciplines.

Tourism Main article: Tourism in Norway See also: Tourist attractions in Norway In 2019, Norway ranked 20th in the World Economic Forum 's Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report .

[ 217 ] Tourism in Norway contributed to 4.2% of the gross domestic product as reported in 2016.

[ 218 ] Every one in fifteen people throughout the country work in the tourism industry.

[ 218 ] Tourism is seasonal in Norway, with more than half of total tourists visiting between the months of May and August.

[ 218 ] The main attractions of Norway are the varied landscapes that extend across the Arctic Circle . It is famous for its coastline and its mountains, ski resorts, lakes and woods. Popular tourist destinations in Norway include Oslo , Ålesund , Bergen , Stavanger , Trondheim , Kristiansand , Arendal , Tromsø , Fredrikstad , and Tønsberg . Much of the nature of Norway remains unspoiled, and thus attracts numerous hikers and skiers. The fjords, mountains and waterfalls in Western Norway and Northern Norway attract several hundred thousand foreign tourists each year. In the cities, cultural idiosyncrasies such as the Holmenkollen ski jump in Oslo and Saga Oseberg in Tønsberg attract many visitors, as do landmarks such as Bryggen in Bergen, Vigeland installation in Frogner Park in Oslo, Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim, Fredrikstad Fortress ( Gamlebyen ) in Fredrikstad, and the ruin park of Tønsberg Fortress in Tønsberg.

Demographics Main article: Demographics of Norway Population Annual population growth in Norway 1951–2016, in thousands Norway's population was 5,585,044 people in the fourth quarter of 2024.

[ 219 ] Norwegians are an ethnic North Germanic people. The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2023 was estimated at 1.40 children born per woman, [ 220 ] below the replacement rate of 2.1, it remains considerably below the high of 4.69 children born per woman in 1877.

[ 221 ] In 2024 the median age of the Norwegian population was 40 years.

[ 222 ] The Sámi people are indigenous to the Far North and have traditionally inhabited central and northern parts of Norway and Sweden, as well as areas in northern Finland and in Russia on the Kola Peninsula . Another national minority are the Kven people , descendants of Finnish-speaking people who migrated to northern Norway from the 18th up to the 20th century. From the 19th century up to the 1970s, the Norwegian government tried to assimilate both the Sámi and the Kven, encouraging them to adopt the majority language, culture and religion.

[ 223 ] Because of this " Norwegianization process", many families of Sámi or Kven ancestry now identify as ethnic Norwegian.

[ 224 ] The national minorities of Norway are Kvens, Jews , Forest Finns , and Romani people .

[ 225 ] In 2017, Norway's population ranked first on the World Happiness Report , and in 2025, it ranked seventh.

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] Migration Main articles: Norwegian diaspora and Immigration to Norway Norwegians of two Norwegian parents, either born abroad or in Norway as a percentage proportionally and nationally in Norway as of 2021 Particularly in the 19th century, when economic conditions were difficult in Norway, tens of thousands of people migrated to the United States and Canada, where they could work and buy land in frontier areas. Many went to the Midwest and Pacific Northwest. In 2006, according to the US Census Bureau, almost 4.7 million persons identified as Norwegian Americans , [ 228 ] which was larger than the population of ethnic Norwegians in Norway itself.

[ 229 ] In the 2021 Canadian census, 466,500 Canadian citizens identified as having Norwegian ancestry .

[ 230 ] In 2024, approximately 931,081 individuals (16.8% of the population) of the population of Norway were immigrants. Of these, 386,559 (41.5%) had a Western background (Europe, USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand), while 544,521 (58.5%) had a non-Western background (Asia, Africa, South and Central America). 221,459 individuals (4% of the population) were children of immigrants, born in Norway.

[ 231 ] The largest groups of immigrants have come from Poland , Lithuania , Sweden and Syria , as well as Ukraine since the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022.

[ 231 ] Immigrants have settled in all Norwegian municipalities. In 2013, the cities with the highest share of immigrants were Oslo (32%) and Drammen (27%).

[ 232 ] According to Reuters , Oslo is the "fastest growing city in Europe because of increased immigration".

[ 233 ] In recent years, immigration has accounted for most of Norway's population growth.

[ 234 ] Religion Main article: Religion in Norway Church of Norway Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim Separation of church and state happened significantly later in Norway than in most of Europe, and remains incomplete. In 2012, the Norwegian parliament voted to grant the Church of Norway greater autonomy, [ 235 ] a decision which was confirmed in a constitutional amendment on 21 May 2012.

[ 236 ] Until 2012 parliamentary officials were required to be members of the Evangelical-Lutheran Church of Norway, and at least half of all government ministers had to be a member of the state church. As state church, the Church of Norway's clergy were viewed as state employees, and the central and regional church administrations were part of the state administration. Members of the Royal family are required to be members of the Lutheran church. On 1 January 2017, Norway made the church independent of the state, but retained the Church's status as the "people's church".

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] Most Norwegians are registered at baptism as members of the Church of Norway. Many remain in the church to participate in the community and practices such as baptism , confirmation , marriage, and burial rites. About 61.7% of Norwegians were members of the Church of Norway in 2024. In the same year, approximately 50.4% of all newborns were baptised and about 47.6% of all 15-year-olds were confirmed in the church.

[ 239 ] Religious affiliation Official religious affiliation in Norway (31 December 2019): [ 240 ] [ 241 ] [ 242 ] Evangelical Lutheran Church of Norway (68.7%) Catholic Church (3.08%) Pentecostal congregations (0.76%) Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox (0.53%) Evangelical Lutheran Free Church (0.36%) Other Christian denominations (2.21%) Islam (3.41%) Buddhism (0.40%) Hinduism (0.21%) Secular Humanism (1.85%) Unaffiliated (18.3%) Other Religion (0.09%) According to the 2010 Eurobarometer Poll, 22% of Norwegian citizens responded that "they believe there is a God", 44% responded that "they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force" and 29% responded that "they don't believe there is any sort of spirit, God or life force". Five per cent gave no response.

[ 243 ] In the early 1990s, studies estimated that between 4.7% and 5.3% of Norwegians attended church on a weekly basis.

[ 244 ] This figure has dropped to about 2%.

[ 245 ] [ 246 ] In 2010, 10% of the population was religiously unaffiliated , while another 9% were members of religious communities outside the Church of Norway.

[ 247 ] Other Christian denominations total about 4.9% [ 247 ] of the population, the largest of which is the Roman Catholic Church , with 83,000 members, according to 2009 government statistics.

[ 248 ] The Aftenposten (Evening Post) in October 2012 reported there were about 115,234 registered Roman Catholics in Norway; the reporter estimated that the total number of people with a Roman Catholic background may be 170,000–200,000 or higher.

[ 249 ] Others include Pentecostals (39,600), [ 248 ] the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church of Norway (19,600), [ 248 ] the United Methodist Church in Norway (11,000), [ 248 ] Baptists (9,900), [ 248 ] Eastern Orthodox (9,900), [ 248 ] Brunstad Christian Church (6,800), [ 248 ] Seventh-day Adventists (5,100), [ 248 ] Assyrians of the ACOE and the Chaldean Catholic Church , and others. The Swedish, Finnish and Icelandic Lutheran congregations in Norway have about 27,500 members in total.

[ 248 ] Other Christian denominations comprise less than 1% each, including 4,000 members in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and 12,000 Jehovah's Witnesses .

[ 248 ] Among non-Christian religions, Islam is the largest, with 166,861 registered members (2018), and probably fewer than 200,000 in total.

[ 250 ] Other religions comprise less than 1% each, including 819 adherents of Judaism .

[ 251 ] Indian immigrants introduced Hinduism to Norway, which in 2011 has slightly more than 5,900 adherents, or 1% of non-Lutheran Norwegians.

[ 251 ] Sikhism has approximately 3,000 adherents, with most living in Oslo, which has two gurdwaras . Drammen also has a sizeable population of Sikhs; the largest gurdwara in north Europe was built in Lier . There are eleven Buddhist organisations, grouped under the Buddhistforbundet organisation, with slightly over 14,000 members, [ 251 ] which make up 0.2% of the population. The Baháʼí Faith religion has slightly more than 1,000 adherents.

[ 251 ] Around 1.7% (84,500) of Norwegians belong to the secular Norwegian Humanist Association .

From 2006 to 2011, the fastest-growing religious communities in Norway were Eastern Orthodox Christianity and Oriental Orthodox Christianity , which grew in membership by 80%; however, their share of the total population remains small, at 0.2%. It is associated with the immigration from Eritrea and Ethiopia, and to a lesser extent from Central and Eastern European and Middle Eastern countries. Other fast-growing religions were Roman Catholicism (78.7%), Hinduism (59.6%), Islam (48.1%), and Buddhism (46.7%).

[ 252 ] Indigenous religions As in other Scandinavian countries, the ancient Norse followed a form of Germanic paganism known as Norse paganism . By the end of the 11th century, when Norway had been Christianised , the indigenous Norse religion and practices were prohibited. Remnants of the native religion and beliefs of Norway survive today in the form of names, referential names of cities and locations, the days of the week, and everyday language. Modern interest in the old ways has led to a revival of pagan religious practices in the form of Åsatru .

The Norwegian Åsatrufellesskapet Bifrost formed in 1996; in 2011, the fellowship had about 300 members.

Foreningen Forn Sed was formed in 1999 and has been recognised by the Norwegian government.

The Sámi minority retained their shamanistic religion well into the 18th century, when most converted to Christianity under the influence of Dano-Norwegian Lutheran missionaries . Today there is a renewed appreciation for the Sámi traditional way of life, which has led to a revival of Noaidevuohta .

[ 253 ] Some Norwegian and Sámi celebrities are reported to visit shamans for guidance.

[ 254 ] [ 255 ] Health Main article: Health in Norway Development of life expectancy in Norway Norway was awarded first place according to the UN's Human Development Index (HDI) for 2013.

[ 256 ] From the 1900s, improvements in public health occurred as a result of development in several areas such as social and living conditions , changes in disease and medical outbreaks, establishment of the health care system, and emphasis on public health matters.

Vaccination and increased treatment opportunities with antibiotics resulted in great improvements within the Norwegian population. Improved hygiene and better nutrition were factors that contributed to improved health.

The disease pattern in Norway changed from communicable diseases to non-communicable diseases and chronic diseases as cardiovascular disease . Inequalities and social differences are still present in public health in Norway.

[ 257 ] In 2024 the infant mortality rate was 2.1 per 1,000 live births among children under the age of one. For girls it was 1.7 and for boys 2.4, which is the lowest infant mortality rate for boys ever recorded in Norway.

[ 258 ] Education Main article: Education in Norway The main building of the Norwegian University of Science and Technology in Trondheim Higher education in Norway is offered by a range of seven universities , five specialised colleges, 25 university colleges as well as a range of private colleges. Education follows the Bologna Process involving Bachelor (3 years), Master (2 years) and PhD (3 years) degrees.

[ 259 ] Acceptance is offered after finishing upper secondary school with general study competence.

Public education is virtually free for citizens from EU/EEA and Switzerland, but other nationalities need to pay tuition fees.

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] [ 262 ] Higher education has historically been free for everyone regardless of nationality, but tuition fees for all students from outside EU/EEA and Switzerland was implemented in 2023.

[ 263 ] [ 264 ] The academic year has two semesters , from August to December and from January to June. The ultimate responsibility for the education lies with the Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research .

Languages Main articles: Languages of Norway and Norwegian dialects See also: Norwegian language and Sámi languages The map shows the division of the Norwegian dialects within the main groups.

Norwegian in its two forms, Bokmål and Nynorsk , is the main national official language of all of Norway. Sámi, a group which includes three separate languages, is recognised as a minority language on the national level and is a co-official language alongside Norwegian in the Sámi administrative linguistic area ( Forvaltningsområdet for samisk språk ) in Northern Norway.

[ 2 ] Kven is a minority language and is a co-official language alongside Norwegian in one municipality, also in Northern Norway.

[ 265 ] [ 266 ] [ 267 ] Norwegian Norwegian is a North Germanic language descended from Old Norse . It is the main national language of Norway and is spoken throughout the country. Norwegian is spoken natively by over 5 million people mainly in Norway, but is generally understood throughout Scandinavia and to a lesser degree other Nordic countries . It has two official written forms, Bokmål and Nynorsk . Both are used in public administration, schools, churches, and media. Bokmål is the written language used by a majority of about 85%. Around 95% of the population speak Norwegian as their first or native language, although many speak dialects that may differ significantly from the written languages. Norwegian dialects are mutually intelligible, although listeners with limited exposure to dialects other than their own may struggle with certain phrases and pronunciations.

Norwegian is closely related to and generally mutually intelligible with its neighbour Scandinavian languages ; Danish and Swedish , and the three main Scandinavian languages thus form both a dialect continuum and a larger language community with about 25 million speakers. All three languages are commonly employed in communication among inhabitants of the Scandinavian countries. As a result of the co-operation within the Nordic Council , inhabitants of all Nordic countries always have the right to communicate with Norwegian authorities in Danish or Swedish as equal alternatives to Norwegian.

[ 268 ] In the 19th and 20th centuries, the Norwegian language was subject to strong political and cultural controversies . This led to the development of Nynorsk in the 19th century and to the formation of alternative spelling standards in the 20th century.

Sámi and Kven Several Uralic Sámi languages, which are related but not generally mutually intelligible, are traditionally spoken by the Sámi people primarily in Northern Norway and to much lesser extent in some parts of Central Norway. Around 15,000 people have officially registered as Sámi in the Sámi census ( Samemanntallet ), but the number of people of recent Sámi heritage is often estimated at 50,000 people. The number of people who have some knowledge of Northern Sámi, including as a second language, is estimated at 25,000 people, but only a minority are native speakers. The other Sámi languages are heavily endangered and spoken by at most a few hundred people. Most people of Sámi heritage are today native speakers of Norwegian as a result of past assimilation policies.

[ 269 ] Speakers have a right to be educated and to receive communication from the government in their own language in a special forvaltningsområde (administrative area) for Sámi languages.

[ 270 ] [ 271 ] The Kven minority historically spoke the Uralic Kven language (considered a separate language in Norway, but generally perceived as a Finnish dialect in Finland). Today the majority of ethnic Kven have little or no knowledge of the language.

[ 272 ] As Norway has ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (ECRML) the Kven language together with Romani and Scandoromani language has become officially recognised minority languages.

[ 273 ] [ 274 ] Other languages Some supporters have also advocated making Norwegian Sign Language an official language.

[ 275 ] [ 276 ] The primary foreign language taught in Norwegian schools is English, and the majority of the population, especially those born after World War II, is fairly fluent in English. German, French and Spanish are also commonly taught as second or, more often, third languages. Russian, Japanese, Italian, Latin , and rarely Chinese (Mandarin) are offered in some schools, mostly in the cities. Traditionally, English, German and French were considered the main foreign languages in Norway. These languages, for instance, were used on Norwegian passports until the 1990s, and university students have a general right to use these languages when submitting their theses.

90% of Norwegians are fluent in English.

[ 277 ] Culture Main article: Culture of Norway Traditional Norwegian farmer's costumes, known as folkedrakt , and modern costumes inspired by those costumes, known as bunad , are widely used on special occasions.

The Norwegian farm culture continues to play a role in contemporary Norwegian culture. In the 19th century, it inspired a strong romantic nationalistic movement, which is still visible in the Norwegian language and media . Norwegian culture expanded with nationalist efforts to achieve an independent identity in the areas of literature, art and music. This continues today in the performing arts and as a result of government support for exhibitions, cultural projects and artwork.

[ 278 ] Cinema Main article: Cinema of Norway Norwegian cinema has received international recognition. The documentary film Kon-Tiki (1950) won an Academy Award . Another notable film is The Pinchcliffe Grand Prix , an animated feature film directed by Ivo Caprino . The film was released in 1975 and is the most widely seen Norwegian film of all time.

[ 279 ] Nils Gaup 's Pathfinder (1987), the story of the Sámi , was nominated for an Oscar.

Berit Nesheim 's The Other Side of Sunday was nominated for an Oscar in 1997.

Egil Ragnar Monn-Iversen had so much influence in Norwegian culture that he received the nickname the Godfather .

Since the 1990s, the film industry has expanded, producing up to 20 feature films each year. Particular successes were Kristin Lavransdatter , based on a novel by a Nobel Prize winner; The Telegraphist and Gurin with the Foxtail .

Knut Erik Jensen was among the more successful new directors, together with Erik Skjoldbjærg , who is remembered for Insomnia .

[ 280 ] Elling and the 2012 adaption of Kon-Tiki was nominated for an Oscar for the best foreign language film. The TV-series Skam created by Julie Andem received a cult following and international recognition, with many countries making their own adaptations.

Norwegian directors such as Joachim Rønning , Anja Breien , Espen Sandberg , Liv Ullmann and Morten Tyldum have made internationally successful movies such as The Imitation Game , Passengers , Pirates of the Caribbean: Salazar's Revenge and Maleficent: Mistress of Evil , as well as the TV series Jack Ryan and Marco Polo . Composers include Thomas Bergersen , who composed for Avatar , The Dark Knight , Harry Potter and Narnia .

Egil Monn-Iversen has been one of the most influential modern composers in Norway, having composed scores to over 100 Norwegian movies and TV series.

Norway has been used as filming location for Hollywood and other international productions, including Star Wars The Empire Strikes Back (1980). Among the thousands of movies filmed in Norway include Die Another Day , No Time to Die , The Golden Compass , Spies Like Us , Mission: Impossible – Fallout and Mission: Impossible – Dead Reckoning Part One , Black Widow , Tenet , Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince and Heroes of Telemark , as well as the TV series Lilyhammer and Vikings .

[ 281 ] Music Main article: Music of Norway See also: Norwegian music industry Edvard Grieg , composer and pianist The classical music of the romantic composers Edvard Grieg , Rikard Nordraak and Johan Svendsen is internationally known, as is the modern music of Arne Nordheim . Norway's classical performers include Leif Ove Andsnes , a pianist; Truls Mørk , an outstanding cellist ; and the Wagnerian soprano Kirsten Flagstad .

[ citation needed ] The Norwegian ballad tradition , known as the "ballad wave" (Norwegian: visebølgen ), started as a cultural movement in the 1960s, greatly inspired by the Swedish ballad tradition and its modern representatives such as Olle Adolphson and Cornelis Vreeswijk . Some of its prominent representatives are Ole Paus , Lillebjørn Nilsen and Finn Kalvik .

[ 282 ] The jazz scene is thriving.

Jan Garbarek , Terje Rypdal , Mari Boine , Arild Andersen and Bugge Wesseltoft are internationally recognised while Paal Nilssen-Love , Supersilent , Jaga Jazzist and Wibutee are becoming world-class artists.

[ 283 ] Norway has a strong folk music tradition which remains popular.

[ 284 ] Among the most prominent folk musicians are Hardanger fiddlers Andrea Een , Olav Jørgen Hegge and Annbjørg Lien , and the vocalists Agnes Buen Garnås , Kirsten Bråten Berg and Odd Nordstoga .

Norwegian black metal , a form of rock music in Norway , has been an influence in world music since the late 20th century.

[ citation needed ] Since the 1990s, Norway's export of black metal has been developed by such bands as Emperor , Darkthrone , Gorgoroth , Mayhem , Burzum and Immortal . Bands such as Enslaved , Kvelertak , Dimmu Borgir and Satyricon have evolved the genre while still garnering worldwide fans.

Notable female solo artists from Norway include Susanne Sundfør , Sigrid , Astrid S , Adelén , Julie Bergan , Maria Mena , Tone Damli , Margaret Berger , Lene Marlin , Christel Alsos , Maria Arredondo , Marion Raven and Marit Larsen (both former members of the defunct pop-rock band M2M ), Lene Nystrøm (vocalist of the Danish Eurodance group Aqua ), Anni-Frid Lyngstad (vocalist of the Swedish pop group ABBA ), and Aurora Aksnes . Norwegian songwriters and producers for international artists include Stargate , Espen Lind , Lene Marlin and Ina Wroldsen .

Norway has been a constant competitor in the Eurovision Song Contest , participating 62 times. Since its first participation in 1960, Norway has won the competition three times: Bobbysocks 's win in 1985 , Secret Garden 's win in 1995 and Alexander Rybak 's win in 2009 .

[ 285 ] Alexander Rybak's win in 2009 with his song Fairytale was a major win in Eurovision's history as it scored the biggest margin of victory ever.

[ 286 ] The song was an international hit, peaking at number one in several countries.

[ 287 ] Norway enjoys many music festivals throughout the year, all over the country. Norway is the host of one of the world's biggest extreme sport festivals with music, Ekstremsportveko —a festival held annually in Voss . Oslo is the host of many festivals, such as Øyafestivalen and by:Larm . Oslo used to have a summer parade similar to the German Love Parade . In 1992, the city of Oslo wanted to adopt the French music festival Fête de la Musique .

Fredrik Carl Størmer established the festival. From its first year, "Musikkens Dag" gathered thousands of people and artists in the streets of Oslo. "Musikkens Dag" is now renamed Musikkfest Oslo .

[ citation needed ] Literature Main article: Norwegian literature See also: List of Norwegian writers This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Henrik Ibsen , the most frequently performed dramatist in the world after Shakespeare .

The history of Norwegian literature starts with the pagan Eddaic poems and skaldic verse of the ninth and tenth centuries, with poets such as Bragi Boddason and Eyvindr skáldaspillir . The arrival of Christianity around the year 1000 brought Norway into contact with European medieval learning, hagiography and history writing. Merged with native oral tradition and Icelandic influence, this influenced the literature written in the late 12th and early 13th centuries. Major works of that period include Historia Norwegiæ , Þiðrekssaga and Konungs skuggsjá .

Little Norwegian literature came out of the period of the Scandinavian Union and the subsequent Dano-Norwegian union (1387–1814), with some notable exceptions such as Petter Dass and Ludvig Holberg . During the union with Denmark, the government imposed using only written Danish, which decreased the writing of Norwegian literature.

Two major events precipitated a major resurgence in Norwegian literature: in 1811 a Norwegian university was established in Christiania , and in 1814 the Norwegians created their first Constitution . Authors were inspired and became recognised first in Scandinavia, and then worldwide; among them were Henrik Wergeland , Peter Christen Asbjørnsen , Jørgen Moe and Camilla Collett .

By the late 19th century, in the Golden Age of Norwegian literature, the so-called "Great Four" emerged: Henrik Ibsen , Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson , Alexander Kielland , and Jonas Lie . Bjørnson's "peasant novels", such as Ein glad gut (A Happy Boy) and Synnøve Solbakken , are typical of the Norwegian romantic nationalism of their day. Kielland's novels and short stories are mostly naturalistic. Although an important contributor to early romantic nationalism, (especially Peer Gynt ), Henrik Ibsen is better known for his pioneering realistic dramas such as The Wild Duck and A Doll's House .

In the 20th century, three Norwegian novelists were awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature : Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson in 1903, Knut Hamsun for the book Markens grøde (" Growth of the Soil ") in 1920, and Sigrid Undset (known for Kristin Lavransdatter ) in 1928.

Architecture Main article: Architecture of Norway The Urnes Stave Church has been listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site .

Dalen Hotel in Telemark built in Dragon Style , a style of design architecture that originated during the Norwegian romantic nationalism .

With expansive forests, Norway has long had a tradition of building in wood. Many of today's most interesting new buildings are made of wood, reflecting the strong appeal that this material continues to hold for Norwegian designers and builders.

[ 288 ] With Norway's conversion to Christianity, churches were built. Stonework architecture was introduced from Europe for the most important structures, beginning with the construction of Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim . In the early Middle Ages , wooden stave churches were constructed throughout Norway. Some of them have survived; they represent Norway's most unusual contribution to architectural history.

Urnes Stave Church in inner Sognefjord is on UNESCO 's World Heritage List . Another notable example of wooden architecture is the buildings at Bryggen Wharf in Bergen, also on the list for World Cultural Heritage sites, consisting of a row of tall, narrow wooden structures along the quayside.

In the 17th century, under the Danish monarchy, cities and villages such as Kongsberg and Røros were established. The city Kongsberg had a church built in the Baroque style. Traditional wooden buildings that were constructed in Røros have survived.

After Norway's union with Denmark was dissolved in 1814, Oslo became the capital. The architect Christian H. Grosch designed the earliest parts of the University of Oslo , the Oslo Stock Exchange , and many other buildings and churches constructed in that early national period.

At the beginning of the 20th century, the city of Ålesund was rebuilt in the Art Nouveau style, influenced by styles of France. The 1930s, when functionalism dominated, became a strong period for Norwegian architecture. It is only since the late 20th century that Norwegian architects have achieved international renown. One of the most striking modern buildings in Norway is the Sámi Parliament in Kárášjohka , designed by Stein Halvorson and Christian Sundby . Its debating chamber, in timber, is an abstract version of a lavvo , the traditional tent used by the nomadic Sámi people .

[ 289 ] Art Main article: Norwegian art The Scream by Edvard Munch , 1893 For an extended period, the Norwegian art scene was dominated by artwork from Germany and Holland as well as by the influence of Copenhagen. It was in the 19th century that a truly Norwegian era began, first with portraits, later with impressive landscapes.

Johan Christian Dahl , originally from the Dresden school, eventually returned to paint the landscapes of western Norway, defining Norwegian painting for the first time." [ 290 ] Norway's newly found independence from Denmark encouraged painters to develop their Norwegian identity, especially with landscape painting by artists such as Kitty Kielland , a female painter who studied under Hans Gude , and Harriet Backer , another pioneer among female artists, influenced by impressionism .

Frits Thaulow , an impressionist, was influenced by the art scene in Paris as was Christian Krohg , a realist painter, famous for his paintings of prostitutes.

[ 291 ] Of particular note is Edvard Munch , a symbolist/expressionist painter who became world-famous for The Scream which is said to represent the anxiety of modern man. Other notable works from Munch includes The Sick Child , Madonna and Puberty .

Other artists of note include Harald Sohlberg , a neo-romantic painter remembered for his paintings of Røros , and Odd Nerdrum , a figurative painter who maintains that his work is not art, but kitsch .

Cuisine Main article: Norwegian cuisine Norway's culinary traditions show the influence of long seafaring and farming traditions, with salmon (fresh and cured), herring (pickled or marinated), trout , codfish , and other seafood, balanced by cheeses (such as brunost , Jarlsberg cheese , and gamalost ), dairy products, and breads (predominantly dark/darker).

Lefse is a Norwegian potato flatbread, usually topped with large amounts of butter and sugar, most commonly eaten around Christmas. Traditional Norwegian dishes include lutefisk , smalahove , pinnekjøtt , raspeball , and fårikål .

[ 292 ] A Norwegian speciality is rakefisk, which is fermented trout, consumed with thin flatbread and sour cream. The most popular pastry is vaffel.

Sports This section needs to be updated . The reason given is: Lacks info on handball from the late 2010's onward..

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( March 2025 ) See also: List of Norwegian sport governing bodies and Football in Norway Skier Marit Bjørgen from Norway is the most successful Winter Olympian of all time, with 15 medals Sports are a central part of Norwegian culture, and popular sports include cross-country skiing , ski jumping , mountaineering , hiking , association football, handball , biathlon , speed skating , and, to a lesser degree, ice hockey .

Norway is known internationally for its role in the development of modern winter sports, particularly skiing. From the 19th century Norway also became a premier mountaineering destination, with books such as William Cecil Slingsby 's Norway, the Northern Playground contributing to the country's popularity among early mountain climbers.

[ 293 ] Association football is the most popular sport in Norway in terms of active membership. In 2014–2015 polling, football ranked far behind biathlon and cross-country skiing in terms of popularity as spectator sports.

[ 294 ] Ice hockey was the biggest indoor sport as of 2013.

[ 295 ] The women's handball national team has won several titles, including two Summer Olympics championships ( 2008 , 2012 ), three World Championships ( 1999 , 2011 , 2015 ), and six European Championship ( 1998 , 2004 , 2006 , 2008 , 2010 , 2014 ).

[ needs update ] Men's handball experienced a boom in the late 2010's and early 2020's, with star players including Sander Sagosen and Magnus Abelvik Rød , the Norway national handball team reaching the finals of the 2017 and 2019 IHF World Men's Handball Championships , and Kolstad Håndball having among the highest group stage average crowds in the 2023–24 and 2024–25 EHF Champions League seasons.

In association football, the women's national team has won the FIFA Women's World Cup in 1995 and the Olympic Football Tournament in 2000 . The women's team also has two UEFA European Women's Championship titles ( 1987 , 1993 ). The men's national football team has participated three times in the FIFA World Cup ( 1938 , 1994 , and 1998 ), and once in the European Championship ( 2000 ). The highest FIFA ranking Norway has achieved is second, a position it has held twice, in 1993 and in 1995.

[ 296 ] Norwegian players in the National Football League in American football include Halvor Hagen , Bill Irgens , Leif Olve Dolonen Larsen , Mike Mock , and Jan Stenerud .

[ 297 ] Bandy is a traditional sport in Norway and the country is one of the four founders of Federation of International Bandy . As of January 2018, the men's national team has captured one silver and one bronze, while the women's national team has managed five bronzes at the World Championships .

Norway first participated at the Olympic Games in 1900, and has sent athletes to compete in every Games since then, except for the sparsely attended 1904 Games and the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow when they participated in the American-led boycott . Norway leads the overall medal tables at the Winter Olympic Games by a considerable margin. Norway has hosted the Games on two occasions: 1952 Winter Olympics in Oslo 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer It also hosted the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics in Lillehammer, making Norway the first country to host both Winter regular and Youth Olympics.

Norway featured a women's national team in beach volleyball that competed at the 2018–2020 CEV Beach Volleyball Continental Cup , [ 298 ] and later a men's national team in beach volleyball at the 2020 Summer Olympics that won gold metal.

Chess has gained huge popularity in Norway.

Magnus Carlsen , a Norwegian, was the world chess champion between 2013 and 2023.

[ 299 ] Many of the biggest chess tournaments are broadcast live on national television, with the World Rapid and Blitz Chess Championships airing on the country's biggest television channel NRK1 .

[ 300 ] Norway has produced many track and field athletes at the highest international levels, including, but not limited to, Egil Danielsen and Andreas Thorkildsen (Men's javelin throw ), Grete Waitz (Women's long distance running), Vebjørn Rodal , Jakob Ingebrigtsen , and Henrik Ingebrigtsen (Men's middle distance running), Karsten Warholm (Men's 400m running and hurdles), Sander Skotheim and Markus Rooth (Men's pentathlon ), and Kristian Blummenfelt (Men's triathlon ).

See also Norway portal Outline of Norway Notes ^ Bokmål : Norge , Nynorsk : Noreg , Northern Sami : Norga , Lule Sami : Vuodna , Southern Sami : Nöörje , Kven : Norja ^ Names in the official and recognised languages: Bokmål : Norge [ˈnɔ̂rɡə] ⓘ ; Nynorsk : Noreg ⓘ ; official names in minority languages: Northern Sami : Norga ; Lule Sami : Vuodna ; Southern Sami : Nöörje ; Kven : Norja .

^ Written Bokmål and Nynorsk ^ Northern , Lule , and Southern ^ Including indigenous group Sámi , and minority groups Jewish , Traveller , Forest Finn , Romani , and Kven .

^ Until the 2012 constitutional amendment the Evangelical-Lutheran religion was the public religion of the State.

[ 12 ] ^ a b The Spitsbergen Treaty (also known as the Svalbard Treaty ) of 9 February 1920 recognises Norway's full and absolute sovereignty over the arctic archipelago of Spitsbergen (now called Svalbard ).

[ 24 ] References Citations ^ "Sak" . 12 March 2024.

^ a b "Offisiell status for samisk" .

Language Council of Norway .

Archived from the original on 15 August 2023 . Retrieved 19 August 2021 .

Samisk har status som minoritetsspråk i Noreg, Sverige og Finland, og i alle tre landa har samisk status som offisielt språk i dei samiske forvaltningsområda.

[Sámi is recognised as a minority language in Norway, Sweden and Finland, and is an official language within the Sámi administrative areas in all three countries.] ^ "Minoritetsspråk" .

Språkrådet .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2018 . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ "Statistics and analysis of immigrants in Norway 2023" .

Statistics Norway . 29 April 2024 . Retrieved 10 August 2025 .

^ "Immigrants and their children as of 1 January 2020" . Statistics Norway. 9 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 3 January 2021 . Retrieved 26 December 2020 .

^ "Immigrants and Norwegian-born to immigrant parents" . Statistics Norway. 9 March 2021.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2021 . Retrieved 30 March 2021 .

^ "Samer" .

Regjeringen.no . Fornyings- administrasjons- og kirkedepartementet. 16 June 2006.

Archived from the original on 9 January 2018 . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ inkluderingsdepartementet, Arbeids- og (16 June 2006).

"Nasjonale minoriteter" .

Regjeringen.no .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2017 . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ "05183: Immigrants and Norwegian-born to immigrant parents, by sex and country background 1970 – 2021-PX-Web SSB" .

SSB .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Church of Norway Archived 27 March 2025 at archive.today Statistics Norway (17 March 2025).

^ Members of religious and life stance communities outside the Church of Norway, by religion/life stance.

Archived 23 January 2025 at the Wayback Machine Statistics Norway (5 June 2024).

^ "The Constitution of Norway, Article 16 (English translation, published by the Norwegian Parliament)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 September 2015.

^ "The Re-establishing of a Norwegian State" .

regjeringen.no . 5 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2017 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .

^ "Surface water and surface water change" .

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).

Archived from the original on 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 11 October 2020 .

^ a b c d "Arealstatistics for Norway 2019" . Kartverket, mapping directory for Norway. 20 December 2019. Archived from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 1 March 2020 .

^ "Population, 2025-01-01" . Statistics Norway. 25 February 2025 . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2025" .

^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2025" .

^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2025" .

^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2025" .

^ "Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income – EU-SILC survey" .

ec.europa.eu .

Eurostat .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2020 . Retrieved 22 June 2022 .

^ "Human Development Report 2025" (PDF) .

United Nations Development Programme . 6 May 2025.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 .

^ "Norway" .

CIA World fact . 26 October 2021.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 12 February 2021 .

^ National Research Council (U.S.). Polar Research Board (1986).

Antarctic treaty system: an assessment . National Academies Press.

ISBN 978-0309036405 . Retrieved 24 July 2011 .

^ "Norwegian Society / Living in Norway" .

Study in Norway . Archived from the original on 21 March 2018 . Retrieved 21 March 2018 .

^ "Statistics Norway raises '07 GDP outlook, cuts '08" .

Reuters . 6 September 2007. Archived from the original on 22 September 2020 . Retrieved 8 March 2009 .

^ "Country Comparison :: Crude oil – production" .

CIA – The World Factbook . Archived from the original on 7 March 2017 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ "Country Comparison :: Natural gas – production" .

CIA – The World Factbook . Archived from the original on 15 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ "The World's Richest Countries" .

forbes.com .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2018 . Retrieved 12 December 2014 .

^ Holter, Mikael (27 June 2017).

"The World's Biggest Wealth Fund Hits $1 Trillion" .

Bloomberg L.P .

Archived from the original on 19 September 2017 . Retrieved 19 September 2017 .

^ Meredith, Sam (31 January 2023).

"Norway's gigantic sovereign wealth fund loses a record $164 billion, citing 'very unusual' year" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2023 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 .

^ a b "Nomino 6:6" .

Nomino . Season 2 (in Norwegian). 4 October 2016.  Event occurs at 22:18.

NRK .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2016 . Retrieved 5 October 2016 .

^ a b "Sår tvil om Norges opphav" (in Norwegian). Forskning.no for Universitetet i Agder . 29 February 2016.

Archived from the original on 22 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ Skre, Dagfinn (2020).

Rulership in 1st to 14th century Scandinavia . De Gruyter. pp. 3, 5– 10.

hdl : 20.500.12657/23221 .

ISBN 978-1-193-55787-8 .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 22 June 2021 .

^ Heide, Eldar (2016).

"Noregr tyder nok vegen mot nord, likevel" .

Namn og Nemne (in Norwegian Bokmål).

33 .

ISSN 2703-7371 .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2017 . Retrieved 14 August 2023 .

^ Klavs Randsborg (14 September 2009).

The Anatomy of Denmark: Archaeology and History from the Ice Age to AD 2000 . Bloomsbury Academic.

ISBN 978-0-7156-3842-2 .

OCLC 1114604682 .

^ Ling 2008.

Elevated Rock Art . GOTARC Serie B. Gothenburg Archaeological Thesis 49. Department of Archaeology and Ancient History, University of Gothenburg, Goumlteborg, 2008.

ISBN 978-9185245345 .

^ Bjørn Ringstad, Vestlandets største gravminner. Et forsøk på lokalisering av forhistoriske maktsentra , (Bergen, 1986) ^ Bergljot Solberg, Jernalderen i Norge , (Oslo, 2000) ^ "Vinland Archeology" .

naturalhistory.si.edu . Archived from the original on 8 March 2018 . Retrieved 11 April 2017 .

^ Larsen , p. 83.

^ Foster, R. F.

(2001) The Oxford History of Ireland . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 019280202X ^ Larsen , p. 95.

^ Jones, Gwyn, A history of the Vikings (Oxford 2001).

^ Larsen , p. 201.

^ Stenersen: 36 ^ Stenersen: 38 ^ Stenersen: 39 ^ Stenersen: 37 ^ Stenersen: 41 ^ Stenersen: 44 ^ a b Stenersen: 45 ^ Stenersen: 46 ^ Derry p. 75 ^ Derry pp. 77–78 ^ Derry p. 77 ^ Derry pp. 81–82 ^ Derry pp. 83–84 ^ Larsen , p. 192.

^ Oeding, P (1990). "The black death in Norway".

Tidsskrift for den Norske Laegeforening .

110 (17): 2204– 08.

PMID 2197762 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Black Death (pandemic)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 .

^ Larsen , pp. 202–03.

^ Larsen , p. 195 ^ Larsen , p. 197 ^ " Finding the family in medieval and early modern Scotland Archived 17 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine ". Elizabeth Ewan, Janay Nugent (2008).

Ashgate Publishing . p. 153.

ISBN 0754660494 ^ " The savage wars of peace: England, Japan and the Malthusian trap Archived 28 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine ". Alan Macfarlane (1997). p. 63.

ISBN 0631181172 ^ Treaty of Kiel , 14 January 1814.

^ Nicolson, Harold (1946).

The Congress of Vienna; a study in allied unity, 1812–1822 . Constable & co. ltd. p. 295.

The British Government sought to overcome this reluctance by assisting Russia in blockading the coast of Norway ^ Larsen , p. 572.

^ Larsen , p. 423.

^ Franklin D. Scott, Sweden: the Nation's History ( University of Minnesota Press : Minneapolis, 1977) p. 380.

^ Larsen , p. 432.

^ Larsen , p. 431.

^ Larsen , p. 412.

^ a b See "The Civil War in Switzerland" by Frederick Engels contained in Marx & Engels, Collected Works: Volume 6 (International Publishers, New York, 1976) p. 368.

^ Larsen , p. 433.

^ "Marcus Møller Thrane – Norwegian journalist and socialist" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 11 April 2024.

Archived from the original on 9 October 2014 . Retrieved 23 June 2022 .

^ Riste, Olav.

The Neutral Ally: Norway's relations with belligerent powers in the First World War (1995) ^ "Norwegian volunteers in the Wehrmacht and SS" . Nuav.net. 9 April 1940.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 5 April 2010 .

^ PM to light London tree .

Aftenposten . 5 December 2007 ^ Frenzel, Eike (3 September 2010).

"Kriegsende in der Arktis: Die vergessenen Haudegen" .

Spiegel Online .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2017 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

^ "Balder – Norsk Oljemuseum" .

www.norskolje.museum.no . Archived from the original on 7 October 2017 . Retrieved 6 October 2017 .

^ "Norwegian minister Espen Eide urges UK caution on quitting EU" .

BBC News . 23 December 2012.

Archived from the original on 23 December 2012 . Retrieved 23 December 2012 .

^ "Norway mourns 77 dead a decade after terrorist attack" .

PBS NewsHour . 22 July 2021.

Archived from the original on 13 December 2021 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 .

^ " 'Iron Erna' replaces Stoltenberg as Norway's prime minister as centre-right bloc takes power" .

canadianbusiness.com . 9 September 2013. Archived from the original on 13 December 2021 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 .

^ "Norway election: Conservative Erna Solberg triumphs" .

BBC News . 10 September 2013.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2017 . Retrieved 30 August 2022 .

^ a b Stolen, Henrik; Dagenborg, Joachim (12 September 2017).

"Norway's right-wing government wins re-election fought on oil, tax" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2020 . Retrieved 5 March 2021 .

^ Buli, Nora; Klesty, Victoria (14 September 2021).

"Norway's left-wing opposition wins in a landslide, coalition talks next" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2021 . Retrieved 19 October 2021 .

^ "Norway's prime minister presents his new government" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 26 October 2021 .

^ a b Holmesland, Arthur m.fl.: Norge , Oslo: Aschehoug, 1973.

^ Kiel-traktaten.

Danish translation 1814.  Nasjonalbiblioteket/National Library of Norway, read 2 February 2014.

^ Schei, Liv K.: Orkenøyene , Oslo: Grøndahl, 1985.

^ Helle, Knut & Knut Mykland: Norge blir en stat. 1130–1319.

Bergen: Universitetsforlaget, 1964.

^ a b Thuesen, Nils Petter; Thorsnæs, Geir; Røvik, Sissel (14 May 2018), "Norge" , Store norske leksikon (in Norwegian), archived from the original on 6 July 2018 , retrieved 5 July 2018 ^ "Norge i nord, sør, øst og vest" .

Kartverket (in Norwegian Bokmål). 8 March 2013. Archived from the original on 5 July 2018 . Retrieved 5 July 2018 .

^ "Explore North Cape, Europe's northernmost point" .

The Independent . 14 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 21 June 2022 . Retrieved 5 July 2018 .

^ "Statistisk årbok 2013: Geografisk oversikt" .

www.ssb.no .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2013 . Retrieved 5 July 2018 .

^ a b c d Central Intelligence Agency .

"Norway" .

The World Factbook .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2013 .

^ "Minifacts about Norway 2009: 2. Geography, climate and environment" .

Statistics Norway .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2013 . Retrieved 25 October 2009 .

^ Strøm, Kaare (1959).

Innsjøenes verden . Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.

^ Rogstad, Lars (1985).

Opplegg For Ressursregnskp For Vann notat. Oslo: SSB/Statistics Norway.

^ a b Met.no.

"Climate in Norway(English)" . Archived from the original on 20 March 2017 . Retrieved 20 March 2017 .

^ a b Muller, M. J. (6 December 2012).

Selected climatic data for a global set of standard stations for vegetation . Springer.

ISBN 978-9400980402 .

^ "The Gulf Stream Myth" .

ocp.ldeo.columbia.edu .

Archived from the original on 30 December 2016 . Retrieved 30 November 2016 .

^ NRK (21 August 2016).

"Norske steder blant de tørreste i Europa (Places in Norway among the driest in Europe)" .

NRK .

Archived from the original on 26 August 2016 . Retrieved 26 August 2016 .

^ "Climate of Norway: Temperature, Climate graph, Climate table for Norway" . Climate-Data.org.

Archived from the original on 21 March 2017 . Retrieved 20 March 2017 .

^ A study behind the updated maps of Köppen-Geiger climate classification (2007).

"Updated world map of the Koppen-Geiger climate classification" .

Hydrology and Earth System Sciences .

11 (5): 1633– 1644.

Bibcode : 2007HESS...11.1633P .

doi : 10.5194/HESS-11-1633-2007 .

ISSN 1027-5606 .

S2CID 9654551 .

^ Website with maps (2006).

"World map of Köppen-Geiger climate classification updated" .

Meteorologische Zeitschrift .

15 (3): 259– 263.

Bibcode : 2006MetZe..15..259K .

doi : 10.1127/0941-2948/2006/0130 . Archived from the original on 5 April 2017.

^ "Norwegian Shelf ecosystem" . Eoearth.org. Archived from the original on 1 November 2012 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ "NOU 2004" . Regjeringen.no. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ a b Norwegian Red List 2010 . Artsdatabanken.no ^ Dinerstein, Eric; et al. (2017).

"An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm" .

BioScience .

67 (6): 534– 545.

doi : 10.1093/biosci/bix014 .

ISSN 0006-3568 .

PMC 5451287 .

PMID 28608869 .

^ "WWF – Norway's forest heritage under threat" Archived 18 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine . panda.org. 15 April 2003 ^ "25 Reasons Norway Is The Greatest Place On Earth" Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine .

The Huffington Post . 7 January 2014.

^ Hamashige, Hope.

"Best, Worst World Heritage Sites Ranked" .

National Geographic News . Archived from the original on 17 November 2006 . Retrieved 25 October 2009 .

^ "Norway: come for the sun, stay for the light show" .

Lonely Planet . 2 August 2010. Archived from the original on 30 April 2017 . Retrieved 11 April 2017 .

^ "Environmental Performance Index 2024" (PDF) .

epi.yale.edu .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 October 2017 . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ "2016 Environmental Performance Index (excel/xls)" .

epi.yale.edu . January 2016 . Retrieved 23 December 2017 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Grantham, H. S.; et al. (2020).

"Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material" .

Nature Communications .

11 (1): 5978.

Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.5978G .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 7723057 .

PMID 33293507 .

^ Wong, Curtis M. (14 December 2010).

World's Top Democratic Governments: Economist Intelligence Unit's Democracy Index 2010 (PHOTOS) Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine .

The Huffington Post .

Retrieved 27 August 2013.

^ Sida/Så arbetar vi/EIU_Democracy_Index_Dec2011.pdf Democracy index 2011 [ dead link ] .

Economist Intelligence Unit Retrieved 27 August 2013.

^ Davidson, Kavitha A. (21 March 2013).

Democracy Index 2013: Global Democracy At A Standstill, The Economist Intelligence Unit's Annual Report Shows Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine .

The Huffington Post .

Retrieved 27 August 2013.

^ "The Constitution – Complete text" .

The Storting's Information Corner . 2011. Archived from the original on 29 August 2011 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ "The King's constitutional role" . The Royal Court of Norway.

Archived from the original on 14 July 2010 . Retrieved 24 April 2009 .

^ a b "The Monarchy" . Norway.org. 24 June 2010. Archived from the original on 22 February 2012.

^ "The Storting" . Norway.org. 10 June 2009. Archived from the original on 26 January 2012.

^ Nordsieck, Wolfram (2011).

"Parties and Elections in Europe" . parties-and-elections.de. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011 . Retrieved 10 September 2011 .

Storting, 4-year term, 4% threshold (supplementary seats) ^ "The Government" . Norway.org. 10 June 2009. Archived from the original on 3 September 2010.

^ "Case of Folgerø and Others v. Norway" .

European Court of Human Rights . 29 June 2007.

Archived from the original on 8 February 2016 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

^ "På statskirkens siste dag" .

Dagen.no (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 4 February 2017 .

^ "Form of Government" . Norway.org. 10 September 2009. Archived from the original on 22 February 2012.

^ "Political System of Norway" . 123independenceday.com. Archived from the original on 25 February 2010 . Retrieved 27 January 2010 .

^ "Political System" . Norway.org. 18 November 2009. Archived from the original on 12 April 2010 . Retrieved 27 January 2010 .

^ Bevanger, Lars (10 September 2013).

"Norway election: Erna Solberg to form new government" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 February 2014 .

^ "Norway's Prime Minister Presents His New Government" .

U.S. News & World Report . Associated Press. 14 October 2021.

Archived from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 9 December 2021 .

^ "Fylkesinndelingen fra 2024" (in Norwegian Bokmål). regjeringen.no. 5 July 2022.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 11 January 2024 .

^ "Local Government" . Norway.org. 10 June 2009. Archived from the original on 11 June 2010 . Retrieved 27 January 2010 .

^ "An Introduction to Norway » Government & Politics" .

Life in Norway . 5 February 2017.

Archived from the original on 16 August 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ Thorsnæs, Geir, ed. (8 April 2024).

"Byer i Norge" .

Store norske leksikon (in Norwegian).

Kunnskapsforlaget . Retrieved 1 July 2024 .

^ Rapp, Ole Magnus (21 September 2015).

"Norge utvider Dronning Maud Land helt frem til Sydpolen" .

Aftenposten (in Norwegian). Oslo, Norway.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 22 September 2015 .

…formålet med anneksjonen var å legge under seg det landet som til nå ligger herreløst og som ingen andre enn nordmenn har kartlagt og gransket. Norske myndigheter har derfor ikke motsatt seg at noen tolker det norske kravet slik at det går helt opp til og inkluderer polpunktet.

^ a b "The Judiciary" . Norway.org. 10 June 2009. Archived from the original on 26 January 2012.

^ Anders Breivik: Just how cushy are Norwegian prisons?

Archived 22 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine BBC ^ "Index 2023 – Global score" .

Reporters Without Borders .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2023 . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ "Global Corruption Barometer 2013-Norway" . Transparency International. Archived from the original on 21 October 2014 . Retrieved 17 November 2013 .

^ Aslaug Moksnes.

Likestilling eller særstilling? Norsk kvinnesaksforening 1884–1913 (p. 35), Gyldendal Norsk Forlag , 1984, ISBN 8205153566 ^ "The Constitution – Complete text" . Stortinget.no. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 .

^ Toivanen, Reetta; et al. (2003). Götz, Norbert (ed.).

Civil Society in the Baltic Sea Region . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. pp.

205– 216.

ISBN 978-0754633174 .

^ "Journal of Indigenous People Rights. Issue No. 3/2005" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 February 2015 . Retrieved 31 March 2015 .

^ "Same-Sex Marriage Around the World" .

Pew Research Center . 9 June 2023.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2023 . Retrieved 26 October 2023 .

^ "Human rights: A crowded field" .

The Economist . 27 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2011 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 .

^ "Norway - Embassies and consulates" . 26 March 2025.

Archived from the original on 6 February 2008 . Retrieved 30 March 2025 .

^ "Refleksjoner fra Brussel – Hospitering ved Sørlandets Europakontor – Vest-Agder Fylkeskommune" . Intportal.vaf.no. 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013 . Retrieved 15 August 2010 .

^ "EU-programmer" . Eu-norge.org. 30 June 2009. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ "NDF official numbers" . NDF. Archived from the original on 12 April 2009 . Retrieved 22 April 2009 .

^ Gwladys Fouche and Balazs Koranyi (14 June 2013): "Norway becomes first NATO country to draft women into military" Archived 28 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine , Reuters . Retrieved 15 June 2013.

^ "Forsvarsnett: Norwegian forces abroad" . mil.no. Archived from the original on 29 September 2008 . Retrieved 2 September 2008 .

^ Baltais, Simon (2010).

"Environment And Economy: Can They Co-Exist In The "Smart State"?" .

Issues .

91 : 21– 24. Archived from the original on 7 April 2015 . Retrieved 20 March 2015 .

^ "Human development indices 2008" (PDF) .

Human Development Report . hdr.undp.org. 18 December 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 December 2008 . Retrieved 12 May 2009 .

^ A Family Affair: Intergenerational Social Mobility across OECD Countries Archived 16 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

OECD , 2010. Retrieved 27 August 2013.

^ "OECD Better Life Index" .

OECD .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2013 . Retrieved 27 August 2013 .

^ "NAV – Foreldrepenger ved fødsel" . Nav.no. 2011. Archived from the original on 26 February 2010 . Retrieved 18 April 2011 .

^ "Labour force survey" .

Statistics Norway . March 2025.

Archived from the original on 17 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ "Labour force survey – About the statistics" . Ssb.no. 30 October 2013.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 15 February 2014 .

^ "Recipients of disability benefit" . Statistics Norway. 3 July 2024.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ "Dette er Norge" (in Norwegian).

Statistics Norway .

Archived from the original on 21 February 2005 . Retrieved 2 January 2013 .

^ Bureau of Labor Statistics.

"International Comparisons of GDP per Capita and per Hour, 1960–2010" (PDF) .

Division of International Labor Comparisons .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ "Hourly Compensation Costs, U.S. Dollars and U.S. = 100." Archived 26 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine United States Department of Labor: Bureau of Labor Statistics, 21 December 2011. Web. 18 September 2012.

^ Central Intelligence Agency.

"Country Comparison: Distribution of Family Income – GINI Index" .

The World Factbook . Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 20 June 2013 .

^ Christensen, Sverre August (27 August 2018), "Chapter 9: The capitalist state or the state as private owner" , At the Forefront, Looking Ahead , Books, Universitetsforlaget, pp.

134– 158, doi : 10.18261/9788215031583-2018-10 , ISBN 978-82-15-03140-8 , retrieved 11 June 2025 ^ "Green Islands" .

www.globalislands.net . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ "EØS-loven – EØSl. Lov om gjennomføring i norsk rett av hoveddelen i avtale om Det europeiske økonomiske samarbeidsområde (EØS) m.v. (EØS-loven)" . Lovdata.no.

Archived from the original on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved 14 February 2009 .

^ "Norway threatened by GDP decline" . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ "Norway - Economy and Banking Sector" .

thebanks.eu . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ " Norway Archived 4 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine ," U.S. Department of State ^ Farida Fawzy (8 June 2016).

"Norway first in world to ban deforestation" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2019 . Retrieved 27 July 2019 .

^ "Secondary Industries" .

This is Norway .

Statistics Norway . 14 October 2019. p. 75.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2020 . Retrieved 14 January 2020 .

^ "The Norwegian Fiscal Policy Framework" . Government.no. 20 March 2019.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2020 . Retrieved 14 January 2020 .

^ Ole Mathismoen (5 August 2013) Aftenposten p. 5 ^ a b Lindeberg, Anne (6 September 2013).

"Her er Norges nye oljeprovins" . Dn.no.

Archived from the original on 11 October 2013 . Retrieved 12 October 2013 .

^ "Gass- og oljefunn nord for Snøhvitfeltet i Barentshavet – 7220/8-1" . Npd.no. 1 April 2011. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013 . Retrieved 12 October 2013 .

^ "FAO Globefish global trends 2006" . Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 8 March 2009 .

^ "Mener Norge bør satse på våpen når oljen tar slutt – VG Nett om Stoltenberg-regjeringen" [They think Norway should invest in weapons when the oil runs out – VG Nett about the Stoltenberg government].

vg.no (in Norwegian).

Verdens Gang . 28 January 2011.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2011 . Retrieved 7 March 2011 .

^ handelsdepartementet, Nærings- og (18 May 2000).

"Norsk næringsvirksomhet – Strukturen i norsk økonomi" .

Regjeringen.no (in Norwegian).

Archived from the original on 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2018 .

^ "Norsk næringsliv" .

ssb.no (in Norwegian Bokmål).

Archived from the original on 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2018 .

^ "Algas nocivas matam mais de 4,2 mil toneladas de salmão no Chile" .

Archived from the original on 24 October 2022 . Retrieved 4 September 2022 .

^ "Binge and purge" .

The Economist . 22 January 2009.

Archived from the original on 6 January 2019 . Retrieved 30 January 2009 .

98–99% of Norway's electricity comes from hydroelectric plants.

^ "Mineral Resources in Norway in 2013" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 .

^ "The fund" .

Norges Bank Investment Management . Archived from the original on 21 November 2018 . Retrieved 4 June 2019 .

2017 The fund's value reaches 1 trillion dollars ^ "National accounts – SSB" .

Statistics Norway .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2020 . Retrieved 14 January 2020 .

Statistics Norway national accounts ^ Stanley Reed (24 June 2014).

"Norway's Sovereign Wealth Fund Ramps Up Investment Plans" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 22 June 2015 . Retrieved 27 April 2015 .

The fund, the world's largest sovereign wealth fund ...

^ "Transparency" .

www.nbim.no . Archived from the original on 21 November 2018 . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ "Investment: Norway's nest egg" .

Financial Times . 19 August 2012.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communication, 2003: 3 ^ "Majority in Favor of High-Speed Trains" . Theforeigner.no. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 .

^ Skjeggestad, Sveinung Berg Bentzrød Helene (7 March 2011).

"De aller fleste sier ja takk til lyntog" .

Aftenposten (in Norwegian Bokmål).

Archived from the original on 24 February 2019 . Retrieved 23 February 2019 .

^ Rail transport Statistics Norway (2023). Retrieved 29 March 2025 ^ "Slik er norsk jernbane organisert" . 3 July 2023.

Archived from the original on 6 February 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ "Slik er norsk jernbane organisert" .

Regjeringen.no (in Norwegian Bokmål). Norwegian Government. 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 9 August 2024 .

^ Norwegian National Rail Administration.

"About" . Archived from the original on 16 December 2007 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Norwegian Ministry of Transport (16 June 2006).

"Kollektivtransport" (in Norwegian).

Archived from the original on 20 June 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Norges Statsbaner .

"Train facts" . Archived from the original on 12 June 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications, 2003: 15 ^ "Electric cars take off in Norway" .

The Independent .

Agence France-Presse . 15 May 2011. Archived from the original on 17 May 2011 . Retrieved 9 October 2011 .

^ European Association for Battery, Hybrid and Fuel Cell Electric Vehicles (AVERE) (3 September 2012).

"Norwegian Parliament extends electric car initiatives until 2018" . AVERE. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017 . Retrieved 10 April 2013 .

^ Hannisdahl, Ole Henrik (9 January 2012).

"Eventyrlig elbilsalg i 2011" [Adventurous electric vehicle sales in 2011] (in Norwegian). Grønn bil. Archived from the original on 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 .

See table "Elbilsalg i 2011 fordelt på måned og merke" (Electric vehicle sales in 2011, by month and brand) to see monthly sales for 2011.

^ "Elbilsalget i mars slo alle rekorder" [Electric vehicle sales in March broke all records] (in Norwegian). Grønn bil. 2 April 2014. Archived from the original on 5 April 2014 . Retrieved 3 April 2014 .

^ Cobb, Jeff (16 January 2014).

"Top 6 Plug-In Vehicle Adopting Countries" . HybridCars.com.

Archived from the original on 21 February 2015 . Retrieved 28 January 2015 .

^ Siu, Jason (6 June 2016).

"Norway Wants to Make Gas-Powered Cars Illegal by 2025" .

AutoGuide.com . VerticalScope Inc.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2016 . Retrieved 7 June 2016 .

^ a b c d Avinor (2008).

"2007 Passasjerer" (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 28 December 2010 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Avinor .

"About Avinor" . Archived from the original on 31 March 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Scandinavian Airlines System .

"Rutekart" . Archived from the original on 28 June 2012 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Norwegian Air Shuttle .

"Route Map" . Archived from the original on 14 July 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Widerøe .

"Våre destinasjoner" . Archived from the original on 15 August 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Oslo Lufthavn .

"Car" . Archived from the original on 1 June 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ Oslo Lufthavn .

"International scheduled routes from Oslo" . Archived from the original on 14 July 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ World Intellectual Property Organization (2024).

Global Innovation Index 2024: Unlocking the Promise of Social Entrepreneurship . World Intellectual Property Organization. p. 18.

doi : 10.34667/tind.50062 .

ISBN 978-92-805-3681-2 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ "The Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Report 2019 Travel and Tourism at a Tipping Point" (PDF) . World Economic Forum. 2019.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ a b c Statistics Norway (2016).

"Key Figures for Norwegian travel and tourism" (PDF) .

Innovation Norway . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 April 2018 . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ "Befolkningen" .

ssb.no (in Norwegian).

Archived from the original on 23 March 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

^ "Key figures" .

ssb.no .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2019 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ Max Roser (2014), "Total Fertility Rate around the world over the last centuries" , Our World In Data , Gapminder Foundation , archived from the original on 7 August 2018 , retrieved 7 May 2019 ^ "Mean and median age in municipalities, counties and the entire populace (M) 2000 - 2025" .

Statistics Norway . 25 February 2025 . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ Eivind Bråstad Jensen. 1991. Fra fornorskningspolitikk mot kulturelt mangfold. Nordkalott-Forlaget.

^ I. Bjørklund, T. Brantenberg, H. Eidheim, J.A. Kalstad and D. Storm. 2002.

Australian Indigenous Law Reporter (AILR) 1 7(1) ^ "National minorities - regjeringen.no" . 11 January 2007.

Archived from the original on 3 February 2024 . Retrieved 4 January 2024 .

^ Rankin, Jennifer (20 March 2017).

"Happiness is on the wane in the US, UN global report finds" .

the Guardian .

Archived from the original on 16 August 2023 . Retrieved 22 March 2023 .

^ Hunter, Marnie (20 March 2025).

"These are the world's happiest countries in 2025" .

CNN . Retrieved 20 March 2025 .

^ "American FactFinder – Results" .

factfinder.census.gov . Retrieved 8 August 2017 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Population: Key figures for the population" .

ssb.no . Archived from the original on 6 August 2016 . Retrieved 4 September 2016 .

^ Statistics Canada (10 May 2023).

"Religion by ethnic or cultural origins: Canada, provinces and territories and census metropolitan areas with parts" .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2018 . Retrieved 29 March 2025 .

^ a b "Facts about immigration" .

SSB . Retrieved 9 October 2024 .

^ Innvandrere og norskfødte med innvandrerforeldre, 25 April 2013 Archived 23 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine Statistics Norway . Retrieved 30 December 2013 ^ Hare, Sophie.

"Factbox – facts about Norway" , Reuters . 22 July 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2011.

^ "14 per cent of population are immigrants" .

ssb.no . 5 March 2018.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2022 . Retrieved 29 December 2022 .

^ Fraser, Sean (15 May 2012).

"Norway abolishes state-sponsored Church of Norway" .

Digital Journal . Archived from the original on 14 June 2013 . Retrieved 20 June 2013 .

^ "Norway and its national church part ways" . 5 January 2017.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2019 . Retrieved 5 January 2017 .

^ På vei mot ny kirkeordning Archived 13 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine Den Norske Kirke. Retrieved 12 December 2017.

^ Norwegian Church passes milestone in modification of its links with State Archived 13 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine Church Times , 6 January 2017.

^ Den norske kirke Archived 25 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine 17 March 2025 Statistics Norway ^ Church of Norway Archived 25 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine Statistics Norway 17 May 2020 ^ Members of religious and life stance communities outside the Church of Norway, by religion/life stance.

Archived 1 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine Statistics Norway 8 December 2019 ^ Members of Christian communities outside the Church of Norway.

Archived 5 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine Statistics Norway 8 December 2020 ^ "Special Eurobarometer, biotechnology" (PDF) . October 2010. p. 204. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 April 2011.

^ "The People in the Church" . dawnnorge.no. Archived from the original on 15 August 2007.

^ "KOSTRA (Municipality-State-Reporting): Church" .

Statistics Norway .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2011 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ "Church of Norway. Church services and participants, by diocese. 2005–2009 (Corrected 28 June 2010)" .

Statistics Norway . 28 June 2010.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2011 . Retrieved 7 March 2011 .

^ a b "More members in religious and philosophical communities" .

Statistics Norway .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2012 . Retrieved 8 March 2009 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Members of Christian communities outside the Church of Norway" .

Statistics Norway .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2011 . Retrieved 21 August 2010 .

^ Andreas Sletteholm: "Nå er det flere katolikker enn muslimer i Norge" Archived 5 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Aftenposten , 3 December 2012 ^ "Religious communities and life stance communities" .

Statistics Norway .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2013 . Retrieved 9 December 2011 .

^ a b c d "Members of religious and life-stance communities outside the Church of Norway, by religion/life stance" .

Statistics Norway .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2011 . Retrieved 21 August 2010 .

^ "Religious communities and life stance communities" .

Statistics Norway .

Archived from the original on 20 November 2012 . Retrieved 9 December 2011 .

^ "Shamanism Approved as a Religion in Norway" . Tnp.no. 15 March 2012.

Archived from the original on 15 October 2013 . Retrieved 12 October 2013 .

^ "Geir Kvarme gikk til sjaman for å få balanse" . Kjendis.no. 8 May 2012. Archived from the original on 15 July 2012 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 .

^ AV: ellen kongsnes.

"Samisk sjaman skapte oljefeber" . Aftenbladet.no. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 .

^ United Nations (November 2012).

Human Development Report 2013 . United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

ISBN 978-9211263404 .

^ Nordhagen, R; Major, E; Tverdal, A; Irgens, L; Graff-Iversen, S (2014).

"Folkehelse i Norge 1814–2014" . Folkehelseinstituttet. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014 . Retrieved 2 September 2014 .

^ "Deaths – SSB" Archived 9 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine . ssb.no.

^ "Norway – Implementation of the elements of the Bologna Process" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 February 2004 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ "Are University Degrees Free In Norway? (Updated With New 2023 Information!) – The Norway Guide" .

thenorwayguide.com . 15 March 2022.

Archived from the original on 11 February 2023 . Retrieved 11 February 2023 .

^ "Tuition Fees In Norway: Detailed Guide For 2023 – The Norway Guide" .

thenorwayguide.com . 30 January 2023.

Archived from the original on 11 February 2023 . Retrieved 11 February 2023 .

^ "Tuition fees for students from outside EU/EEA and Switzerland | Study in Norway" .

studyinnorway.no . Archived from the original on 11 February 2023 . Retrieved 11 February 2023 .

^ Kunnskapsdepartementet (6 October 2022).

"Utanlandske studentar skal betale for å studere i Noreg" .

Regjeringa.no (in Norwegian Nynorsk) . Retrieved 11 February 2023 .

^ "Norway Abolishes Free University Education For People Outside Of EU/EEA – The Norway Guide" .

thenorwayguide.com . 7 October 2022.

Archived from the original on 11 February 2023 . Retrieved 11 February 2023 .

^ Vikør, Lars S.; Jahr, Ernst Håkon; Berg-Nordlie, Mikkel (22 May 2019), "språk i Norge" , Store norske leksikon (in Norwegian), archived from the original on 8 June 2019 , retrieved 26 June 2019 ^ Norges grunnlov, § 108 (Constitution of Norway, article 108, mention the Sámi language specifically) ^ kirkedepartementet, Kultur- og (27 June 2008).

"St.meld. nr. 35 (2007–2008)" .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2017 . Retrieved 5 March 2017 .

^ "Interesting Facts About the Norwegian Language (Norsk)" .

Nordictrans.com . 26 January 2017.

Archived from the original on 24 October 2020 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 .

^ "Nordens språk med røtter og føtter–Samiske språk" . Eplads.norden.org. Archived from the original on 10 April 2013 . Retrieved 26 March 2013 .

^ "Lov om Sametinget og andre samiske rettsforhold (sameloven) – Lovdata" Archived 25 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine . lovdata.no.

^ "NOU 1995: 18 – Ny lovgivning om opplæring" . Kunnskapsdepartementet. 4 July 1995. Archived from the original on 27 October 2014.

^ "Kvener – Kainun institutti" . Kvenskinstitutt.no.

Archived from the original on 19 January 2013 . Retrieved 26 March 2013 .

^ "Minoritetsspråkpakten" . Fornyings-, administrasjons- og kirkedepartementet. 26 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 27 October 2014 .

^ "St.meld. nr. 35 (2007–2008) – Mål og meining" . Kulturdepartementet. Archived from the original on 27 October 2014.

^ "St.meld. nr. 35. Mål og meining : Ein heilskapleg norsk språkpolitikk" . Kultur- og kirkedepartementet. 27 June 2008.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2014 . Retrieved 27 October 2014 .

^ "Tegnspråk blir offisielt språk" . NRK. 26 June 2008.

^ Leiro, Eivind (9 May 2023).

"Is English Language Spoken In Norway? (Is It ACTUALLY Used)" .

Norwegian Community .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2024 . Retrieved 30 May 2024 .

^ "Norway's Culture", Encarta . Webcitation.org. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009 . Retrieved 15 February 2014 .

^ Aune, Oddvin (16 January 2009).

"Mest sette kinofilm på 33 år" .

NRK (in Norwegian Bokmål) . Retrieved 19 May 2025 .

^ "A brief history of Norwegian film" ^ "Norwegian Film Commission" . Norwegianfilm.com. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012 . Retrieved 22 September 2012 .

^ Rigmor Falla: Tone, tekst og trubadur: 60 år med Visens Venner . Andresen & Butenschøn. Oslo 2003. ISBN 978-82-8089-216-4 ^ "Culture" . Studyinnorway.no. 26 March 2007. Archived from the original on 19 February 2012 . Retrieved 16 November 2009 .

^ Folk Music from Norway ^ "Norway in Eurovision" .

Eurovision.tv .

Archived from the original on 21 June 2022 . Retrieved 2 August 2023 .

^ "Norway in Eurovision" .

Eurovision.tv .

Archived from the original on 21 June 2022 . Retrieved 2 August 2023 .

Norway has won the contest 3 times and scored the biggest margin of victory ever in 2009.

^ Hung, Steffen (24 April 2009).

"Alexander Rybak Fairytale" .

swedishcharts.com .

Archived from the original on 16 August 2023 . Retrieved 3 August 2023 .

^ "The evolution of Norwegian architecture" . The official site of Norway. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013 . Retrieved 20 June 2013 .

^ Burgher, Leslie.

"Norwegian Architecture" . Leslie Burgher website. Archived from the original on 12 October 2010 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ Haverkamp, Frode.

Hans Fredrik Gude: From National Romanticism to Realism in Landscape (in Norwegian).

^ "Norwegian Artists" . Artcyclopedia.com.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 .

^ "Countries and Their Cultures, Norway" . Everyculture.com. 4 September 2010.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2020 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 .

^ Neate, Jill (1986).

Mountaineering Literature . The Mountaineers Books. p. 145.

ISBN 0938567047 .

^ "Knock-out fra Northug & co" .

Dagbladet . 22 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 22 June 2015 . Retrieved 22 June 2015 .

^ "Stor interesse for ishockey" .

NRK . 13 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 11 June 2016 .

^ "FIFA/Coca-Cola World Ranking" .

FIFA . 22 June 2015. Archived from the original on 19 February 2015 . Retrieved 22 June 2015 .

^ Grasso, John (2013).

Historical Dictionary of Football . Scarecrow Press.  490 pp.

ISBN 978-0810878570 .

^ "Continental Cup Finals start in Africa" .

FIVB . 22 June 2021.

Archived from the original on 7 August 2021 . Retrieved 7 August 2021 .

^ "Carlsen er verdensmester – Jeg er lykkelig og lettet" .

NRK . 22 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2015 . Retrieved 22 June 2015 .

^ "Slik blir sjakk-VM på NRK" (in Norwegian Bokmål).

NRK . 26 December 2024 . Retrieved 13 March 2025 .

Sources Larsen, Karen (1948).

A History of Norway .

Princeton, New Jersey : Princeton University Press .

External links Norway at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Norway ".

regjeringen.no Archived 24 September 2022 at the Wayback Machine , official Norwegian government website Norway.no , Norway's official portal Statistics Norway Archived 26 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine State of the Environment Norway Norway Archived 11 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

The World Factbook .

Central Intelligence Agency .

Norway Archived 2 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine entry at Britannica.com Gosse, Edmund William (1884).

"Norway" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. XVII (9th ed.). pp.

575– 592.

Gosse, Edmund William ; and four others (1911).

"Norway" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). pp.

799– 818.

Hammer, Simon Christian (1922).

"Norway" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 31 (12th ed.).

Norway from UCB Libraries GovPubs Norway profile Archived 29 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine from the BBC News Norway.info Archived 26 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine , official foreign portal of the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Wikimedia Atlas of Norway Geographic data related to Norway at OpenStreetMap Official facts about Norway Archived 19 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine VisitNorway.com , official travel guide to Norway.

National Anthem of Norway on YouTube Key Development Forecasts for Norway Archived 12 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine from International Futures World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Norway v t e Norway articles History Stone Age Bronze Age Petty kingdoms Viking Age Unification High Middle Ages Kingdom of Norway (872–1397) Hereditary Kingdom of Norway Kalmar Union Denmark–Norway Kingdom of Norway (1814) Sweden–Norway End of the union World War II Reichskommissariat Quisling regime Norwegian government-in-exile 1945–2000 21st century Geography Climate Districts Extreme points Islands Lakes Mammals Mountains Municipalities Cities Protected areas Rivers World Heritage Sites Politics Administrative divisions National budget Constitution Correctional Service Courts Elections Foreign relations Governments Incarceration LGBT rights Military Monarchy Parliament Police Political parties Prime Minister Membership of International organizations Economy Energy Fisheries Government Pension Fund Industry Mining Natural gas Krone (currency) National bank Nordic model Norwegian paradox Oil Renewable energy Stock Exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Rail Whaling Society Climate change Crime Demographics Education Ethnic groups Health Immigration Incarceration Irreligion Languages language conflict Norwegians Pensions Poverty Religion Women Culture Architecture Art Bunad (clothing) Christmas (season) Cinema Cuisine Jante law Music Norwegian language Literature Media Prostitution Public holidays Sport Nationalism Romantic nationalism Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flags national flag Mottos Name of Norway Outline Category Portal Articles related to Norway v t e Countries and dependencies of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia 2 Austria Azerbaijan 1 Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus 2 Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia 1 Germany Greece Hungary Iceland 3 Ireland Italy Kazakhstan 1 Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia 1 San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey 1 Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City 4 States with limited recognition Abkhazia 2 Kosovo Northern Cyprus 2 South Ossetia 2 Transnistria Dependent territories Denmark Faroe Islands 3 autonomous country of the Kingdom of Denmark United Kingdom Akrotiri and Dhekelia 2 (Sovereign Base Areas) Gibraltar ( British Overseas Territory ) Crown Dependencies Bailiwick of Guernsey Alderney Guernsey Sark Bailiwick of Jersey Isle of Man Special areas of internal sovereignty Finland Åland ( autonomous region subject to the Åland convention of 1921) Norway Svalbard ( unincorporated area subject to the Svalbard Treaty ) United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern Ireland ( country of the United Kingdom subject to the British-Irish Agreement ) 1 Spans the conventional boundary between Europe and another continent.

2 Considered European for cultural, political and historical reasons but is geographically in Western Asia.

3 Oceanic islands within the vicinity of Europe are usually grouped with the continent even though they are not situated on its continental shelf.

4 Governed by the Holy See which has sovereignty over Vatican City.

Category Europe portal v t e Nordic countries States Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden Autonomous countries Åland Faroe Islands Greenland ( Territory ) Special status / cultural area Svalbard Sápmi Related Climate of the Nordic countries Comparison of the Nordic countries Nordic Council Nordic Cross flag Subdivisions of the Nordic countries LGBT in the Nordic countries Nordic diplomatic missions See also Norsemen Old Norse Nordic identity in Estonia Scandinavia Category v t e Nordic Council Full members Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden Associate members Åland Faroe Islands Greenland Observer / offices Sápmi Estonia ( identity ) Latvia Lithuania Schleswig-Holstein v t e International organizations with the Kingdom of Norway as a member Geographical and geopolitical Arctic Council European Free Trade Association EEA Schengen Council of Europe (CE) International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Nordic Council Organization of American States (OAS) Historical and cultural International Olympic Committee (IOC) International Organization for Migration (IOM) International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Economic and social development African Development Bank (AfDB) Asian Development Bank (ADB) Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement (ICRM) International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRCS) International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Paris Club World Customs Organization (WCO) World Trade Organization (WTO) Security Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) International Criminal Court (ICCt) Interpol North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) Zangger Committee (ZC) Technology and research Australia Group European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) European Space Agency (ESA) International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) International Energy Agency (IEA) International Mobile Satellite Organization (IMSO) International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (ITSO) Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) United Nations (UN) Branches UNCTAD UNHCR UNTSO Specialized agencies FAO ICAO IFAD ILO IMF IMO ITU MINUSMA UNESCO UNIDO UPU UNITAR UNMISS UNRWA UNWTO WHO WIPO WMO World Bank Group IBRD IDA IFC MIGA Italics indicates observer status Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Israel Catalonia Geographic MusicBrainz area Academics CiNii Artists KulturNav People UK Parliament Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX 61°N 8°E ﻿ / ﻿ 61°N 8°E ﻿ / 61; 8 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nchxs
Cached time: 20250817083747
Cache expiry: 55351
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.880 seconds
Real time usage: 4.432 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 27400/1000000
Revision size: 233599/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 806603/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 99862/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 120/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 955885/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.373/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22510677/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3706.844      1 -total
 42.65% 1580.860      3 Template:Reflist
 26.07%  966.308    166 Template:Cite_web
 16.88%  625.633      1 Template:Infobox_country
  4.10%  151.955      3 Template:ISO_3166_code
  4.01%  148.633     26 Template:Cite_news
  3.65%  135.192      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  3.37%  125.012     16 Template:Fix
  3.01%  111.539      1 Template:Norway_topics
  3.00%  111.377      1 Template:Navboxes Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21241:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817083747 and revision id 1305987605. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Norway&oldid=1305987605 " Categories : Norway Member states of the United Nations Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of NATO Members of the Nordic Council Member states of the European Free Trade Association Scandinavia States and territories established in the 870s 872 establishments States and territories established in 1814 States and territories established in 1905 Countries in Europe OECD members Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments Articles containing Bokmål-language text Articles containing Nynorsk-language text Articles containing Northern Sami-language text Articles containing Lule Sami-language text Articles containing Southern Sami-language text Articles containing Kven-language text Pages with Norwegian IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template archiveis links Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) CS1 Norwegian Bokmål-language sources (nb) Articles with dead external links from April 2018 Articles with dead external links from February 2017 Articles with dead external links from May 2020 CS1 Norwegian Nynorsk-language sources (nn) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use British English from January 2022 Use dmy dates from December 2024 Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from August 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with unsourced statements from May 2015 All articles with minor POV problems Articles with minor POV problems from September 2022 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from October 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 Articles containing Norwegian-language text Pages using largest cities with unknown parameters Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 Articles with failed verification from June 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Articles needing additional references from February 2022 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2025 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1922 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 07:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Norway 305 languages Add topic

