Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Example devices Toggle Example devices subsection 1.1 Non-electrical 1.2 Electrical 2 Example processes Toggle Example processes subsection 2.1 Media 3 Interfacing the digital and analog worlds 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations Toggle the table of contents Analog device 6 languages العربية Eesti Euskara Bahasa Indonesia Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Combination of analog machine and media This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Analog device" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2013 ) Analog devices are a combination of both analog machine and analog media that can together measure , record , reproduce, receive or broadcast continuous information , for example, the almost infinite number of grades of transparency , voltage , resistance , rotation , or pressure .

[ 1 ] In theory, the continuous information in an analog signal has an infinite number of possible values with the only limitation on resolution being the accuracy of the analog device.

Analog media are materials with analog properties, such as photographic film , which are used in analog devices, such as cameras .

Example devices [ edit ] Non-electrical [ edit ] There are notable non-electrical analog devices, such as some clocks (sundials, water clocks), the astrolabe , slide rules , the governor of a steam engine, the planimeter (a simple device that measures the surface area of a closed shape), Kelvin's mechanical tide predictor , acoustic rangefinders, servomechanisms (e.g. the thermostat ), a simple mercury thermometer , a weighing scale , and the speedometer .

Electrical [ edit ] The telautograph is an analogue precursor to the modern fax machine . It transmits electrical impulses recorded by potentiometers to stepping motors attached to a pen, thus being able to reproduce a drawing or signature made by the sender at the receiver's station. It was the first such device to transmit drawings to a stationary sheet of paper; previous inventions in Europe used rotating drums to make such transmissions.

An analog synthesizer is a synthesizer that uses analog circuits and analog computer techniques to generate sound electronically.

The analog television encodes television and transports the picture and sound information as an analog signal, that is, by varying the amplitude and/or frequencies of the broadcast signal. All systems preceding digital television, such as NTSC, PAL, and SECAM are analog television systems.

An analog computer is a form of computer that uses electrical, mechanical, or hydraulic phenomena to model the problem being solved. More generally an analog computer uses one kind of physical quantity to represent the behavior of another physical system, or mathematical function. Modeling a real physical system in a computer is called simulation.

Example processes [ edit ] Media [ edit ] The chemical reactions in photographic film and film stock involve analog processes, with camera as machinery.

Interfacing the digital and analog worlds [ edit ] In electronics, a digital-to-analog converter is a circuit for converting a digital signal (usually binary) to an analog signal (current, voltage or electric charge). Digital-to-analog converters are interfaces between the digital world and analog worlds. An analog-to-digital converter is an electronic circuit that converts continuous signals to discrete digital numbers.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "What is Analog Device? — Limeup" .

UX Design & Software Development Company – Limeup . Retrieved July 19, 2024 .

This technology-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Analog_device&oldid=1281232561 " Categories : Analog circuits Electronic circuits Electronic engineering Technology stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2021 Articles needing additional references from August 2013 All articles needing additional references Use American English from September 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All stub articles This page was last edited on 19 March 2025, at 03:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Analog device 6 languages Add topic

