Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Career 3 Family 4 References Toggle the table of contents John Forster (Chief Justice) 2 languages Français Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Irish lawyer, politician and judge John Forster (1668 – 2 July 1720) was an Irish lawyer, politician and judge.

Background [ edit ] Forster was born in Dublin , one of four children of Richard Forster and his wife Anne Webber. His father sat in the Irish House of Commons for Swords and came from a family long associated with the Dublin business community. Nicholas Forster, Bishop of Raphoe , was his brother.

Career [ edit ] Forster served as Recorder of  Dublin from 1701 to 1714, and represented Dublin City in the Irish House of Commons from 1703 to 1715. He was Solicitor-General for Ireland in 1709 and Attorney-General for Ireland from Christmas Eve 1709 to 1711, before being raised to the Bench as Chief Justice of the Irish Common Pleas on 20 September 1714.

[ 1 ] In 1713 he took part in the hotly contested Irish General Election and his constituency was the scene of the Dublin election riot .

Elrington Ball described Forster as "a sound lawyer and impressive speaker" but lacking in political judgment.

[ 2 ] Like Alan Brodrick, 1st Viscount Midleton , his mentor, he was stubborn and hot-tempered. His tenure as Recorder of Dublin saw a major conflict between the aldermen of Dublin and the Privy Council ; Forster was entirely on the side of the aldermen, and for this, he was violently attacked by Jonathan Swift and other critics. These attacks undoubtedly took their toll, and it is believed he exchanged the Recordership for the position of Chief Justice in the belief that the more senior position would, in practice, be less onerous than the Recordership.

Family [ edit ] Forster married firstly Rebecca Monck, daughter of Henry Monck of St. Stephens Green , Dublin and his wife Sarah, daughter and heiress of Sir Thomas Stanley of Grangegorman , by whom he had at least three children, Richard, Anne and Elizabeth.

He married secondly Dorothy Evans, daughter of George Evans , of Bulgaden Hall, County Limerick and his wife Mary Eyre, and sister of George Evans, 1st Baron Carbery . They had a daughter, Dorothy.

His son Richard married Elizabeth Geering in 1721, and died in 1738.  His daughter Anne married the celebrated philosopher George Berkeley , Bishop of Cloyne ; her sister Elizabeth married Rev. Robert Spence. The youngest child Dorothy married Thomas Burton of Buncraggy: they were the grandparents of another leading judge, Thomas Burton Vandeleur .

He died following a stroke at his home, Clonshagh, Santry .

References [ edit ] ^ Haydn, Joseph Book of Dignitie s ^ Ball, F. Elrington The Judges in Ireland 1221–1921 John Murray, London 1926 Parliament of Ireland Preceded by William Handcock Sir John Rogerson Member of Parliament for Dublin City 1703–1715 With: Benjamin Burton Succeeded by John Rogerson Benjamin Burton Legal offices Preceded by Sir William Handcock Recorder of Dublin 1701–1714 Succeeded by John Rogerson Preceded by Sir Richard Levinge Solicitor General for Ireland 1709 Succeeded by William Whitshed Preceded by Alan Brodrick Attorney General for Ireland 1709–1711 Succeeded by Sir Richard Levinge Preceded by Sir Robert Doyne Chief Justice of the Irish Common Pleas 1714–1720 Succeeded by Sir Richard Levinge Political offices Preceded by Alan Brodrick Speaker of the Irish House of Commons 1710–1713 Succeeded by Alan Brodrick v t e Solicitors-general for Ireland Thomas Rochfort Thomas Luttrell Patrick Barnewall John Bathe James Dowdall Nicholas Nugent Richard Bellings Jesse Smythes Roger Wilbraham Sir John Davies Robert Jacobe Richard Bolton Edward Bolton William Sambach William Ellis Robert Shapcote John Temple Theobald Butler Richard Levinge Alan Brodrick Richard Levinge John Forster William Whitshed Francis Bernard John Rogerson Thomas Marlay Robert Jocelyn John Bowes St George Caulfeild Warden Flood Philip Tisdall John Gore Marcus Paterson Godfrey Lill John Scott Robert Hellen Hugh Carleton Arthur Wolfe John Toler John Stewart William Cusack-Smith James McClelland William Plunkett Charles Kendal Bushe Henry Joy John Doherty Philip Cecil Crampton Michael O'Loghlen Edward Pennefather Michael O'Loghlen John Richards Stephen Woulfe Maziere Brady David Richard Pigot Richard Moore Edward Pennefather Joseph Devonsher Jackson Thomas Cusack-Smith Richard Wilson Greene Abraham Brewster James Henry Monahan John Hatchell Henry George Hughes James Whiteside William Keogh John Fitzgerald Jonathan Christian Henry George Hughes Edmund Hayes John George Rickard Deasy Thomas O'Hagan James Anthony Lawson Sir Edward Sullivan, 1st Baronet Michael Morris, Baron Morris Hedges Eyre Chatterton Robert Warren Michael Harrison John Thomas Ball Henry Ormsby Charles Robert Barry Richard Dowse Christopher Palles Hugh Law Henry Ormsby David Plunket Gerald Fitzgibbon Hugh Holmes William Moore Johnson Andrew Porter John Naish Samuel Walker The MacDermot John Monroe John George Gibson The MacDermot John George Gibson Peter O'Brien Dodgson Hamilton Madden John Atkinson Edward Carson Charles Hare Hemphill William Kenny Dunbar Barton George Wright James Campbell Redmond Barry Charles O'Connor Ignatius O'Brien Thomas Molony John Moriarty Jonathan Pim James O'Connor James Chambers Arthur Samuels John Blake Powell Denis Henry Daniel Martin Wilson Thomas Watters Brown Category Authority control databases International VIAF People Ireland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Forster_(Chief_Justice)&oldid=1285356102 " Categories : 1668 births 1720 deaths Attorneys-general for Ireland 17th-century Irish lawyers Irish MPs 1703–1713 Irish MPs 1713–1714 Irish MPs 1715–1727 Members of the Parliament of Ireland (pre-1801) for County Dublin constituencies Solicitors-general for Ireland Speakers of the Parliament of Ireland (pre-1801) Members of the Privy Council of Ireland Chief justices of the Irish Common Pleas Recorders of Dublin 18th-century Irish judges Lawyers from County Dublin Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 This page was last edited on 13 April 2025, at 06:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Forster (Chief Justice) 2 languages Add topic

