Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Birka speculations 3 Ubsola speculations 4 The theory's Nazi origin 5 Testing the theory 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle the table of contents Götaland theory 3 languages Deutsch Română Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Revisionist view that the foundation of Sweden occurred in Västergötland This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Götaland theory" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( August 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Götaland theory (or Westrogothian School , Swedish Västgötaskolan ) is a view which challenges established history and archaeology, and claims that the foundation of Sweden occurred not (as traditionally assumed) in Eastern Sweden , but in the province of Västergötland (Westrogothia). The adherents of this idea use wide-ranging methods, from controversial ones, such as dowsing and asking mediums to contact the dead, to more conventional methods such as etymology , but also claim that the established academic material consists of lies and forgeries. Although well known in Sweden and fervently preached by its adherents, it has never been accepted by scholars.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The Götaland theory originated in the early 20th century with claims that the ancient city Ubsola ( Uppsala ) was situated in the province of Västergötland , specifically in the old lands called Uplanden . Additionally, the theory's supporters also held the view that Västergötland and the region of Lake Vänern was in fact the land of "Sithun", translated into modern day language as Sigtuna , where Odin and his Aesir companions supposedly settled when they came to Scandinavia .

An early predecessor of the theory was Pehr Tham (1737–1820), who during the 19th century unsuccessfully tried to promote ideas such as the village Sätuna being the location of Old Sigtuna , and the ancient town of Birka being situated somewhere around Lake Hornborga . He is regarded as a successor of Olof Rudbeckius , a seventeenth-century scholar who claimed that Sweden was the true location of the sunken Atlantis .

The early proponents of the Götaland theory proposed ideas about Västergötland, and the Vänern lake region, in particular, being the origin not only of the Geats , but also of the Suiones , the Danes ; and furthermore the location of various phenomena in Norse mythology , such as Odin 's Sithun ( Sigtuna ), Valhall , and the ash tree Yggdrasil . These ideas, created in the spirit of Romanticism , were also a reaction to the archaeological research at the time, which arguably neglected some areas of Sweden that were nevertheless rich in archaeological remains. The speculations of the adherents of the Götaland theory movement are largely irrelevant to modern academic discussion, which does not pay much attention to Swedish-Geatish wars or the Yngling kings.

[ 2 ] Especially, the story of Odin and the Aesir's emigration according to the Ynglinga saga is generally considered as false by the official views and scholars. Other parts of the extensive work of Snorri Sturluson (and other saga writers) may however be considered valid references for finding elements of the ancient history of Scandinavian people and their religious customs and beliefs.

Birka speculations [ edit ] The town Birka is also known from the Vita Ansgari , in which Ansgar founds a mission in the town. It is commonly referred to being on Björkö island in the lake Mälaren . This location is a World Heritage Site and a popular tourist attraction.

According to the Västgöta theory, Birka as a name meant "merchant town," and could refer to any such town in ancient Sweden.

[ citation needed ] Ubsola speculations [ edit ] Upsalir , or Ubsola , was the main cult center of pagan (heathen) Ása-faith in ancient Scandinavia and Sweden. The ancient Upsalir was described by Adam of Bremen in the 11th century, and by Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century. It is generally considered to correspond to modern-day Uppsala , with its location on Uppsala's old location – Old Uppsala , in east Sweden, the habitat of the ancient tribe called Suiones (Swedes). The Västgöta school however claims that the original site for the temple was located in West Sweden, in the habitat of the ancient Geats ( Götar ), the tribe which came to name Västergötland .

There are however no archeological findings that support the view of Västergötland being the original site of Ubsola, and therefore the views of the Västgöta theory have little or no actual credibility.

[ citation needed ] The theory's Nazi origin [ edit ] The Götaland theory was the only notable result of the Nazi infiltration of Swedish archaeology during 1933–1945.

[ 3 ] Carl-Otto Fast, founder of the Westrogothian School ("Västgötaskolan"), was a known Nazi [ 4 ] who some claim collaborated with SS Ahnenerbe , Richard Walther Darré and eugenicists from Hadamar in Germany.  Archaeologist Magnus Alkarp, who has studied classified and semi-classified documents from the post-war era , has shown that the Westrogothian School was, among some regional, right-wing separatists movements in Scandinavia, an important part of the Operation Gladio .

[ citation needed ] Testing the theory [ edit ] Amateurs have unsuccessfully tried to prove what they consider important aspects of the Götaland theory several times. The barrow at Skalunda was claimed to be the burial site of the hero Beowulf known from the Beowulf epic ; after applying the dowsing technique with a pendulum, they claimed that the barrow was indeed the burial site of this Geatish hero.

[ 5 ] Later, professional archaeologists drilled into the barrow to extract a sample for C14 dating .

[ 5 ] The barrow was from around 700 C.E., about 150 years too late for being a candidate for Beowulf's burial site.

[ 5 ] The locality Sätuna at the Lake Hornborga in Västergötland was, according to believers in the theory, the true Sigtuna , where king Olof Skötkonung had his coins made.

[ 6 ] A protrusion in the ground was pointed out by adherents of the Götaland theory as the king's mint .

[ 6 ] However, when archaeologists examined it, the protrusion turned out to be the remains of an uncompleted barn from the 1890s.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Lands of Sweden History of Sweden Gothicismus Name of the Goths Consolidation of Sweden Notes [ edit ] ^ Larsson 2002:8: Bland de akademiska forskarna har denna skola aldrig accepterats, [...] ^ Gahrn 1988, Strömberg 1998 ^ Alkarp 2007 The lost Temple [...] ^ "Kategori:Personer inom svensk nazism" , Wikipedia (in Swedish), 2016-10-13 , retrieved 2023-02-06 ^ a b c Larsson 2002:90 ^ a b c Larsson 2002:34 References [ edit ] Alkarp, Magnus (2007).

Men däri är också mycken galenskap : Adam av Bremen, arkeologin och Gamla Uppsala = Adamus Bremensis, archaeology and Old Uppsala . In: Kult, guld och makt : ett tvärvetenskapligt symposium i Götene .

Gahrn, Lars (1988).

Sveariket i källor och historieskrivning . Gothenburg University, doctoral thesis with English summary.

Larsson, M. G. (2002).

Götarnas riken. Upptäcksfärder till Sveriges enande . Atlantis, Stockholm.

ISBN 91-7486-641-9 .

Strömberg, J.B.L.D. (1998).

Svearikets vagga och västgötaskolan . Stockholm.

Web edition with an English summary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Götaland_theory&oldid=1287305797 " Categories : Pseudoarchaeology Conspiracy theories in Sweden Pseudohistory Historiography of Sweden Anti-Swedish sentiment Separatism in Sweden Goths Hidden categories: CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2019 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from August 2019 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 This page was last edited on 25 April 2025, at 10:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Götaland theory 3 languages Add topic

