Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Tourist sights 3 Twin towns – sister cities 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Szerencs 29 languages 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Lombard Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 48°10′N 21°12′E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.167°N 21.200°E ﻿ / 48.167; 21.200 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Town in Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén, Hungary Szerencs Town Szerencs Castle Flag Coat of arms Szerencs Coordinates: 48°09′44″N 21°12′18″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.16228°N 21.20507°E ﻿ / 48.16228; 21.20507 Country Hungary County Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén District Szerencs Area • Total 36.69 km 2 (14.17 sq mi) Population (2001) • Total 10,184 • Density 277.57/km 2 (718.9/sq mi) Time zone UTC+1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+2 ( CEST ) Postal code 3900 Area code (+36) 47 Website www .szerencs .hu Szerencs ( Hungarian pronunciation: [ˈsɛrɛnt͡ʃ] ) is a town in Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén county , Northern Hungary . It lies 35 km (22 mi) away from Miskolc , and 205 km (127 mi) away from Budapest . It has about 9,100 inhabitants.

History [ edit ] Old bath house in Szerencs Szerencs grew into a town where the Great Plain and the Zemplén mountains meet. It is the cultural and economic centre of Southern Hegyalja. This small town, with rich historical past, is called the Gate of Hegyalja and due to it was inhabited in ancient times.

The first authentic written record about the one-thousand-year-old Szerencs dates back to a document from the 13th century. In 1241 the monastery of crusaders from St. John-order (the Joannists) stood here, which was named “Szerencs-Abbey of the Apostles called St. Peter and St. Paul”. The documents from the end of the 15th century refer to the settlement as a town.

The most important part of the history of the town can be connected to the era of Zsigmond Rákóczi, around the 16th and 17th centuries.

In 1605 in Szerencs on his land the parliament was convoked where István Bocskai was elected the Governor of Transylvania.

Programme “Day of Szerencs town“ has been organized since 1998 to celebrate this historical event on 20 April, every year.

István Bocskai gave Szerencs the status of a royal town with significant privileges in 1606.

Among the Rákóczi Family the last lord of the Szerencs-castle was Ferenc Rákóczi II. In the 18th century, in the era of Mária Terézia, the settlement began to show slow economic development. Then this development came to a sudden stop and during the administrative reform of 1876 Szerencs was qualified as a large village, i.e. it lost its status as a medieval market town.

Establishing industries at the end of the 19th century gave a new pace to the settlement.

The greatest sugar factory and refinery at that time of Europe were built here during 8 months in 1889. The chocolate factory was built in 1923, and its products made the name of Szerencs known nationally. Between the two world wars the settlement developed, but not at an earlier rapid pace. Szerencs had a population of 6707 residents in 1930. The factories, the rolling mill and the quarry provided a decent living for the people living here.

After 1945 Szerencs became the economic, cultural and administrative centre of the district and the modern development of the settlement began in 1960s.

In 1984 the settlement was given town status again.

In the 20th century Szerencs has become a town with its specific atmosphere as a result of urbanizational processes embedded in historical traditions.
The educational institutions like the crčche, three nursery schools, two primary schools and two secondary schools, ensure socialization, trade-learning and preparations for higher education at a high level for nearly 3000 children and young people.

International relations of Szerencs enrich the educational and cultural life of the town. Twin town co-operational agreements were concluded with Malchin (1989) and Geisenheim (1989) in Germany, Roznava (1991) in Slovakia and Hesperingen (1997) in Luxembourg. Twin town relations provide opportunities for exchange visits of students, tradition-keeping groups, families and the mutual introduction of cultural values.

Nowadays, the town serves as the engine of the Multi-purpose Microregion of Szerencs Town comprising 18 settlements with its primary and medium level educational establishments, its health care, sports facilities and services.

In recent years, several developments have taken place in the town (construction of a swimming pool, establishing an Industrial Park, creating a flowery city). New developments are also underway: block of flats building program, making up a rainwater and groundwater system, upgrading the existing ambulance center etc.). The ultimate goal is to create a small town of European standard.

Tourist sights [ edit ] Rákóczi Castle The history of the castle, built on the ruins of a Benedictine Abbey, goes back to the 1550s. During the war against the Turkish it saw several battles. Between 1586 and 1616 it was the residence of the Rákóczi family. In the second half of the 18th century three towers of the inner castle were demolished, but the southern tower remained. After the War of Independence, led by Ferenc Rákóczi II, the new landlords rebuilt it as a palace, so it lost its characteristics as a castle.

The Huszárvár Hotel, the Zemplén Museum and the Town Cultural Centre are also housed here where the latter organises various programmes attracting tourists. Every June the Hegyalja Smallholders’ Days with grape-wine exhibition, wine competition and folklore programmes are held here.

The Museum of the town rich in history, at the edge of Tokaj-Hegyalja, was opened in 1969. The permanent exhibition of the Zemplén Museum can be seen in six rooms on the first floor of the eastern wing. The exhibits are displayed in four groups. The largest one is placed in three rooms and called the History of Picture Postcards. This collection of picture postcards is still the biggest collection in Hungary: its estimated number is 900,000.

Roman Catholic Church The Roman Catholic Church, built in baroque style in 1774, and the statue if Saint John from Nepomuk in front of it in Rákóczi Street, have architectural value.

Calvinist Church The old Calvinist Church, built in Gothic style at the end of the 13th century, can also be found in Rákóczi Street. Zsigmond Rákóczi was buried here in 1609. His red marble tomb can be seen in the nave.

Greek Catholic Church The Greek Catholic Church, in Ondi Street, was built in the beginning of the 18th century.

Twin towns – sister cities [ edit ] See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in Hungary Szerencs is twinned with: [ 1 ] Geisenheim , Germany Hesperange , Luxembourg Malchin , Germany Miercurea Nirajului , Romania Podgora , Croatia Pułtusk , Poland Rožňava , Slovakia References [ edit ] ^ "Testvérvárosaink" .

szerencs.hu (in Hungarian). Szerencs . Retrieved 2021-04-10 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Szerencs .

Official website in Hungarian v t e Towns and villages of Szerencs District Town (1) Szerencs (district seat) Large villages (2) Taktaharkány Tiszalúc Villages (13) Alsódobsza Bekecs Golop Legyesbénye Mád Megyaszó Mezőzombor Monok Prügy Rátka Taktakenéz Taktaszada Tállya v t e Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén County City with county rights Miskolc (county seat) Towns Abaújszántó Alsózsolca Borsodnádasd Cigánd Edelény Emőd Encs Felsőzsolca Gönc Kazincbarcika Mezőcsát Mezőkeresztes Mezőkövesd Nyékládháza Onga Ózd Pálháza Putnok Rudabánya Sajóbábony Sajószentpéter Sárospatak Sátoraljaújhely Szendrő Szerencs Szikszó Tiszaújváros Tokaj Large villages Arló Izsófalva Múcsony Ricse Szentistván Szirmabesenyő Taktaharkány Tiszalúc Villages Abaújalpár Abaújkér Abaújlak Abaújszolnok Abaújvár Abod Aggtelek Alacska Alsóberecki Alsódobsza Alsógagy Alsóregmec Alsószuha Alsótelekes Alsóvadász Arka Arnót Aszaló Ároktő Baktakék Balajt Baskó Bánhorváti Bánréve Becskeháza Bekecs Berente Beret Berzék Bodroghalom Bodroghalász Bodrogkeresztúr Bodrogkisfalud Bodrogolaszi Bogács Boldogkőújfalu Boldogkőváralja Boldva Borsodbóta Borsodgeszt Borsodivánka Borsodszentgyörgy Borsodszirák Bódvalenke Bódvarákó Bódvaszilas Bózsva Bőcs Bükkaranyos Bükkábrány Bükkmogyorósd Bükkszentkereszt Bükkzsérc Büttös Csenyéte Cserépfalu Cserépváralja Csernely Csincse Csobaj Csobád Csokvaomány Damak Dámóc Debréte Dédestapolcsány Detek Domaháza Dövény Dubicsány Egerlövő Égerszög Erdőbénye Erdőhorváti Fáj Fancsal Farkaslyuk Felsőberecki Felsődobsza Felsőgagy Felsőkelecsény Felsőnyárád Felsőregmec Felsőtelekes Felsővadász Filkeháza Fony Forró Fulókércs Füzér Füzérkajata Füzérkomlós Füzérradvány Gadna Gagyapáti Gagybátor Gagyvendégi Galvács Garadna Gelej Gesztely Gibárt Girincs Golop Gömörszőlős Göncruszka Györgytarló Halmaj Hangács Hangony Harsány Háromhuta Hegymeg Hejce Hejőbába Hejőkeresztúr Hejőkürt Hejőpapi Hejőszalonta Hercegkút Hernádbűd Hernádcéce Hernádkak Hernádkércs Hernádnémeti Hernádpetri Hernádszentandrás Hernádszurdok Hernádvécse Hét Hidasnémeti Hidvégardó Hollóháza Homrogd Igrici Imola Ináncs Irota Jákfalva Járdánháza Jósvafő Kács Karcsa Karos Kánó Kány Kázsmárk Kelemér Kenézlő Keresztéte Kesznyéten Kéked Királd Kiscsécs Kisgyőr Kishuta Kiskinizs Kisrozvágy Kissikátor Kistokaj Komjáti Komlóska Kondó Korlát Kovácsvágás Köröm Krasznokvajda Kupa Kurityán Lak Lácacséke Ládbesenyő Legyesbénye Léh Lénárddaróc Litka Mád Makkoshotyka Mályi Martonyi Mályinka Megyaszó Meszes Mezőnagymihály Mezőnyárád Mezőzombor Méra Mikóháza Mogyoróska Monaj Monok Muhi Nagybarca Nagycsécs Nagyhuta Nagykinizs Nagyrozvágy Négyes Nekézseny Nemesbikk Novajidrány Nyésta Nyíri Nyomár Olaszliszka Ormosbánya Oszlár Ónod Pamlény Parasznya Pácin Pányok Pere Perecse Perkupa Prügy Pusztafalu Pusztaradvány Radostyán Ragály Rakaca Rakacaszend Rásonysápberencs Rátka Regéc Répáshuta Révleányvár Rudolftelep Sajóecseg Sajógalgóc Sajóhídvég Sajóivánka Sajókápolna Sajókaza Sajókeresztúr Sajólád Sajólászlófalva Sajómercse Sajónémeti Sajóörös Sajópálfala Sajópetri Sajópüspöki Sajósenye Sajószöged Sajóvámos Sajóvelezd Sály Sárazsadány Sáta Selyeb Semjén Serényfalva Sima Sóstófalva Szakácsi Szakáld Szalaszend Szalonna Szászfa Szegi Szegilong Szemere Szendrőlád Szentistvánbaksa Szin Szinpetri Szomolya Szögliget Szőlősardó Szuhafő Szuhakálló Szuhogy Taktabáj Taktakenéz Taktaszada Tarcal Tard Tállya Telkibánya Teresztenye Tibolddaróc Tiszabábolna Tiszacsermely Tiszadorogma Tiszakarád Tiszakeszi Tiszaladány Tiszapalkonya Tiszatardos Tiszatarján Tiszavalk Tolcsva Tomor Tornabarakony Tornakápolna Tornanádaska Tornaszentandrás Tornaszentjakab Tornyosnémeti Trizs Újcsanálos Uppony Vadna Vajdácska Varbó Varbóc Vatta Vágáshuta Vámosújfalu Vilmány Vilyvitány Viss Viszló Vizsoly Zalkod Zádorfalva Zemplénagárd Ziliz Zsujta Zubogy 48°10′N 21°12′E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.167°N 21.200°E ﻿ / 48.167; 21.200 Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Szerencs&oldid=1302000151 " Category : Populated places in Borsod-Abaúj-Zemplén County Hidden categories: CS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with Hungarian IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 21:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Szerencs 29 languages Add topic

