Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 References 3 Sources 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Cigoli 20 languages Беларуская Български Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian painter and architect (1559–1613) For the Italian village in Tuscany, see Cigoli, San Miniato .

Cigoli, self-portrait The Sacrifice of Isaac , by Ludovico Cigoli, c. 1607 Lodovico or Ludovico Cardi (21 September 1559 – 8 June 1613), [ 1 ] also known as Cigoli , was an Italian painter and architect of the late Mannerist and early Baroque period, trained and active in his early career in Florence , and spending the last nine years of his life in Rome .

Biography [ edit ] Lodovico Cardi was born at Villa Castelvecchio in Cigoli , Tuscany , whence the name by which he is commonly known. Initially, Cigoli trained in Florence under the fervid mannerist Alessandro Allori , and studied the works of Michelangelo , Correggio , Andrea del Sarto and Pontormo .

[ 2 ] Later, influenced by the most prominent of the " Counter- Maniera " painters, Santi di Tito , as well as by Barocci , Cigoli shed the shackles of mannerism and infused his later paintings with an expressionism often lacking from 16th-century Florentine painting.

For the Roman patron, Massimo Massimi, he painted an Ecce Homo [ 3 ] (now in Palazzo Pitti ). Supposedly unbeknownst to any of the painters, two other prominent contemporary painters, Passignano and Caravaggio , had been requested canvases on the same theme . This work was afterwards taken by Napoleon to the Louvre , and was restored to Florence in 1815.

One of his early paintings was of Cain slaying Abel . He then gained the employ of the  Grand-Duke in some works for the Pitti Palace , where he painted a Venus and Satyr and a Sacrifice of Isaac .

Other important pictures are St. Peter Healing the Lame Man in St Peter's ; an unfinished Burial of St. Paul in the church of San Paolo fuori le Mura , [ 4 ] and a Story of Psyche in a fresco incorporated in the decorative scheme of the Villa Borghese ; a Martyrdom of Stephen , which earned him the name of the "Florentine Correggio ", and a Stigmata of St. Francis at Florence. Shortly before his death, Cigoli was made a Knight of Malta at the request of Pope Paul V .

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] As stated by the prominent 17th-century painter, Andrea Sacchi, Cigoli's, St Peter Healing the Lame Man came to be recognized as the third most beautiful painting in Rome after Raphael's Transfiguration and Domenichino's The Last Communion of St Jerome . Cigoli's fame and influence, even prior to coming to Rome, was of such a degree that the Florentine ambassador to the city greeted the artist on his arrival to the Eternal City. In Baldanucci's Notizie or lives of the artists, Cigoli is the only artist, along with Michelangelo, given the unique title of "Divine".

Cigoli, a close personal friend of Galileo Galilei – and regarded by him as the greatest painter of the age – painted a last fresco in the dome of the Pauline chapel of the church of Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome, depicting the Madonna standing upon a pock-marked lunar orb. This is the first extant example of Galileo's discoveries about the physical nature of the Moon (as he himself drew it in his 1610 treatise Sidereus Nuncius ) having penetrated the visual arts practice of his day. Until this image, the Moon in pictures of the Virgin had always been mythical and smooth, perfectly spherical as described by Platonic & Ptolemaic tradition.

His pupils include Cristofano Allori (1577–1621), the Fleming Giovanni Biliverti (1576–1644), Domenico Fetti , Giovanni Antonio Lelli , Aurelio Lomi , Pietro Medici , Gregorio Pagani , and Andrea Comodi (1560–1638).

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Chappell, Miles L.

"Cigoli, Lodovico" .

Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online . Oxford University Press . Retrieved September 10, 2013 .

^ a b Chisholm 1911 .

^ Ecce Homo by CIGOLI ^ Baglione, Le Nove Chiese,  639, p. 62 ^ Næss, Atle (2005).

Galileo Galilei, When the World Stood Still . Berlin: Springer. p. 106.

ISBN 3540219617 .

^ Hobbes, James R. (1849).

Picture collector's manual; Dictionary of Painters (volume II) . T. & W. Boone, 29 Bond Street, London. pp.

43 –44.

Sources [ edit ] Wittkower, Rudolf (1993). "Art and Architecture Italy, 1600-1750".

Pelican History of Art . 1980. Penguin Books Ltd. pp.

97– 98.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Cigoli ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 365.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cigoli .

Orazio and Artemisia Gentileschi , a fully digitized exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries, which contains material on Cigoli (see index) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France 2 BnF data 2 Italy Spain Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav 2 3 Victoria Scientific illustrators Städel Prado People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cigoli&oldid=1303412537 " Categories : 1559 births 1613 deaths People from San Miniato 16th-century Italian painters Italian male painters 17th-century Italian painters Painters from Tuscany Italian Mannerist painters Italian Mannerist architects Pseudonymous painters Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 21:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cigoli 20 languages Add topic

