Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Species 2 Control measures 3 By region Toggle By region subsection 3.1 Canterbury 3.2 Hawke's Bay 3.3 Marlborough 3.4 Otago 3.5 Southland 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Wilding conifer Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Invasive trees in New Zealand Wilding pines in the Canterbury region.

Wilding conifers , commonly known as wilding pines , are invasive trees in the high country of New Zealand. Millions of dollars are spent on controlling their spread.

[ 1 ] In the South Island , they threaten 210,000 hectares of public land administered by the Department of Conservation .  They are also present on privately owned land and other public land such as roadsides. The wilding conifers are considered to be a threat to biodiversity , farm productivity and to landscape values. Since they often invade tussock grasslands – which are characterised by low-lying vegetation that is considered to be a natural environment – the tall trees become a prominent and unwanted feature.

Species [ edit ] European larch and other invasive conifers in the Jollie River . The trees have almost completely blanketed the flanks of the lower section of the valley.

There are ten main species that have become wildings: [ 2 ] Bishop pine ( Pinus muricata ) Corsican pine ( Pinus nigra ) Dwarf mountain pine ( Pinus mugo ) Lodgepole pine ( Pinus contorta ) Maritime pine ( Pinus pinaster ) Ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa ) Radiata pine (Monterey pine, Pinus radiata ) Scots pine ( Pinus sylvestris ) Douglas fir ( Pseudotsuga species) European larch ( Larix decidua ) The various species dominate in different areas of New Zealand. Radiata pine ( Pinus radiata ) is used for 90% of the plantation forests in New Zealand [ 3 ] and some of the wilding conifers are a result of these forests.

Control measures [ edit ] Without any control measures, wilding conifers will spread over an increasing area with economic and environmental consequences. As well as volunteers organised by environmental groups, regional councils and the Department of Conservation invest in wild conifer removal.

[ citation needed ] A South Island Wilding Conifer Management Group was formed in 2006 and obtained funding from the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry Sustainable Farming Fund.

[ 4 ] Mechanical removal by hand pulling seedlings, and the use of brush cutters and chainsaws are common control methods. Spray trials are also being carried out. In 2004 a spraying operation by the Department of Conservation at Mid Dome in the Southland region caused spray drift onto surrounding areas including the towns of Athol and Kingston .

[ 5 ] By region [ edit ] Locations of major wilding conifer areas. Adapted from Wilding conifers – New Zealand history and research background .

[ 2 ] Pest management is administered by regional councils . There are sixteen different regions in New Zealand and wilding conifers only occur in a few of these regions, predominantly in the South Island. The Department of Conservation manages wilding conifers on public land under its jurisdiction.

[ citation needed ] Canterbury [ edit ] In its 2005 Pest Management Strategy the Canterbury Regional Council (Ecan) has the objective of eradicating all self-sown wilding conifers in ecologically sensitive areas in its jurisdiction. To do this a range of measures are used, including carrying out wilding conifer control operations, encouraging reporting of the presence of wilding conifers, encouraging the removal of seed sources and advocating changes to the district plans of the territorial authorities to prevent or control the planting of inappropriate conifers.

[ 6 ] Hawke's Bay [ edit ] Wilding conifers infest the Kaweka Forest Park .

[ citation needed ] Marlborough [ edit ] Pinus contorta infests the south Marlborough area and is classed as a "Containment Control Pest", which are pests that are managed to prevent spreading to new areas. Other wilding species exist in Marlborough but Lodgepole Pine is the focus for pest management.

[ 7 ] Otago [ edit ] Pinus contorta is a pest plant listed in the Otago Regional Council Pest Management Strategy for Otago .

[ 8 ] Southland [ edit ] A major area of wilding conifer spread is in the Mid Dome Area in the Southland region . The Mid Dome Wilding Trees Charitable Trust was set up in 2006 [ 9 ] and in 2008 the government allocated $54,000 from the Biodiversity Funds to control wildings on about 1,000 hectares (2,500 acres) in the area.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Forestry in New Zealand Invasive species in New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ "Wilding pines: Eternal vigilance needed, even with $100 million investment" .

Stuff . 16 October 2020 . Retrieved 9 March 2021 .

^ a b Wilding conifers – New Zealand history and research background , a presentation by Nick Ledgard at the "Managing wilding conifers in New Zealand – present and future" workshop (2003) ^ "Situation and outlook for New Zealand agriculture and forestry" (PDF) . NZ Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. 2007 . Retrieved 19 October 2010 .

^ "The Project" . South Island Wilding Conifer Management Group . Retrieved 17 January 2009 .

^ Wallace, Euan (23 April 2004).

"A review of herbicide drift at Athol and surrounding area" (PDF) . Agro-Research Enterprises . Retrieved 18 April 2009 .

^ Canterbury Regional Council (June 2005).

Canterbury Regional Pest Management Strategy (2005) (PDF) . Christchurch, New Zealand: Canterbury Regional Council .

ISBN 1-86937-563-7 . Retrieved 6 September 2008 .

^ "2007 Regional Pest Management Strategy" . Marlborough District Council. 2007. Archived from the original on 6 December 2008 . Retrieved 17 January 2009 .

^ "Pest Management Strategy for Otago" (PDF) . Otago Regional Council. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 May 2010 . Retrieved 14 August 2010 .

^ Parker, David (16 August 2006).

"Mid Dome Wilding Trees Charitable Trust – inaugural meeting" . New Zealand Government . Retrieved 14 January 2011 .

^ "Mid Dome project receives biodiversity funding" . New Zealand Government. 19 October 2008 . Retrieved 14 January 2011 .

Further reading [ edit ] R.L. Hill, S.M. Zydenbos and C.M. Bezar, ed. (2004).

Managing Wilding Conifers in New Zealand: Present and Future (PDF) . NZPPS.

ISBN 0-478-10842-7 .

(Individual chapters can be downloaded from the New Zealand Plant Protection Society ) Ledgard, Nick; Langer, Lisa (1999).

Wilding Prevention (PDF) . Forest Research Institute.

ISBN 0-477-02186-7 .

Harding, M. (May 1990), Wilding pines – a growing problem , Forest and Bird magazine, pp.

38– 41 Hansford, Dave (2 June 2010).

"Wilding Pines" .

New Zealand Geographic (102).

Froude, Victoria A (December 2011).

Wilding conifers in New Zealand: Status report (PDF) . Pacific Eco-Logic Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-478-40010-6 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wilding conifers in New Zealand .

Wilding pines at the Department of Conservation South Island Wilding Conifer Strategy (2001) , Department of Conservation South Island Wilding Conifer Management Group Wilding Conifers in Canterbury at Environment Canterbury Wakatipu Wilding Conifer Strategy at the Queenstown Lakes District Council Waimakariri Ecological and Landscape Restoration Alliance v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wilding_conifer&oldid=1305572293 " Categories : Invasive plant species in New Zealand Conifers Environmental issues with forests Forest pathology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Use New Zealand English from August 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 21:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wilding conifer Add languages Add topic

