Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Astronomy 3 Mathematics 4 Notes 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Geminus 22 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Estremeñu Français Galego Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek astronomer and mathematician (fl. 1st-century BC) Geminus Γεμῖνος ὁ Ῥόδιος Nationality Greek Known for Astronomer and mathematician Scientific career Academic advisors Posidonius Geminus of Rhodes ( Greek : Γεμῖνος ὁ Ῥόδιος ), was a Greek astronomer and mathematician , who flourished in the 1st century BC. An astronomy work of his, the Introduction to the Phenomena , still survives; it was intended as an introductory astronomy book for students. He also wrote a work on mathematics , of which only fragments quoted by later authors survive.

Life [ edit ] Nothing is known about the life of Geminus. It is not even certain that he was born in Rhodes, but references to mountains on Rhodes in his astronomical works suggests that he worked there. His dates are not known with any certainty either. A passage in his works referring to the Annus Vagus (Wandering Year) of the Egyptian calendar of 120 years before his own time, has been used to imply a date of c. 70 BC for the time of writing, [ 1 ] which would be consistent with the idea that he may have been a pupil of Posidonius , but a date as late as 50 AD has also been suggested.

[ 2 ] The crater Geminus on the Moon is named after him.

[ citation needed ] Astronomy [ edit ] The only work of Geminus to survive is his Introduction to the Phenomena ( Greek : Εἰσαγωγὴ εἰς τὰ Φαινόμενα ), often just called the Isagoge .  This introductory astronomy book, based on the works of earlier astronomers such as Hipparchus , was intended to teach astronomy for beginning students in the subject. In it, Geminus describes the zodiac and the motion of the Sun , the constellations , the celestial sphere , days and nights, the risings and settings of the zodiacal signs, luni-solar periods and their application to calendars , phases of the Moon , eclipses , star phases, terrestrial zones and geographical places, and the foolishness of making weather predictions by the stars.

[ 3 ] He also wrote a commentary on Posidonius' work On Meteorology . Fragments of this commentary are preserved by Simplicius in his commentary on Aristotle's Physics .

Mathematics [ edit ] Geminus also wrote extensively on mathematics , including a comprehensive Doctrine, (or Theory) of Mathematics.

[ 4 ] Although this work has not survived, many extracts are preserved by Proclus , Eutocius , and others. He divided mathematics into two parts: Mental ( Greek : νοητά ) and Observable ( Greek : αἰσθητά ), or in other words, Pure and Applied . In the first category he placed geometry and arithmetic (including number theory ), and in the second category he placed mechanics , astronomy , optics , geodesy , canonics ( musical harmony ), and logistics . Long extracts of his work are also preserved by Al-Nayrizi in his commentary on Euclid's Elements .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Dicks, D., Dictionary of Scientific Biography.

New York. (1970).

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Neugebauer, O., A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy.

New York. (1975).

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Evans, J., The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy , p. 91. Oxford University Press. (1998).

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Heath, T., A Manual of Greek Mathematics, Dover Publications. (2003).

Bibliography [ edit ] Evans, J., Berggren, J.L., Geminos's Introduction to the Phenomena: A Translation and Study of a Hellenistic Survey of Astronomy.

(Princeton University Press, 2006.) External links [ edit ] Greek text of Manitius' Teubner edition of Εἰσαγωγή εἰς τὰ Φαινόμενα (Introduction to Phaenomena/Elements of Astronomy) Technology Museum of Thessaloniki Entry [ usurped ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Geminus" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Geminus' section at wilbourhall.org with scans of Manitius' edition of Εἰσαγωγή εἰς τὰ Φαινόμενα including a German translation and an 1895 dissertation on Geminus by Carolus Tittel .

v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal v t e Stoicism Philosophers Greek Scholarchs of the Stoa Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Zeno of Tarsus Diogenes of Babylon Antipater of Tarsus Panaetius Aristo of Chios Sphaerus Persaeus Herillus Dioscorides Crates of Mallus Zenodotus Apollodorus of Seleucia Boethus of Sidon Dardanus Mnesarchus Dionysius of Cyrene Hecato of Rhodes Diotimus the Stoic Posidonius Geminus Diodotus Antipater of Tyre Apollonides Athenodorus Cananites Roman Publius Rutilius Rufus Quintus Lucilius Balbus Cato the Younger Quintus Sextius Attalus Papirius Fabianus Seneca Cornutus Chaeremon of Alexandria Paconius Agrippinus Persius Helvidius Priscus Arulenus Rusticus Musonius Rufus Thrasea Paetus Rubellius Plautus Barea Soranus Publius Egnatius Celer Mara bar Serapion Euphrates Epictetus Hierocles Claudius Maximus Basilides Apollonius of Chalcedon Junius Rusticus Marcus Aurelius ( Philosophy ) Philosophical concepts Logic Logos Adiaphora Katalepsis Diairesis Physics Physis Fire Pneuma Ethics Pathos Apatheia Eudaimonia Kathekon Negative visualization Oikeiôsis Prohairesis Sophos Works On Passions (Chrysippus) Paradoxa Stoicorum Letters to Lucilius (Seneca) Seneca's Essays De Providentia De Brevitate Vitae De Vita Beata De Beneficiis De Clementia De Tranquillitate Animi De Ira De Otio De Constantia Sapientis Seneca's Consolations Lectures (Musonius Rufus) Discourses of Epictetus Enchiridion of Epictetus Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta Related articles Stoa Poikile Stoic Opposition Neostoicism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geminus&oldid=1288763285 " Categories : Ancient Greek astronomers Ancient Greek mathematicians Ancient Rhodian scientists Roman-era Rhodians Stoic philosophers 1st-century BC Rhodians 1st-century BC Greek writers 1st-century BC mathematicians 1st-century BC astronomers Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 17:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geminus 22 languages Add topic

