Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Fossil history 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Evolution of sirenians 10 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Català Español Euskara فارسی Français Polski Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Development from a Tethytherian ancestor and radiation of species This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Evolution of sirenians" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The foot of a manatee. Manatees are believed to share common ancestry with elephants .

Sirenia is the order of placental mammals which comprises modern "sea cows" ( manatees and the Dugong ) and their extinct relatives. They are the only extant herbivorous marine mammals and the only group of herbivorous mammals to have become completely aquatic. Sirenians are thought to have a 50-million-year-old fossil record (early Eocene -recent). They attained modest diversity during the Oligocene and Miocene , but have since declined as a result of climatic cooling, oceanographic changes, and human interference.

[ 1 ] Two genera and four species are extant: Trichechus , which includes the three species of manatee that live along the Atlantic coasts and in rivers and coastlines of the Americas and western Africa , and Dugong , which is found in the Indian and Pacific oceans.

[ citation needed ] Origins [ edit ] Evolution of Sirenian Locomotion, based on Berta and Sumich, 1999.

Evolution of Sirenia, based on Daryl P. Domning and Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals .

Amazonian manatee West Indian manatee Sirenians, along with Proboscidea (elephants), group together with the extinct Desmostylia and likely the extinct Embrithopoda to form the Tethytheria . Tethytheria is thought to have evolved from primitive hoofed mammals (" condylarths ") along the shores of the ancient Tethys Ocean .

Tethytheria, combined with Hyracoidea (hyraxes), forms a clade called Paenungulata . Paenungulata and Tethytheria (especially the latter) are among the least controversial mammalian clades, with strong support from morphological and molecular interpretations.

[ citation needed ] The ancestry of Sirenia is remote from that of Cetacea and Pinnipedia , although they are thought to have evolved an aquatic lifestyle around the same time.

Fossil history [ edit ] Prorastomus , an early sirenian from the Eocene The first appearance of sirenians in the fossil record was during the early Eocene, and by the late Eocene, sirenians had significantly diversified. Inhabitants of rivers, estuaries, and nearshore marine waters, they were able to spread rapidly. The most primitive sirenian known to date, Prorastomus , was found in Jamaica, not the Old World ; however more recently the contemporary Sobrarbesiren has been recovered from Spain .

[ 2 ] The first known quadrupedal sirenian was Pezosiren from the early Eocene.

[ 3 ] The earliest known sea cows, of the families Prorastomidae and Protosirenidae , are both confined to the Eocene, and were about the size of a pig, four-legged amphibious creatures. By the time the Eocene drew to a close, came the appearance of the Dugongidae ; sirenians had acquired their familiar fully aquatic streamlined body with flipper-like front legs with no hind limbs, powerful tail with horizontal caudal fin, with up and down movements which move them through the water, like cetaceans.

In Western Europe the first and oldest sirenian remains have been found in a new paleontological site , in Santa Brígida, Amer (La Selva, Catalonia , Spain [ 4 ] ). The age is dated by the Shallow Bentic Zones in the Eoceno SBZ 15).

The last of the sirenian families to appear, Trichechidae , are thought to have originated from early dugongids in the late Eocene or early Oligocene. The current fossil record documents some major stages in hindlimb and pelvic reduction (well developed hindlimbs attached to a sacrum (Prorastomidae), well developed hindlimbs without proper sacrum (Protosirenidae) and reduced innominate with hindlimbs reduced or absent (Dugongidae and Trichechidae).

[ 5 ] Since sirenians first evolved, they have been herbivores, likely depending on seagrasses and aquatic angiosperms (flowering plants) for food. To the present, almost all have remained tropical (with the notable exception of Steller's Sea Cow ), marine and angiosperm consumers. Sea cows are shallow divers with large lungs. They have heavy skeletons to help them stay submerged; the bones are pachyostotic (swollen) and osteosclerotic (dense), especially the ribs which are often found as fossils.

Eocene sirenians, like Mesozoic mammals but in contrast to other Cenozoic ones, have five instead of four premolars, giving them a 3.1.5.3 dental formula. Whether this condition is truly a primitive retention in sirenians is still under debate.

Although cheek teeth are relied on for identifying species in other mammals, they do not vary to a significant degree among sirenians in their morphology, but are almost always low-crowned ( brachyodont ) with two rows of large, rounded cusps ( bunobilophodont ). The most easily identifiable parts of sirenian skeletons are the skull and mandible, especially the frontal and other skull bones. With the exception of a pair of tusk-like first upper incisors present in most species, front teeth (incisors and canines) are lacking in all, except the earliest sirenians.

See also [ edit ] Evolution of cetaceans References [ edit ] ^ Berta, Annalisa (2012).

Return to the Sea : The Life and Evolutionary Times of Marine Mammals . Berkeley, CA: University of California. p. 5.

ISBN 9780520270572 .

^ Díaz-Berenguer, Ester; Badiola, Ainara; Moreno-Azanza, Miguel; Ignacio Canudo, José (2018).

"First adequately-known quadrupedal sirenian from Eurasia (Eocene, Bay of Biscay, Huesca, northeastern Spain)" .

Scientific Reports .

8 (1): 5127.

Bibcode : 2018NatSR...8.5127D .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-018-23355-w .

PMC 5865116 .

PMID 29572454 .

^ Domning DP (2001). "The Earliest Known Fully Quadrupedal Sirenian".

Nature .

413 (6856): 625– 627.

Bibcode : 2001Natur.413..625D .

doi : 10.1038/35098072 .

PMID 11675784 .

S2CID 22005691 .

^ Fuentes-Buxó, R., Fuentes-Buxó, A. 2016.

Finding of sirenian remains in the Lutetian (Middle Eocene) of Santa Brígida (Amer, La Selva, Girona) . Treballs del Museu de Geologia de Barcelona, 22: 19-24 .

^ Domning, D.P. (2000). "The readaptation of Eocene sirenians to life in water".

Historical Biology .

14 ( 1– 2): 115– 119.

Bibcode : 2000HBio...14..115D .

doi : 10.1080/10292380009380559 .

S2CID 86603486 .

Further reading [ edit ] Domning DP (2002).

"Sirenian Evolution" . In Perrin WF, Würsig B, Thewissen JG (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals . San Diego: Academic Press. pp.

1083–1086 .

ISBN 978-0125513401 .

Berta A (2012). "5. Diversity, Evolution, and Adaptation of Sirenians and Other Marine Mammals".

Return to the Sea: The Life and Evolutionary Times of Marine Mammals . Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.

127– 149.

ISBN 978-0-520-27057-2 .

Berta A, Sumich JL, Kovacs KK (2006). "5. Sirenian and Other Marine Mammals: Evolution and Systematics".

Marine Mammals: Evolutionary Biology (2nd ed.). Academic Press. pp.

89 –110.

ISBN 978-0-12-369499-7 .

Marsh H, O'Shea TJ, Reynolds JE III (2012). "3. Affinities, origins and diversity of the Sirenia through time".

Ecology and Conservation of the Sirenia: Dugongs and Manatees . Conservation Biology. Vol. 18. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

35– 77.

ISBN 978-0-521-71643-7 .

Appendices Velez-Juarbe J, Domning DP, Pyenson ND (2012).

"Iterative Evolution of Sympatric Seacow (Dugongidae, Sirenia) Assemblages during the Past ~26 Million Years" .

PLOS ONE .

7 (2): e31294.

Bibcode : 2012PLoSO...731294V .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0031294 .

PMC 3272043 .

PMID 22319622 .

Origin of Sirenians Macro-evolution at its finest Christina Reed, Geotimes December 2001 Evolution of the Sirenia by Caryn Self-Sullivan at Sirenian International External links [ edit ] Manatee and Elephant Fossils v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evolution_of_sirenians&oldid=1291273499 " Categories : Sirenians Evolution of mammals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from August 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 05:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evolution of sirenians 10 languages Add topic

