Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Human rights 2 Women's rights 3 Children's rights Toggle Children's rights subsection 3.1 United States 4 Medicine 5 Government and law Toggle Government and law subsection 5.1 Ireland 5.2 United States 5.3 Canada 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Bodily integrity 20 languages العربية Bosanski Cymraeg Deutsch فارسی Hausa Հայերեն Igbo Bahasa Indonesia עברית Македонски Nederlands 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Simple English Twi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Human right to personal autonomy, self-ownership, and self-determination "Personal integrity" redirects here. For the moral integrity of an individual, see Integrity .

Bodily integrity is the inviolability of the physical body and emphasizes the importance of personal autonomy , self-ownership , and self-determination of human beings over their own bodies. In the field of human rights , violation of the bodily integrity of another is regarded as an unethical infringement, intrusive, and possibly criminal.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Human rights [ edit ] Two key international documents protect these rights: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . Furthermore, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities also requires protection of physical and mental integrity.

[ 7 ] Women's rights [ edit ] Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Though bodily integrity is afforded to every human being, women are more often affected in violations of it, via unwanted pregnancy, and limited access to contraception . These principles were addressed in the 1997 Irish Council for Civil Liberties Working Conference on Women's Rights as Human Rights, which defined bodily integrity as a right deserved by all women: "bodily integrity unifies women and ... no woman can say that it does not apply to them." [ 8 ] As defined by the conference participants, the following are bodily integrity rights that should be guaranteed to women: Freedom of movement Security of persons Reproductive and sexual rights Women's health Breaking women's isolation Education Networking [ 8 ] In her book Sextarianism , Maya Mikdashi described the persisting issue of the violation of women's bodily integrity through hyman exams in the Lebanese state.

[ 9 ] Children's rights [ edit ] See also: Children's rights and Child grooming United States [ edit ] The debate over children's rights to bodily integrity has grown in recent years.

[ 10 ] In the wake of the highly publicized Jerry Sandusky trial , [ 11 ] parents have been increasingly encouraged to promote their child's sense of bodily integrity as a method of reducing children's vulnerability to being victims of sexual violence , human trafficking and child prostitution .

[ 12 ] Methods of increasing children's sense of bodily autonomy include: Allowing children to choose when to give hugs/kisses Encouraging children to communicate about boundaries Offer alternative actions (e.g. a high five , handshake, etc.) Postponing male circumcision until they are competent to decide for themselves.

Medicine [ edit ] The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states the following: "No one shall be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. In particular, no one shall be subjected without his free consent to medical or scientific experimentation." [ 13 ] Government and law [ edit ] Ireland [ edit ] In the Republic of Ireland , bodily integrity has been recognised by the courts as an unenumerated right , protected by the general guarantee of " personal rights " contained within Article 40 of the Irish constitution . In Ryan v Attorney General it was pronounced that "you have the right not to have your body or personhood interfered with. This means that the State may not do anything to harm your life or health. If you are in custody, you have a right not to have your health endangered while in prison".

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In a separate case M (Immigration - Rights of Unborn) -v- Minister for Justice and Equality & ors, the Irish Supreme Court ruled that the right to bodily integrity extended to the unborn.

[ 16 ] In a summary of the case in section 5.19, the Supreme Court stated: ...the only right of the unborn child as the Constitution now stands which attracts the entitlement to protection and vindication is that enshrined by the amendments in Article 40.3.3 namely, the right to life or, in other words, the right to be born and, possibly, (and this is a matter for future decision) allied rights such as the right to bodily integrity which are inherent in and inseparable from the right to life itself.

[ 17 ] United States [ edit ] The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution states "The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated".  Also, the U.S. Supreme Court has upheld the right to privacy , which, as articulated by Julie Lane, often protects rights to bodily integrity. In Griswold v. Connecticut (1965) the Court supported women's rights to obtain birth control (and thus, retain reproductive autonomy) without marital consent. Similarly, a woman's right to privacy in obtaining abortions was protected by Roe v. Wade (1973). In McFall v. Shimp (1978), a Pennsylvania court ruled that a person cannot be forced to donate bone marrow, even if such a donation would save another person's life.

The Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade (1973) on June 24, 2022. The Supreme Court has also protected the right of governmental entities to infringe upon bodily integrity under certain circumstances. Examples include laws prohibiting the use of drugs, laws prohibiting euthanasia , [ 18 ] laws requiring the use of seatbelts and helmets, strip searches of prisoners, [ 19 ] and forced blood tests .

[ 20 ] Canada [ edit ] In general, the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms defends personal liberty and the right not to be interfered with. However, in certain unique circumstances government may have the right to temporarily override the right to physical integrity in order to preserve the life of the person. Such action can be described using the principle of supported autonomy, [ 21 ] a concept that was developed to describe unique situations in mental health (examples include the forced feeding of a person dying from the eating disorder anorexia nervosa , or the temporary treatment of a person living with a psychotic disorder with antipsychotic medication).

One unique example of a Canadian law that promotes bodily integrity is Ontario's Health Care Consent Act . This law has to do with the capacity to consent to medical treatment.  The HCCA states that a person has the right to consent to or refuse treatment if they have mental capacity. In order to have capacity, a person must have the ability to understand and appreciate the consequences of the treatment decision. The law says that a person is capable with respect to a treatment, admission to a care facility or a personal assistance service if the person is able to understand and appreciate the information that is relevant to making such a decision.

See also [ edit ] Abortion-rights movements Anti-vaccine activism Body theory Capabilities approach Circumcision controversies Civil liberties Cognitive liberty Drug liberalization Freedom of choice Gender self-identification Intersex human rights Legal recognition of non-binary gender Legal status of transgender people LGBTQ rights McFall v. Shimp Mera Jism Meri Marzi Morphological freedom My body, my choice Personal boundaries Reproductive rights Right to die Right to personal identity Right to sexuality Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health and rights Transgender rights References [ edit ] ^ Miller, Ruth Austin (2007).

The Limits of Bodily Integrity: Abortion, Adultery, and Rape Legislation in Comparative Perspective . Ashgate Publishing.

ISBN 9780754683391 . Retrieved 6 April 2021 .

^ Communication Technology And Social Change Carolyn A. Lin, David J. Atkin – 2007 ^ Civil Liberties and Human Rights Helen Fenwick, Kevin Kerrigan – 2011 ^ Xenotransplantation: Ethical, Legal, Economic, Social, Cultural Brigitte E.s. Jansen, Jürgen W. Simon, Ruth Chadwick, Hermann Nys, Ursula Weisenfeld – 2008 ^ Personal Autonomy, the Private Sphere and Criminal Law Peter Alldridge, Chrisje H. Brants - 2001, retrieved 29 May 2012 ^ Privacy law in Australia Carolyn Doyle, Mirko Bagaric – 2005 ^ Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , Article 17 ^ a b "Women's Rights as Human Rights: Local and Global Perspectives: Strategies and Analyses from the ICCL Working Conference on Women's Rights as Human Rights, Part 3, theme: Bodily Integrity and Security of Person" .

www.iccl.ie . Retrieved 19 May 2024 .

^ Mikdashi, Maya (3 May 2022), "Chapter 5 The Epidermal State: Violence and the Materiality of Power" , Sextarianism: Sovereignty, Secularism, and the State in Lebanon , Stanford University Press, pp.

153– 182, doi : 10.1515/9781503631564-007/html?lang=en&srsltid=afmbooqmkfgsvp8tezyvtpl1n9xqwbblqfowgl-cpbyebauxugeyh-ur , ISBN 978-1-5036-3156-4 , retrieved 7 March 2025 ^ Alderson, Patricia.

Researching Children's Rights to Integrity in Children's Childhoods: Observed And Experienced . The Falmer Press, 1994.

^ "Overheard on CNN.com: Are you a 'huggy' person? Would you make a child hug?" . Archived from the original on 7 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 .

^ Hetter, Katia (20 June 2012).

"I don't own my child's body" .

CNN . Retrieved 20 February 2020 .

^ "International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" . 5 July 2008. Archived from the original on 5 July 2008 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 .

^ Ryan v Attorney General [1965] 1 IR 294 at 295. Judgement by Kenny J: "That the general guarantee of personal rights in section 3 (1) of Art. 40 extends to rights not specified in Art. 40. One of the personal rights of the citizen protected by the general guarantee is the right to bodily integrity." ^ "Right to Bodily Integrity" . 11 February 2013. Archived from the original on 11 February 2013 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 .

^ Judgement by the Irish Supreme Court: M (Immigration - Rights of Unborn) -v- Minister for Justice and Equality & ors, 7 March 2018.

^ "M (Immigration - Rights of Unborn) -v- Minister for Justice and Equality & ors : Judgments & Determinations : Courts Service of Ireland" .

^ "States with Legal Physician-Assisted Suicide - Euthanasia - ProCon.org" .

Euthanasia . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ "Missouri v. McNeely: The Loss of Bodily Integrity in an Emerging Police State" . 15 January 2013.

^ Totenberg, Nina; Chappell, Bill (27 June 2019).

"Supreme Court Affirms Police Can Order Blood Drawn from Unconscious DUI Suspects" .

NPR .

^ "琪琪布电影网" . Archived from the original on 9 August 2013 . Retrieved 23 February 2013 .

Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vzcnb
Cached time: 20250817140526
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.388 seconds
Real time usage: 0.479 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2167/1000000
Revision size: 13827/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 113934/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 27084/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 177351/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.208/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6609793/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  378.971      1 -total
 34.08%  129.144      1 Template:Reflist
 27.66%  104.836      1 Template:Feminism_sidebar
 16.58%   62.822      1 Template:Cite_book
 11.89%   45.068      1 Template:Short_description
 11.28%   42.754     10 Template:Cite_web
 11.18%   42.387      1 Template:Authority_control
 10.17%   38.540     16 Template:Flatlist
  7.21%   27.319      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.53%   20.946      1 Template:Redirect Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31601107:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817140526 and revision id 1300049713. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bodily_integrity&oldid=1300049713 " Categories : Abortion Autonomy Crimes against women Development economics Development studies Ethical principles Human body Individualism Sociological theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2019 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 01:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bodily integrity 20 languages Add topic

