Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Theme 3 Members 4 Exhibitions 5 Public responses 6 Further reading 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents The Group (New Zealand art) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Informal association of NZ artists The Group was an informal but influential art association formed in Christchurch , New Zealand in 1927. Initially begun by ex-students from Canterbury College of Art , its aim was to provide a freer, more experimental alternative to the academic salon painting exhibitions of the Canterbury Society of Arts . The Group exhibited annually for 50 years, from 1927 to 1977, and it was continuously at the forefront of New Zealand art's avant-garde scene.

Many of the country's best-known artists were associated at some time with The Group. Among these are Colin McCahon , Lois McIver , Doris Lusk , Toss Woollaston , Rita Angus , Olivia Spencer Bower , Leo Bensemann , Rata Lovell-Smith , Philip Trusttum , Quentin Macfarlane and Douglas MacDiarmid .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The influence of The Group extended into other areas of New Zealand culture through the collaborations and friendship of members such as the likes of writer and editor Charles Brasch and composer Douglas Lilburn .

[ 3 ] Its influence was such that it is occasionally referred to as " Bloomsbury South".

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Colin McCahon Rita Angus Philip Trusttum The Group was formed in 1927 by seven young graduates of Canterbury College School of Art [ 4 ] to challenge conventional and conservative standards of art by showcasing their artistic works free of influence and administration from a larger body.

[ 5 ] They were Margaret Anderson (later Frankel), Viola Macmillan Brown , Cora Wilding , William (Billy) Baverstock , Evelyn Polson (later Page), Edith Wall , Ngaio Marsh , William H. Montgomery, and .

[ 6 ] Prior to the formation of The Group, artists were to submit their artworks to larger bodies such as Canterbury Society of Arts (CSA) for review and curation before getting approved before selected artworks getting selected to be displayed at exhibitions.

[ 7 ] The CSA was a large art exhibiting institution at the time with surging membership and high sales.

[ 4 ] From its founded year until 1933, it frequently held annual shows in later time of the year in the Durham Street gallery to distinguish from CSA’s annual shows. The Group continuously organised independent shows until it temporarily terminated its exhibition in 1933 or 1934 after the formation of the New Zealand Society of Artists (NZSA). All members of The Group at the time were tempted by the larger scale of NZSA, hence their decisions of leaving Group to join NZSA. However, members of The Group who left to join NZSA then withdrew their membership with NZSA as they were displeased with having to submit their artworks to bigger group. The Group later on organised its largest-ever exhibition in 1935 with the contribution of fourteen artists, including Rata Lovell-Smith and Louise Henderson, two major contributors to the Canterbury landscape painting style.

Despite the attempt to create a more balanced atmosphere, The Group had experienced some internal conflicts as some members attempted to turn Group into a weapon against its competitors while some other members wanted to limit the number of memberships available instead of expanding by branching out.

[ 7 ] Theme [ edit ] Unlike showcased artworks at exhibitions held by other art groups in New Zealand at the time, which were usually chosen by those group’s committees, artworks displayed at exhibitions of The Group were curated by artists who had their works displayed at the upcoming exhibition.

Though the operation was unconventional during its time, members of The Group respected their traditional and conservative education they received in art school.

[ 7 ] Members [ edit ] During its time, The Group had some notable names within New Zealand’s contemporary art scene joined as its members. Members of The Group were dominated by female artists except in 1932.

James Cook joined in 1931and exhibited with The Group in 1931 and 1932.

[ 8 ] Rita Angus joined The Group in 1932. During her membership, she contributed fifteen works to the 1938 show. Angus has been a well-known name within the contemporary art scene of New Zealand, hence her membership boosted the reputation of The Group. She also introduced some artists such as Bensemann to become a member of The Group.

[ 7 ] Leo Bensemann was a mainly self-taught artist as he, the son of a German blacksmith, grew up in an underprivileged rural environment. He withdrew his membership with CSA, where his works were exhibited during 1935 to 1938, to join The Group in 1938 after moving to Christchurch to pursue his with his membership being proposed by Rita Angus .

[ 9 ] The shared house of Bensemann, Rita Angus, and Lawrence Baigent was the informal headquarters and regular meeting spot of The Group. His art expression and style revolutionised the art scene of Christchurch as a result of his membership – free of influence from traditional methods that were taught in art school. Bensemann style focused on portraitures and graphic media, distinguishing himself from most The Group’s artists whose predominated subject is landscape.

Coming from rather similar background with Bensemann, Toss Wollaston became member of The Group in 1936. His style was similar to Bensemann’s in free and radical mindsets as they shared the same mentor. Wollaston shared the same apartment with Angus and Bensemann for some time.

Rata Lovell-Smith was a regular contributor to CSA in the 1920s until she left the institution for The Group. Her style mainly depicts landscape with poster-like colour palettes.

Olivia Spencer Bower was born in England. She graduated Canterbury College School of Art and started having her works showed with The Group from 1936. Preferred medium was using watercolour to depict landscape and figure subjects.

[ 7 ] Exhibitions [ edit ] Throughout its operating period, The Group had organised its annual exhibition at the Durham Street Gallery, except for in 1933 and 1934 due to its temporary fall-out caused by the formation of NZSA. Many of Group's exhibitions displayed landscape and portraiture artworks as they were the dominated subjects of Group’s artists.

[ 4 ] Public responses [ edit ] The Group received positive responses from the critics during its time being under review.

[ 4 ] They mainly spoke highly of The Group on its unique way of art exhibiting, which differentiates itself from other existing art institutions. However, there are opinions saying that Group’s lack of distinctive unity decreased its influence on New Zealand’s contemporary art scene.

[ 10 ] Though being a competitor with The Group, James Shelley, NZSA’s first president, spoke highly of The Group as he admired their self-management and the freedom it gave its artists to fully express themselves via their artworks. He delivered opening speeches at Group’s 1929 and 1932 exhibitions.

[ 7 ] Further reading [ edit ] Elizabeth Louise C’Ailceta, The Group: 1927–1977 (1999, Victoria University of Wellington School of Communications and Information Management) Anne Kirker, New Zealand Women Artists: A Survey of 150 Years (1986, Craftsman House) ISBN 976-8097-30-2 References [ edit ] ^ "15. – Canterbury region – Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand" .

Teara.govt.nz . Retrieved 7 February 2016 .

^ "Artists exhibited with The Group" .

findnzartists.org.nz . Retrieved 14 June 2025 .

^ a b "Home – The New Zealand Portrait Gallery" .

Nzportraitgallery.org.nz . Retrieved 18 March 2019 .

^ a b c d Catchpole, Julie A. (1984).

The Group (Masters thesis). University of Canterbury.

hdl : 10092/8504 .

OCLC 233699673 – via University of Canterbury Library.

^ Cooke, Elizabeth Louise C'Ailceta. "The Group 1927–1977: An Annotated Bibliography" Wellington: Victoria University of Wellington, n.d.

^ Vial, Jane.

"In Plain Sight" .

Christchurch Art Gallery . Retrieved 13 March 2023 .

^ a b c d e f Simpson, Peter (2016).

Bloomsbury South: The Arts in Christchurch 1933–1953 . Auckland: Auckland University Press. pp.

71– 103.

^ Brown, Gordon Harold; Hamish, Keith (1982).

An Introduction to New Zealand Painting, 1839-1980 . New Zealand: Auckland: Collins. pp. 105, 106, 110, 118.

ISBN 9780002169899 .

^ "Bensemann, Leo Vernon" .

^ Roland Hipkins. “Contemporary art in New Zealand.” The studio: international journal of modern art 135 , no. 661 (April 1948): 103–120.

External links [ edit ] Group Show catalogues 1927–1977 v t e The Group The Group artists Chrystabel Aitken Gladys Anderson Rita Angus Ria Bancroft Nola Barron Leo Bensemann Phyllis Bethune Vivien Bishop Olivia Spencer Bower Helen Brown Viola Macmillan Brown Grace Butler Jenny Campbell Rosemary Campbell Anna Caselberg Philip Clairmont Edith Collier Betty Curnow Claudia Pond Eyley Margaret Frankel Suzanne Goldberg Louise Henderson Jean Horsley Olive Jones Rata Lovell-Smith Doris Lusk Molly Macalister Douglas MacDiarmid Dorothy Manning Colin McCahon Lois McIvor Tui McLauchlan Elise Mourant Evelyn Page Patricia Charlotte Perrin Juliet Peter Helen Rockel Kathleen Salmond E. Rosa Sawtell Freda Simmonds Susan Skerman Vida Steinert Philip Trusttum Marion Tylee Edith Wall Marilynn Webb Cora Wilding Sina Woolcott Toss Woollaston Beth Zanders Other people connected to The Group Charles Brasch John Caselberg John Coley Rodney Kennedy Douglas Lilburn Ngaio Marsh Anne Hamblett McCahon Artworks Cass (Angus) Harbour Cone from Peggy's Hill (McCahon) Northland Panels (McCahon) Related articles Brooke Gifford Gallery Centre of Contemporary Art Canterbury College of Art King Edward Technical College Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Group_(New_Zealand_art)&oldid=1295477993 " Categories : 1927 establishments in New Zealand Art movements Arts organizations established in 1927 New Zealand art Cultural organisations based in New Zealand Arts organisations based in New Zealand People associated with the Canterbury Society of Arts People associated with The Group (New Zealand art) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2022 This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 01:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Group (New Zealand art) Add languages Add topic

