Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Editorial team 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Constellations (journal) 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal This article is about an academic journal. For other uses, see Constellation (disambiguation) .

Academic journal Constellations Discipline Critical and Democratic Theory Language English Edited by Simone Chambers, Cristina Lafont , Hubertus Buchstein Publication details History 1994-present Publisher Wiley-Blackwell Frequency Quarterly Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Constellations Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L CODEN CNSTES ISSN 1351-0487 (print) 1467-8675 (web) LCCN 94646452 OCLC no.

30590774 Links Journal homepage Online access Online archive Constellations: An International Journal of Critical and Democratic Theory is a quarterly peer-reviewed academic journal of critical post-Marxist and democratic theory and successor of Praxis International .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Constellations is committed to publishing the best of contemporary critical theory and democratic theory in philosophy , politics , social theory , and law . The journal aims to expanding the global possibilities for radical politics and social criticism .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Editorial team [ edit ] Nadia Urbinati , Amy Allen , Jean L.Cohen , and Andreas Kalyvas are former co-editors.

[ 5 ] It is currently edited by Simone Chambers , Cristina Lafont , and Hubertus Buchstein . Ertug Tombus is the managing editor of the journal since 2009.

Seyla Benhabib , Nancy Fraser and Andrew Arato are the co-founding former editors. With an international editorial contribution, it is based at the New School in New York .

See also [ edit ] List of sociology journals List of philosophy journals List of political science journals Thesis Eleven: Critical Theory and Historical Sociology References [ edit ] ^ Benhabib, Seyla (March 2017).

"Dubrovnik, Prague, Praxis International and Constellations: Intertwined fates" .

Philosophy & Social Criticism .

43 (3): 249.

doi : 10.1177/0191453716672029 .

ISSN 0191-4537 .

^ "PRAXIS International" .

PRAXIS International .

ISSN 0260-8448 .

^ "ICI Journals Master List" .

journals.indexcopernicus.com . Retrieved 2024-03-26 .

^ "International Consortium of Critical Theory Programs | Directory of Programs, Centers, and Projects | Constellations: An International Journal of Critical and Democratic Theory" .

International Consortium of Critical Theory Programs | Directory of Programs, Centers, and Projects . Retrieved 2024-03-26 .

^ "Nadia Urbinati" . Columbia University . Retrieved January 13, 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e The New School Schools and divisions Eugene Lang College of Liberal Arts Parsons School of Design ( Parsons Paris ) Schools of Public Engagement The New School for Social Research College of Performing Arts ( Mannes School of Music , School of Jazz and Contemporary Music and School of Drama ) People Founder Hannah Arendt Founder Charles A. Beard Founder John Dewey Founder Alvin Johnson Former President David E. Van Zandt President Dwight A. McBride Campus 13th Street Residence 20th Street Residence Loeb Hall Sheila Johnson Design Center Stuyvesant Park Residence Theresa Lang Student Center Tishman Auditorium University Center Vera List Center for Art and Politics Vera List Courtyard Williams Street Residence Libraries Archives & Special Collections Art Collection Center for English Language Studies Libraries University Learning Center Closed Raymond Fogelman Library Gimbel Art and Design Library Scherman Music Library Visual Resource Center Media 12th Street LIT The New School Free Press WNSR Radio COPA Radio Voices Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Constellations_(journal)&oldid=1292618591 " Categories : Sociology journals Academic journals established in 1994 Quarterly journals Wiley-Blackwell academic journals English-language journals Critical theory Political science journals The New School Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Quarterly journals (infobox) Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 23:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Constellations (journal) 1 language Add topic

