Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Forms of violence 1.1.1 By age groups 2 Sexual violence Toggle Sexual violence subsection 2.1 Survival sex 2.2 Forced sexual services 2.2.1 By military forces 2.2.2 By criminal groups 3 Domestic violence Toggle Domestic violence subsection 3.1 Violence related to acquiring a partner 3.1.1 Forced marriage 3.1.2 Dowry violence 3.2 Violence within a relationship 3.2.1 Physical 3.2.2 Sexual 3.3 Widowhood related violence 4 Non-intimate partner family violence Toggle Non-intimate partner family violence subsection 4.1 Infanticide and abandonment 4.2 Body modification 4.2.1 Genitalia 4.2.2 Feet 4.2.3 Force-feeding 4.3 Sexual initiation rites 4.4 Honor killings 5 Pregnancy-related violence Toggle Pregnancy-related violence subsection 5.1 Restrictions around menstruation 5.2 Forced pregnancy 5.3 Forced sterilization and forced abortion 6 Women-specific state restrictions Toggle Women-specific state restrictions subsection 6.1 Dress 6.2 Freedom of movement 6.3 Sexuality 7 Violence in specific areas Toggle Violence in specific areas subsection 7.1 Male-dominated spheres 7.1.1 Politics 7.1.1.1 Sub-types 7.1.2 Higher education 7.1.3 Sports 7.1.4 Military 7.2 Online 7.2.1 Cyberbullying 7.2.2 Journalists 7.2.3 Generative AI 7.2.4 Video games 8 Effect on society 9 Prevalence and extent 10 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 10.1 High risk groups 10.1.1 Indigenous people 10.1.2 Immigrants and refugees 10.1.3 Transgender women 11 Activism Toggle Activism subsection 11.1 Levels of activist movements 11.2 Second order sexual harassment (SOSH) 12 Legal enforcement Toggle Legal enforcement subsection 12.1 Challenges faced by women in accessing justice and limitations of measures 12.2 Accessibility of police 12.3 Intervention versus autonomy 13 International protection regimes Toggle International protection regimes subsection 13.1 Africa 13.2 Americas 13.3 Asia 13.4 Europe 14 See also 15 Sources 16 References 17 Bibliography 18 External links Toggle the table of contents Violence against women 65 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa IsiZulu Italiano עברית Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Madhurâ Македонски Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Violent acts against women and girls For the journal, see Violence Against Women (journal) .

Murders per 100,000 population committed against women, 2019 Part of a series on Violence against women Murder Bride burning Dowry death Honor killing Femicide Infanticide Matricide Pregnant women Sati Sororicide Uxoricide Sexual assault and rape Causes of sexual violence Child sexual initiation Sexual violence statistics Forced prostitution Cybersex trafficking Human trafficking Fetish slaves Sexual slavery Violence against prostitutes Post-assault treatment of victims of sexual assault Rape Acquaintance By deception Corrective Date Effects Factors Gang Genocidal History Laws Marital Pregnancy Prevention Prison Statistics Statutory Threat Unacknowledged Wartime Sexual assault Campus Child In Service Mass Secondary victimisation Sexual violence Virgin cleansing myth Widow cleansing Disfigurement Acid attack Breast ironing Female genital mutilation Gishiri cutting Infibulation Foot binding Other issues Gaslighting Dating abuse Domestic violence outline management and pregnancy Droit du seigneur Eve teasing Forced abortion Force-feeding Forced marriage Forced pregnancy Forced sterilisation Intimate partner violence Marriage by abduction Marry-your-rapist law Online gender-based violence Raptio Sexual bullying Toxic masculinity Witch trials International legal framework DEDAW CEDAW VDPA DEVAW Belém do Pará Maputo Istanbul Related topics Prosecution of gender-targeted crimes Women's shelter 25 November 6 February By country Sex and the law Victimology Violence against LGBT people v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Violence against women ( VAW ), also known as gender-based violence ( GBV ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] , Violence Against Women and Girls ( VAWG ) or sexual and gender-based violence ( SGBV ), [ 3 ] is violence primarily committed by men or boys against women or girls . Such violence is often considered hate crime , [ 4 ] committed against persons specifically because they are of the female gender , and can take many forms.

Violence against men is the opposite category, where acts of violence are targeted against the male gender .

VAW has an extensive history, though the incidents and intensity of violence has varied over time and between societies. Such violence is often seen as a mechanism for the subjugation of women, whether in society in general or in an interpersonal relationship .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women states, "violence against women is a manifestation of historically unequal power relations between men and women" and "violence against women is one of the crucial social mechanisms by which women are forced into a subordinate position compared with men." [ 7 ] Kofi Annan , Secretary-General of the United Nations , declared in a 2006 report posted on the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) website: Violence against women and girls is a problem of pandemic proportions. At least one out of every three women around the world has been beaten, coerced into sex, or otherwise abused in her lifetime with the abuser usually someone known to her.

[ 8 ] Definition International instruments aiming to eliminate violence against women and domestic violence have been enacted by various international bodies. These generally start with a definition of gendered violence, and a proposal to combat it. The Istanbul Convention ( Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence ) of the Council of Europe describes VAW as "a violation of human rights and a form of discrimination against women" and defines VAW as "all acts of gender-based violence that result in or are likely to result in physical, sexual, psychological, or economic harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion, or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life".

[ 9 ] The 1979 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) of the United Nations General Assembly makes recommendations relating to VAW, [ 10 ] and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action mentions VAW.

[ 11 ] However, the 1993 United Nations General Assembly resolution on the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women was the first international instrument to explicitly define VAW and elaborate on the subject.

[ 12 ] Other definitions of VAW are set out in the 1994 Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence Against Women [ 13 ] and by the 2003 Maputo Protocol .

[ 14 ] In addition, the term gender-based violence refers to "any acts or threats of acts intended to hurt or make women suffer physically, sexually, or psychologically, and which affect women because they are women or affect women disproportionately".

[ 15 ] Gender-based violence is often used interchangeably with violence against women , [ 1 ] and some articles on VAW reiterate these conceptions by stating that men are the main perpetrators of this violence.

[ 16 ] Moreover, the definition stated by the 1993 Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women also supported the notion that violence is rooted in the inequality between men and women when the term violence is used together with the term gender-based .

[ 1 ] In Recommendation Rec(2002)5 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the protection of women against violence , the Council of Europe stipulated that VAW "includes, but is not limited to, the following": [ 17 ] a. violence occurring in the family or domestic unit, including, inter alia , physical and mental aggression, emotional and psychological abuse, rape and sexual abuse, incest, rape between spouses, regular or occasional partners and cohabitants, crimes committed in the name of honour, female genital and sexual mutilation and other traditional practices harmful to women such as forced marriages; b. violence occurring within the general community, including, inter alia , rape, sexual abuse, sexual harassment and intimidation at work, in institutions or elsewhere; trafficking in women for the purposes of sexual exploitation, and economic exploitation and sex tourism; c. violence perpetrated or condoned by the state or its officials; d. violation of the human rights of women in situations of armed conflict, in particular the taking of hostages, forced displacement, systematic rape, sexual slavery, forced pregnancy, and trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation and economic exploitation.

These definitions of VAW as gender-based are seen by some to be unsatisfactory. These definitions understand society as patriarchal, signifying unequal relations between men and women.

[ 18 ] Opponents of such definitions argue that the definitions disregard violence against men and that the term gender , as used in gender-based violence , only refers to women. Other critics argue that employing the term gender in this particular way introduces notions of inferiority and subordination for femininity and superiority for masculinity.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] There is no widely accepted current definition that covers all the dimensions of gender-based violence.

[ 21 ] Comparison of definitions in human rights instruments Document Adopted by Date Definition General Recommendation 19 CEDAW Committee 1992 'The definition of discrimination includes gender-based violence, that is, violence that is directed against a woman because she is a woman or that affects women disproportionately.' [ 22 ] DEVAW United Nations 20 December 1993 '...the term "violence against women" means any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women'.

[ 23 ] Belém do Pará Convention Organization of American States 9 June 1994 '...violence against women shall be understood as any act or conduct, based on gender, which causes death or physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, whether in the public or the private sphere.' [ 24 ] Maputo Protocol African Union 11 July 2003 '"Violence against women" means all acts perpetrated against women which cause or could cause them physical, sexual, psychological, and economic harm, including the threat to take such acts; or to undertake the imposition of arbitrary restrictions on or deprivation of fundamental freedoms in private or public life in peace time and during situations of armed conflicts or of war...' [ 25 ] Istanbul Convention Council of Europe 11 May 2011 '..."violence against women" is understood as a violation of human rights and a form of discrimination against women and shall mean all acts of gender-based violence that result in, or are likely to result in, physical, sexual, psychological or economic harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life; ... "gender" shall mean the socially constructed roles, behaviours, activities and attributes that a given society considers appropriate for women and men; "gender-based violence against women" shall mean violence that is directed against a woman because she is a woman or that affects women disproportionately...'. The preamble notes: '...Recognising that women and girls are exposed to a higher risk of gender-based violence than men; Recognising that domestic violence affects women disproportionately, and that men may also be victims of domestic violence...' [ 26 ] Forms of violence Violence against women fits into several broad categories. These include violence carried out by individuals and states.

Some forms of violence by individual perpetrators are: rape , domestic violence , sexual harassment , acid throwing , reproductive coercion , female infanticide , prenatal sex selection , obstetric violence , online gender-based violence and mob violence ; as well as harmful customary or traditional practices such as honor killings , dowry violence , female genital mutilation , marriage by abduction and forced marriage .

Forms of violence may be perpetrated or condoned by governments, such as war rape ; sexual violence and sexual slavery during conflict, forced sterilization ; forced abortion ; violence by police and authoritative personnel; stoning and flogging .

Many forms of VAW, such as trafficking in women and forced prostitution are often perpetrated by organized criminal networks.

[ 21 ] Historically, there have been forms of organized WAV, such as Witch trials in the early modern period or the sexual slavery of comfort women .
The Gender Equality Commission of the Council of Europe identifies nine forms of violence against women based on subject and context rather than life cycle or time period: [ 27 ] [ 28 ] 'Violence within the family or domestic violence' 'Rape and sexual violence' 'Sexual harassment' 'Violence in institutional environments' 'Female genital mutilation' 'Forced marriages' 'Violence in conflict and post-conflict situations' 'Killings in the name of honour' 'Failure to respect freedom of choice with regard to reproduction' By age groups The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed a typology of violence against women based on their cultural life cycles.

Phase Type of violence Pre-birth Sex-selective abortion; effects of battering during pregnancy on birth outcomes Infancy Female infanticide; physical, sexual and psychological abuse Girlhood Child marriage; female genital mutilation; physical, sexual and psychological abuse; incest; child prostitution and pornography Adolescence and adulthood Dating and courtship violence (e.g. acid throwing and date rape); economically coerced sex (e.g. school girls having sex with "sugar daddies" in return for school fees); incest; sexual abuse in the workplace; rape; sexual harassment; forced prostitution and pornography; trafficking in women; partner violence; marital rape; dowry abuse and murders; partner homicide; psychological abuse; abuse of women with disabilities; forced pregnancy Elderly Forced "suicide" or homicide of widows for economic reasons; sexual, physical and psychological abuse [ 29 ] Sexual violence Main articles: Sexual violence , Sexual assault , Rape , and Sexual harassment Sexual harassment involves actions with unwelcome sexual overtones, including verbal transgressions.

[ 30 ] Sexual violence is a broader term referring to violence to obtain a sexual act, for example, trafficking.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Sexual assault is usually defined as unwanted sexual contact [ 33 ] and when this involves sexual penetration or sexual intercourse it is referred to as rape .

Women are most often the victims of rape, usually perpetrated by men known to them.

[ 34 ] The rates of reporting, prosecution, and convictions for rape vary considerably in different jurisdictions and are influenced by the society's attitudes toward such crimes. It is considered the most underreported violent crime.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Following a rape, a victim may face violence or threats from the rapist and, in many cultures, from the victim's own family and relatives. Violence or intimidation of the victim may be perpetrated by the rapist, or by friends and relatives of the rapist, as a way of preventing the victims from reporting the rape, punishing them for reporting it, or forcing them to withdraw the complaint; or it may be perpetrated by the relatives of the victim as a punishment for "bringing shame" to the family. Internationally, the incidence of rapes recorded by police during 2008 varied between 0.1 per 100,000 people in Egypt and 91.6 per 100,000 people in Lesotho with 4.9 per 100,000 people in Lithuania as the median .

[ 37 ] Around the world, rape is often not reported or handled properly by law enforcement for a wide variety of reasons.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] In 2011, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found that "nearly 20% of all women" in the United States suffered attempted rape or rape sometime in their lives. More than a third of the victims were raped before the age of 18.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Survival sex See also: Survival sex and Violence against prostitutes Women who are sex workers may be so for several reasons. Some were victims of sexual and domestic abuse. Many women have said they were raped as working girls. They may be apprehensive about coming forward and reporting their attacks. When reported, many women have said that the stigma was too great, and that the police told them they deserved it and were reluctant to follow police policy. Decriminalizing sex work is argued to help sex workers in this aspect.

[ 42 ] In some countries, it is common for older men to engage in "compensated dating" with underage girls. Such relationships are called enjo kōsai in Japan and are also common in Asian countries such as Taiwan, South Korea, and Hong Kong. The WHO condemned "economically coerced sex (e.g. school girls having sex with "sugar daddies" ( Sugar baby in return for school fees)" as a form of violence against women.

[ 29 ] Kisaeng women from outcast or slave families.

Women from certain lower castes have been involved in prostitution as part of a tradition, called Intergenerational prostitution . In pre-modern Korea, many women from the lower caste Cheonmin , known as Kisaeng , were trained to provide entertainment, conversation, and sexual services to upper-class men.

[ 43 ] Women with illegal resident status are disproportionately involved with prostitution. For example, in 1997, Le Monde diplomatique stated that 80% of prostitutes in Amsterdam were foreigners and 70% had no immigration papers.

[ 44 ] Forced sexual services Main article: Sexual slavery By military forces Main article: Wartime sexual violence Brennus and His Share of the Spoils , by Paul Jamin , 1893 Rangoon , Burma . 8 August 1945. A young ethnic Chinese woman from one of the Imperial Japanese Army 's "comfort battalions" is interviewed by an Allied officer.

Militarism produces environments that allow for increased violence against women.

War rapes have accompanied warfare in virtually every known historical era.

[ 45 ] War rapes are rapes committed by soldiers, other combatants, or civilians during armed conflict, war, or military occupation, distinguished from sexual assaults and rapes committed amongst troops in military service. It also covers women forced into prostitution or sexual slavery by an occupying power. During World War II, the Japanese military established brothels filled with " comfort women ", girls and women forced into sexual slavery for soldiers, exploiting women for the access and entitlement of men.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Rape during the Bangladesh Liberation War by members of the Pakistani military and the militias that supported them led to the rape of 200,000 women over a period of nine months.

Rape during the Bosnian War was used as a systematized instrument of war by Serb armed forces, predominantly targeting women and girls of the Bosniak ethnic group for physical and moral destruction. Estimates of the number of women raped during the war range from 50,000 to 60,000; as of 2010 only 12 cases have been prosecuted.

[ 48 ] The 1998 International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda recognized rape in the Rwandan Genocide as a war crime.

[ 49 ] According to one report, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant 's capture of Iraqi cities in June 2014 was accompanied by an upsurge in crimes against women, including kidnapping and rape.

[ 50 ] The Guardian reported that ISIL's extremist agenda extended to women's bodies and that women living under their control were being captured and raped.

[ 51 ] Fighters are told that they are free to have sex and rape non-Muslim captive women.

[ 52 ] Haleh Esfandiari from the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars highlighted abuse of local women by ISIL militants after they captured an area. "They usually take the older women to a makeshift slave market and try to sell them. The younger girls... are raped or married off to fighters," she said, adding, "It's based on temporary marriages, and once these fighters have had sex with these young girls, they just pass them on to other fighters." [ 53 ] In December 2014 the Iraqi Ministry of Human Rights announced that the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant had killed over 150 women and girls in Fallujah who refused to participate in sexual jihad .

[ 54 ] During the Rohingya genocide (2016–present), the Armed Forces of Myanmar , along with the Myanmar Border Guard Police and Buddhist militias of Rakhine , committed widespread gang rapes and other forms of sexual violence against the Rohingya Muslim women and girls. A January 2018 study estimated that the military and local Rakhine Buddhists perpetrated gang rapes and other sexual violence against 18,000 Rohingya Muslim women and girls.

[ 55 ] The Human Rights Watch stated that gang rapes and sexual violence were committed as part of the military's ethnic cleansing campaign, while the United Nations Special Representative of the Secretary General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten, said that Rohingya women and girls were made the "systematic" target of rapes and sexual violence because of their ethnic identity and religion . Other forms of sexual violence included sexual slavery in military captivity, forced public nudity, and humiliation.

[ 56 ] Some women and girls were raped to death, while others were found traumatised with raw wounds upon arrival in refugee camps in Bangladesh. Human Rights Watch reported a 15-year-old girl was ruthlessly dragged on the ground for over 50 feet and then was raped by 10 Burmese soldiers.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] By criminal groups Countries by prevalence of female trafficking Main articles: Human trafficking and Forced prostitution Human trafficking refers to the acquisition of persons by improper means such as force, fraud or deception, with the aim of exploiting them.

[ 59 ] The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children states, [ 60 ] "Trafficking in persons" shall mean the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs.

Because of the illegal nature of trafficking, reliable data on its extent is limited.

[ 61 ] The WHO states "Current evidence strongly suggests that those who are trafficked into the sex industry and as domestic servants are more likely to be women and children." [ 61 ] A 2006 study in Europe on trafficked women found that the women were subjected to serious forms of abuse, such as physical or sexual violence, affecting their physical and mental health.

[ 61 ] Forced prostitution is prostitution resulting from coercion by a third party. In forced prostitution, the party/parties who force the victim to be subjected to unwanted sexual acts exercise coercive control over the victim.

[ 62 ] Domestic violence Violence related to acquiring a partner See also: Stalking and Acid throwing Single and economically independent women have been vilified by certain groups of men. In Hassi Messaoud in Algeria in 2001, mobs targeted single women , attacking 95 and killing at least six [ 63 ] [ 64 ] and, in 2011, similar attacks happened again throughout Algeria.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Stalking is unwanted or obsessive attention by an individual or group toward another person, often manifested through persistent harassment , intimidation , or following/monitoring of the victim. Stalking is often understood as "a course of conduct directed at a specific person that would cause a reasonable person to feel fear.".

[ 67 ] Although stalkers are frequently portrayed as strangers, they are most often known people, such as former or current partners, friends, colleagues or acquaintances. In the U.S., a survey by NVAW found that only 23% of female victims were stalked by strangers.

[ 68 ] Stalking by partners can be very dangerous, as it sometimes escalates into severe violence, including murder.

[ 68 ] Police statistics from the 1990s in Australia indicated that 87.7% of stalking offenders were male and 82.4% of stalking victims were female.

[ 69 ] Women are the overwhelming majority of victims of acid attacks and it is often motivated by rejection and jealousy.

An acid attack is the act of throwing acid at someone with the intention of injuring or disfiguring them. Women and girls are the victims in 75–80% of cases [ 70 ] and are often connected to domestic disputes, including dowry disputes, refusal of a marriage proposal, or sexual advances.

[ 71 ] The acid is usually thrown at the face, burning tissue, often exposing and sometimes dissolving the bones.

[ 72 ] The long-term consequences of these attacks include blindness and permanent scarring of the face and body.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Such attacks are most common in South Asia, in countries such as Bangladesh, Pakistan, and India; and in Southeast Asia, especially in Cambodia.

[ 75 ] Forced marriage Main article: Forced marriage See also: Bride kidnapping The painting depicts a Chilean woman being kidnapped during a malón .

Bride kidnapping for the purpose of forced marriage and forced pregnancy was common through the history in many countries.

Criticism of the Azeri custom of forced marriage , as depicted in the early 20th-century satirical periodical Molla Nasraddin A forced marriage is a marriage against the will of one or both parties. Forced marriages are most common in South Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. The customs of bride price and dowry , which exist in many parts of the world, contribute to this practice. A forced marriage is often the result of a dispute between families, where the dispute is 'resolved' by giving a female from one family to the other.

[ 76 ] The custom of bride kidnapping continues in some Central Asian countries, such as Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and the Caucasus, or in parts of Africa, especially Ethiopia. A girl or woman is abducted by the would-be groom, often helped by his friends. The victim is often raped by the would-be groom, after which he may try to negotiate a bride price with village elders to legitimize the marriage.

[ 77 ] Forced and child marriages are practiced by some inhabitants of Tanzania. Girls are sold by their families to older men for financial benefits, and often girls are married off as soon as they hit puberty, which can be as young as seven years old.

[ 78 ] To the older men, these young brides act as symbols of masculinity and accomplishment. Child brides endure forced sex, causing health risks and growth impediments.

[ 79 ] Primary education is usually not completed for young girls in forced marriages. Married and pregnant students are often discriminated against, expelled, and excluded from school.

[ 78 ] The Law of Marriage Act currently does not address issues with guardianship and child marriage. The issue of child marriage is not addressed enough in this law, and only establishes a minimum age of 18 for the men of Tanzania.

[ 80 ] Dowry violence Main articles: Dowry death and Bride burning Anti-dowry poster in Bangalore, India The custom of dowry , which is common in South Asia, especially in India, is the trigger of many forms of violence against women.

Bride burning is the killing of a bride at home by her husband or husband's family, due to his dissatisfaction over the dowry provided by her family.

Dowry death refers to women and girls being killed or committing suicide due to disputes regarding dowry. Dowry violence is common in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal. In India, in 2011 alone, the National Crime Records Bureau reported 8,618 dowry deaths, while unofficial figures suggest the numbers to be at least three times higher.

[ 81 ] Violence within a relationship Main article: Intimate partner violence Anti-domestic violence sign in Liberia See also: Coverture and Criticism of marriage The relation between violence against women and marriage laws, regulations and traditions has also been discussed.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Roman law gave men the right to punish their wives, even to the point of death.

[ 84 ] The US and English law subscribed until the 20th century to the system of coverture , a legal doctrine where upon marriage, a woman's legal rights were subsumed by her husband's.

[ 85 ] Common-law in the United States and in the UK allowed for domestic violence [ 86 ] and in the UK, before 1891, the husband had the right to inflict moderate corporal punishment on his wife to keep her "within the bounds of duty".

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Today many countries severely restrict the rights of married women: for example, in Yemen , marriage regulations state that a wife must obey her husband and must not leave home without his permission.

[ 89 ] In Iraq husbands have a legal right to "punish" their wives. The criminal code states in Paragraph 41 that there is no crime, if an act is committed while exercising a legal right; examples of such legal rights include: "The punishment of a wife by her husband, the disciplining by parents and teachers of children under their authority within certain limits prescribed by law or by custom".

[ 90 ] In the West, married women faced discrimination until some decades ago: for instance, in France, married women received the right to work without their husband's permission in 1965.

[ 91 ] In Spain, during the Franco era, a married woman required her husband's consent ( permiso marital ) for nearly all economic activities, including employment, ownership of property and traveling away from home; the permiso marital was abolished in 1975.

[ 92 ] Concerns exist about violence related to marriage – both inside marriage (physical abuse, sexual violence, restriction of liberty) and in relation to marriage customs ( dowry , bride price , forced marriage , child marriage , marriage by abduction , violence related to female premarital virginity ). Claudia Card, professor of philosophy at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, writes: [ 93 ] The legal rights of access that married partners have to each other's persons, property, and lives makes it all but impossible for a spouse to defend herself (or himself), or to be protected against torture, rape, battery, stalking, mayhem, or murder by the other spouse... Legal marriage thus enlists state support for conditions conducive to murder and mayhem.

Physical An illustration from JJ Grandville 's Cent Proverbes (1845) captioned "Qui aime bien châtie bien" ( Who loves well, punishes well ). A man beating a woman is shown in the back.

Women are more likely to be victimized by someone that they are intimate with, commonly called " intimate partner violence " (IPV). IPV is often unreported to police and making it difficult to estimate the true magnitude of the problem.

[ 94 ] Though this violence is often considered only an issue within heterosexual relationships, it also occurs in lesbian relationships, [ 95 ] daughter-mother relationships, roommate relationships and other domestic relationships involving women. Violence against women in lesbian relationships is about as common as violence against women in heterosexual relationships.

[ 96 ] Women are much more likely than men to be murdered by an intimate partner. In the United States, in 2005, 1181 women were killed by intimate partners, compared to 329 men.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] An estimated 30% or more of women who are admitted to the ER could be victims of domestic violence.

[ 99 ] In England and Wales about 100 women are killed by partners or former partners each year, while 21 men were killed in 2010.

[ 100 ] In 2008, in France, 156 women were killed by their intimate partner, compared to 27 men.

[ 101 ] According to the WHO, globally, as many as 38% of murders of women are committed by an intimate partner.

[ 102 ] A UN report compiled from a number of different studies conducted in at least 71 countries found domestic violence against women to be most prevalent in Ethiopia .

[ 103 ] A study by Pan American Health Organization conducted in 12 Latin American countries found the highest prevalence of domestic violence against women to be in Bolivia .

[ 104 ] Finland has received major international criticism for the legal process for violence against women; with authors noting that a high level of equality for women in the public sphere (as in Finland) should never be equated with equality in all other aspects of women's lives.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] The American Psychiatric Association planning and research committees for the forthcoming DSM-5 (2013) have canvassed a series of new Relational disorders , which include Marital Conflict Disorder Without Violence or Marital Abuse Disorder (Marital Conflict Disorder With Violence) .

[ 108 ] : 164, 166 Couples with marital disorders sometimes come to clinical attention because the couple recognize long-standing dissatisfaction with their marriage and come to the clinician on their own initiative, or are referred by a health care professional. Alternatively, there is serious violence in the marriage that is "usually the husband battering the wife".

[ 108 ] : 163 In these cases the emergency room or a legal authority often is the first to notify the clinician . Most importantly, marital violence "is a major risk factor for serious injury and even death and women in violent marriages are at much greater risk of being seriously injured or killed ( National Advisory Council on Violence Against Women 2000)".

[ 108 ] : 166 The authors conclude with "very recent information" [ 108 ] : 167, 168 on the course of violent marriages, suggesting that "over time a husband's battering may abate somewhat, but perhaps because he has successfully intimidated his wife. The risk of violence remains strong in a marriage in which it has been a feature in the past. Thus, treatment is essential here; the clinician cannot just wait and watch." [ 108 ] : 167, 168 The most urgent clinical priority is the protection of the wife because she is most frequently at risk, and clinicians must be aware that supporting assertiveness by a battered wife may lead to more beatings or even death.

[ 108 ] : 167, 168 Sexual Main articles: Intimate partner sexual violence , Date rape , and Marital rape Further information: Dating abuse and Teen dating violence Marital or spousal rape was once widely condoned or ignored by law and is now widely considered unacceptable violence against women, repudiated by international conventions, and increasingly criminalized. Still, in many countries, spousal rape remains legal or is illegal but widely tolerated and accepted as a husband's prerogative. The criminalization of spousal rape is recent, having occurred during the past few decades. Traditional understanding and views of marriage , rape , sexuality , gender roles and self determination have started to be challenged in most Western countries during the 1960s and 1970s, leading to the criminalization of marital rape in the following decades. With a few notable exceptions, it was during the past 30 years that most laws against marital rape have been enacted. Some countries in Scandinavia and in the former Communist Bloc of Europe made spousal rape illegal before 1970, but most Western countries criminalized it only in the 1980s and 1990s. In many parts of the world, laws against marital rape are very new, having been enacted in the 2000s.

[ 109 ] In Canada, marital rape was made illegal in 1983, when several legal changes were made, including changing the rape statute to sexual assault and making the laws gender neutral.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] In Ireland, spousal rape was outlawed in 1990.

[ 113 ] In the US, the criminalization of marital rape started in the mid-1970s, and in 1993, North Carolina became the last state to make marital rape illegal.

[ 114 ] In England and Wales , marital rape was made illegal in 1991. The views of Sir Matthew Hale, a 17th-century jurist, published in The History of the Pleas of the Crown (1736), stated that a husband cannot be guilty of the rape of his wife because the wife "hath given up herself in this kind to her husband, which she cannot retract"; in England and Wales, this would remain law for more than 250 years, until it was abolished by the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords , in the case of R v. R in 1991.

[ 115 ] In the Netherlands, marital rape was also made illegal in 1991.

[ 116 ] One of the last Western countries to criminalize marital rape was Germany, in 1997.

[ 117 ] The relationship between some religions ( Christianity and Islam ) and marital rape is controversial. The Bible at 1 Corinthians 7:3-5 explains that one has a "conjugal duty" to have sexual relations with one's spouse (in sharp opposition to sex outside marriage , which is considered a sin ) and states, "The wife does not have authority over her own body, but the husband does. And likewise, the husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife does. Do not deprive one another." [ 118 ] Some conservative religious figures interpret this as rejecting to possibility of marital rape.

[ 119 ] Islam makes reference to sexual relations in marriage too, notably: "Allah's Apostle said, 'If a husband calls his wife to his bed (i.e. to have sexual relation) and she refuses and causes him to sleep in anger, the angels will curse her till morning';" [ 120 ] and several comments on the issue of marital rape made by Muslim religious leaders have been criticized.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] Dating abuse, or dating violence, is the perpetration of coercion, intimidation, or assault in the context of dating or courtship . It is also when one partner tries to maintain abusive power and control . Dating violence is defined by the CDC as "the physical, sexual, psychological, or emotional violence within a dating relationship, including stalking".

[ 123 ] Widowhood related violence Sati (a Hindu practice whereby a widow immolates herself on the funeral pyre of her husband) ceremony A 1533 account of the execution of a witch charged with burning the German town of Schiltach in 1531 See also: Widow § Abuse , Widow inheritance , and Sexual rites of passage § Sexual cleansing of widows Widows have been subjected to forced remarriage called widow inheritance , where they are forced to marry a male relative of their late husband.

[ 124 ] Another practice is the banned remarriage of widows, which is legal in India [ 125 ] and Korea.

[ 126 ] A more extreme version is the ritual killing of widows, as seen in India and Fiji.

Sati is the burning of widows, and although sati in India is today an almost defunct practice, isolated incidents have occurred in recent years, such as the 1987 sati of Roop Kanwar , as well as several incidents in rural areas in 2002 [ 127 ] and 2006.

[ 128 ] A traditional idea, upheld in some places in Africa, is that an unmarried widow is unholy and "disturbed", if she is unmarried and abstains from sex for some period of time. This fuels the practice of widow cleansing where the unmarried widow is required to have sexual intercourse as a form of ritual purification, which is commenced with a ceremony for the neighborhood to witness that she is now purified.

[ 129 ] Unmarried widows are most likely to be accused and killed as witches .

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Witch trials in the early modern period (between the 15th and 18th centuries) were common in Europe and in the European colonies in North America. Today, there remain regions of the world (such as parts of Sub-Saharan Africa , rural North India , and Papua New Guinea ) where belief in witchcraft is held by many people, and women accused of being witches are subjected to serious violence.

[ 132 ] Non-intimate partner family violence Infanticide and abandonment India's child sex ratio, 2011 Birth sex ratios, 2012 Chinese anti-infanticide tract circa 1800. China has a long history of son preference, which was aggravated after the enforcement of the one child policy .

Son preference is a custom prevalent in many societies, [ 133 ] that in its extreme can lead to the rejection of daughters.

Sex-selective abortion of females is more common among the higher income population, who can access medical technology .  After birth, neglect and diverting resources to male children can lead to some countries having a skewed ratio with more boys than girls, [ 133 ] with such practices killing an approximate 230,000 girls under five in India each year.

[ 134 ] In China, the one child policy increased sex-selective abortions and was largely responsible for an unbalanced sex ratio.

The Dying Rooms is a 1995 television documentary film about Chinese state orphanages, which documented how parents abandoned their newborn girls into orphanages , where the staff would leave the children in rooms to die of thirst, or starvation.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] Another manifestation of son preference is the violence inflicted against mothers who give birth to girls.

[ 137 ] Body modification Genitalia Main articles: Female genital mutilation and labia stretching Data map showing the percentage of women aged 15 to 49 who have undergone FGM (2020). There is no data for countries in light grey.

[ 138 ] Anti- FGM road sign, Bakau, Gambia, 2005 Female genital mutilation (FGM) is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as "all procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external female genitalia or other injury to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons".

[ 139 ] The WHO states: "The procedure has no health benefits for girls and women" and "Procedures can cause severe bleeding and problems urinating, and later cysts, infections, infertility, and complications in childbirth increase the risk of newborn deaths".

[ 139 ] According to a 2016 UNICEF report, the top rates for FGM are in Somalia (with 98 percent of women affected), Guinea (97 percent), Djibouti (93 percent), Egypt (87 percent), Eritrea (83 percent), Mali (89 percent), Sierra Leone (90 percent), Sudan (87 percent), Gambia (75 percent), Burkina Faso (76 percent), Ethiopia (74 percent), Mauritania (69 percent), Liberia (50 percent), and Guinea-Bissau (45 percent).

[ 140 ] More than half of the cases documented by UNICEF are concentrated in just three countries (Indonesia, Egypt and Ethiopia).

[ 141 ] [ 140 ] FGM is linked to cultural rites and customs, including traditional practices, and religion. It continues to take place in different communities in Africa and the Middle East, including in places where it is banned by national legislation. According to a 2016 UNICEF report, at least 200  million of women and girls in Africa and the Middle East have experienced FGM.

[ 140 ] Due to globalization and immigration, FGM is spreading beyond the borders of Africa and the Middle East to countries such as Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, New Zealand, the U.S., and UK.

[ 142 ] Although FGM is today associated with developing countries, this practice was common until the 1970s in parts of the Western world, too. FGM was considered a standard medical procedure in the United States for most of the 19th and 20th centuries.

[ 143 ] Physicians performed surgeries of varying invasiveness to treat a number of diagnoses, including hysteria , depression , nymphomania , and frigidity .

[ 144 ] [ 143 ] As of 2016, in Africa, FGM has been legally banned in Benin, Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Kenya, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, and Zambia.

[ 145 ] The Istanbul Convention prohibits female genital mutilation (Article 38).

[ 146 ] Labia stretching is the act of lengthening the labia minora (the inner lips of the female genitals) through manual manipulation (pulling) or equipment (such as weights).

[ 147 ] It is often done by older women to girls.

[ 148 ] Feet X-ray of bound feet , China Foot-binding was a practice in China done to reduce the size of feet in girls. It was seen as more desirable and was likely to make a more prestigious marriage.

[ 149 ] Force-feeding Main article: leblouh In some countries, notably Mauritania, young girls are forcibly fattened to prepare them for marriage because obesity is seen as desirable. This practice of force-feeding is known as leblouh or gavage .

[ 150 ] The practice dates back to the 11th century, and has been reported to have made a significant comeback after a military junta took over the country in 2008 .

[ 151 ] Sexual initiation rites Main article: Sexual rites of passage Sexual "cleansing" is a ceremony where girls have sexual intercourse as a cleansing ritual following their first menstruation [ 152 ] and is referred to as kusasa fumbi in some regions of Malawi.

[ 153 ] Prepubescent girls are often sent to a training camp where women known as anamkungwi , or "key leaders," teach the girls how to cook, clean, and have sexual intercourse in order to be wives.

[ 154 ] After the training, a man known as a hyena performs the cleansing for 12- to 17-year-old females for three days and the girl is sometimes required to perform a bare-breasted dance, known as chisamba , to signal the end of her initiation in front of the community.

[ 155 ] Honor killings Honor killings are a common form of violence against women in certain parts of the world. Honor killings are perpetrated by family members (usually husbands, fathers, uncles, or brothers) against women in the family who are believed to have caused dishonor to the family. The death of the dishonorable woman is believed to restore honor.

[ 156 ] These killings are a traditional practice [ where?

] believed to have originated from tribal customs, where an allegation against a woman can be enough to defile a family's reputation.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] Women are killed for reasons such as refusing to enter an arranged marriage , being in a relationship that is disapproved by their relatives, attempting to leave a marriage, having sex outside marriage, becoming the victim of rape, and dressing in ways that are deemed inappropriate, among others.

[ 157 ] [ 159 ] In cultures where female virginity is highly valued and considered mandatory before marriage, in extreme cases, rape victims are killed in honor killings . Victims may also be forced by their families to marry the rapist in order to restore the family's "honor.".

[ 160 ] In Lebanon, the Campaign Against Lebanese Rape Law - Article 522 was launched in December 2016 to abolish the article that permitted a rapist to escape prison by marrying his victim. In Italy, before 1981, the Criminal Code provided for mitigating circumstances in case of a killing of a woman or her sexual partner for reasons related to honor, providing for a reduced sentence.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] Honor killings are common in countries such as Afghanistan, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey, and Yemen.

[ 159 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] [ 165 ] [ 166 ] Honor killings also occur in immigrant communities in Europe, the United States, and Canada. Although honor killings are most often associated with the Middle East and South Asia, they occur in other parts of the world too.

[ 157 ] [ 167 ] In India, honor killings occur in the northern regions of the country, especially in the states of Punjab, Haryana, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] In Turkey, honor killings are a serious problem in Southeastern Anatolia.

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] Pregnancy-related violence Maternal Mortality Rate worldwide, as defined by the number of maternal deaths per 100,000 live births from any cause related to or aggravated by pregnancy or its management, excluding accidental or incidental causes.

[ 172 ] See also: Domestic violence and pregnancy and Reproductive coercion Obstetric violence refers to acts categorized as physically or psychologically violent in the context of labor and birth. A pregnant woman can sometimes be coerced into accepting surgical interventions that are done without her consent.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] This could include the " husband's stitch " in which one or more additional sutures than necessary are used to repair a woman's perineum after it has been torn or cut during childbirth with the intent of tightening the opening of the vagina and thereby enhancing the pleasure of her male sex partner during penetrative intercourse. Several Latin American countries have laws to protect against obstetric violence.

[ 175 ] Reproductive coercion is a collection of behaviors that interfere with decision-making related to reproductive health .

[ 176 ] According to the WHO, "discrimination in health care settings takes many forms and is often manifested when an individual or group is denied access to health care services that are otherwise available to others. It can also occur through denial of services that are only needed by certain groups, such as women." [ 177 ] Restrictions around menstruation Awareness raising through education is taking place among young girls to modify or eliminate the practice of chhaupadi in Nepal.

See also: Chhaupadi Women in some cultures are forced into social isolation during their menstrual periods . In parts of Nepal, for instance, they are forced to live in sheds, are forbidden to touch men or even to enter the courtyard of their own homes, and are barred from consuming milk, yogurt, butter, meat, and various other foods, for fear they will contaminate those goods. Women have died during this period because of starvation, bad weather, or bites by snakes.

[ 178 ] In cultures where women are restricted from being in public places, by law or custom, women who break such restrictions often face violence.

[ 179 ] Forced pregnancy Main article: Forced pregnancy Forced pregnancy is the practice of forcing a woman or girl to become pregnant . A common motivation is to help establish a forced marriage , including by means of bride kidnapping . This was also used as part of a program of breeding slaves (see Slave breeding in the United States ). In the 20th century, state mandated forced marriage with the aim of increasing the population was practiced by some authoritarian governments, notably during the Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia , which systematically forced people into marriages, ordering them to have children, in order to increase the population and continue the revolution.

[ 180 ] The issue of forced continuation of pregnancy (i.e. denying a woman safe and legal abortion) is also seen by some organizations as a violation of women's rights. For example, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women considers the criminalization of abortion a "violations of women's sexual and reproductive health and rights" and a form of "gender based violence".

[ 181 ] In addition, in some parts of Latin America, with very strict anti-abortion laws, pregnant women avoid the medical system due to fear of being investigated by the authorities if they have a miscarriage, or a stillbirth, or other problems with the pregnancy. Prosecuting such women is quite common in places such as El Salvador .

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] [ 184 ] [ 185 ] Forced sterilization and forced abortion Main articles: Forced sterilization and Forced abortion A map from a 1929 Swedish royal commission report displays the U.S. states that had implemented sterilization legislation by then Forced sterilization and forced abortion are considered forms of gender-based violence.

[ 186 ] The Istanbul Convention prohibits forced abortion and forced sterilization .

[ 187 ] According to the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women, all "women are guaranteed the right to decide freely and responsibly on the number of and spacing of their children, and to have access to information, education, and means to enable them to exercise these rights." [ 188 ] Studies show forced sterilizations often target socially and politically disadvantaged groups such as racial and ethnic minorities, the poor, and indigenous populations.

[ 189 ] In the United States, much of the history of forced sterilization is connected to the legacy of eugenics and racism in the United States .

[ 189 ] Many doctors thought that they were doing the country a service by sterilizing women who were poor, disabled, or a minority; the doctors considered those women to be a drain on the system.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] Native American , Mexican American , African American and Puerto Rican-American women were coerced into sterilization programs, with Native Americans and African Americans especially being targeted.

[ 189 ] Records have shown that Native American girls as young as eleven years-old had hysterectomy operations performed.

[ 191 ] In Europe, there have been a number of lawsuits and accusations towards the Czech Republic and Slovakia of sterilizing Roma women without adequate information and waiting period.

[ 192 ] In response, both nations have instituted a mandatory seven-day waiting period and written consent. Slovakia has been condemned on the issue of forced sterilization of Roma women several times by the European Court for Human Rights (see V. C. vs. Slovakia , N. B. vs. Slovakia and I.G. and Others vs. Slovakia ).

[ 193 ] In Peru , in 1995, Alberto Fujimori launched a family planning initiative that especially targeted poor and indigenous women. In total, over 215,000 women were sterilized, with over 200,000 believed to have been coerced.

[ 194 ] In 2002, Health Minister Fernando Carbone admitted that the government gave misleading information, offered food incentives, and threatened to fine parents if they had additional children. The procedures have also been found to have been negligent, with less than half using proper anesthetic.

[ 195 ] In China, the one child policy included forced abortions and forced sterilization.

[ 196 ] Forced sterilization is also practiced in Uzbekistan.

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] Women-specific state restrictions A member of the Taliban's religious police beating an Afghan woman in Kabul on 26 August 2001 Dress In Iran , since 1981, after the Islamic Revolution , all women are required to wear loose-fitting clothing and a headscarf in public.

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] In 1983, the Islamic Consultative Assembly decided that women who do not cover their hair in public will be punished with 74 lashes. Since 1995, unveiled women can also be imprisoned for up to 60 days.

[ 201 ] The Iranian protests against compulsory hijab continued into the September 2022 Iranian protests , triggered in response to the killing of Mahsa Amini , who was allegedly beaten to death by police due to wearing an "improper hijab". In Saudi Arabia , after the Grand Mosque seizure of 1979, it became mandatory for women to veil in public [ 202 ] but this is no longer required since 2018.

[ 203 ] In Afghanistan, since May 2022, women are required to wear a hijab and face covering in public.

[ 204 ] In countries without mandatory hijab women can face harassment and victim blaming due to not wearing a hijab .

[ 205 ] The hijab has seen bans in places such as Austria, [ 206 ] Yugoslavia, [ 207 ] Kosovo, [ 208 ] Kazakhstan, [ 209 ] the Soviet Union, [ 210 ] and Tunisia.

[ 211 ] On 8 January 1936, [ 212 ] Reza Shah issued a decree, Kashf-e hijab , banning all veils.

[ 200 ] To enforce this decree, the police were ordered to physically remove the veil from any woman who wore it in public. Women who refused were beaten, their headscarves and chadors torn off, and their homes forcibly searched.

[ 213 ] Freedom of movement Women are, in many parts of the world, severely restricted in their freedom of movement .
Freedom of movement is an essential right, recognized by international instruments, including Article 15 (4) of CEDAW .

[ 214 ] Nevertheless, in some countries, women are not legally allowed to leave home without a male guardian (male relative or husband).

[ 215 ] Saudi Arabia was the only country in the world where women were forbidden to drive motor vehicles until June 2018.

[ 216 ] Sexuality Sex crimes such as adultery and sex outside marriage are disproportionately levelled against women and the punishment is often stoning and flogging . This has been seen in Iran, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Pakistan, Yemen, the United Arab Emirates, and some states in Nigeria.

[ 217 ] Additionally this can deter victims of sexual violence from reporting the crime, because the victims may themselves be punished (if they cannot prove their case, if they are deemed to have been in the company of an unrelated male, or if they were unmarried and not virgins at the time of the rape).

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] Another aspect is the denial of medical care often occurs with regard to reproductive and sexual health. Sometimes women themselves avoid the medical system for fear of being reported to the police or facing family violence due to having premarital sex or being the victims of sexual violence .

[ 220 ] Violence in specific areas Male-dominated spheres Slut shaming is a common form of semiotic violence against women in politics.

Politics Violence Against Women in Politics (VAWP) is the act or threat of physical, emotional or psychological violence against female politicians on the basis of their gender , most often with the intent of discouraging the victims and other female politicians from participating in the political process. VAWP has been growing in significance among the fields of gendered political science and feminist political theory studies. The main intent behind creating a separate category that is distinct from Violence Against Women, is to highlight the barriers faced by women who work in politics, or wish to pursue a career in the political realm. VAWP is unique from Violence Against Women in three important ways: victims are targeted because of their gender; the violence itself can be gendered (i.e., sexism, sexual violence); the primary goal is to deter women from participating in politics (including but not limited to voting, running for office, campaigning, etc.).

[ 221 ] It is also important to distinguish VAWP from political violence , which is defined by the use or threats of force to reach political ends, and can be experienced by all politicians.

[ 222 ] While women's participation in national parliaments has been increasing, rising from 11% in 1995 to 26.5% in 2023, there is still a large disparity between male and female representation in governmental politics.

[ 223 ] Expanding women's participation in government is a crucial goal for many countries, as female politicians have proven invaluable with respect to bringing certain issues to the forefront, such as elimination of gender-based violence, parental leave and childcare, pensions, gender-equality laws, electoral reform, and providing fresh perspectives on numerous policy areas that have typically remained a male-dominated realm.

[ 223 ] In order to increase women's participation in an effective manner, the importance of recognizing the issues related to VAWP and making every effort to provide the necessary resources to victims and condemn any and all hostile behaviour in political institutions cannot be understated. Experiencing VAWP can dissuade women from remaining in politics (and lead to an early exit from their career or from aspiring higher political office. Witnessing women in politics experience VAWP can serve as one of many deterrents for aspirants to run for office and for candidates to continue campaigning.

[ 222 ] Acts of violence or harassment are often not deemed to be gendered when they are reported, if they are reported at all. VAWP is often dismissed as "the cost of doing politics" and reporting can be seen as "political suicide", which contributes to the normalization of VAWP.

[ 222 ] This ambiguity results in a lack of information regarding attacks and makes the issue appear to be relatively commonplace. While it is reported that women in politics are more often targeted by violence than their male counterparts, [ 224 ] the specific cause is often not reported as a gendered crime. This makes it more difficult to pinpoint where the links between gender-specific violence and political violence really are. In many countries, the practice of electoral politics is traditionally considered to be a masculine domain.

[ 225 ] The history of male dominated politics has allowed some male politicians to believe they have a right to participate in politics while women should not, since women's participation is a threat to the social order. Women in positions of power are thus more likely than their male counterparts to receive threats and experience violence. As one professor of sociology, Marie E. Berry, wrote: "as women are trained and encouraged to vie for these seats, they risk taking power (and resources) that male politicians see as rightfully theirs, opening them up to the risk of violence and other efforts to limit the effectiveness of their campaigns." [ 226 ] [ 227 ] 48% of electoral violence against women is against supporters, this is most likely the largest percentage as it has the largest amount of the public participating. 9% of electoral violence against women is targeting candidates, while 22% targets female voters. This means that women who are directly acting in politics are likely to face some form of violence, whether physical or emotional.

[ 228 ] Regarding violence against female politicians, younger women and those with intersecting identities , particularly racial and ethnic minorities, are more likely to be targets. Female politicians who outwardly express and act from feminist perspectives are also more likely to be victimized.

[ 222 ] Sub-types Gabrielle Bardell's 2011 report "Breaking the mold: Understanding Gender and Electoral Violence" was one of the first documents published that showed examples and figures for how women are intimidated and attacked in politics.

[ 228 ] Since Bardall's report, other scholars have conducted further research on the topic. Notably, Mona Lena Krook's work on VAWP introduced 5 forms of violence and harassment: physical, sexual, psychological, economic, and semiotic/symbolic. Physical violence encompasses inflicting, or attempting to inflict, bodily harm and injury.

[ 222 ] [ 229 ] While physical violence is the most easily identified form, it is actually the least common type.

[ 222 ] Sexual violence involves (attempts at) sexual acts through coercion, including unwanted sexual comments, advances, and harassment.

[ 222 ] [ 229 ] Psychological violence includes causing emotional and mental damage through means of death/ rape threats , stalking , etc.

[ 222 ] [ 229 ] Economic violence involves denying, withholding, and controlling female politicians' access to financial resources, particularly regarding campaigns.

[ 222 ] [ 229 ] Semiotic or symbolic violence, the most abstract subtype of VAWP, refers to the erasure of female politicians through degrading images and sexist language.

[ 222 ] [ 229 ] [ 230 ] Krook theorizes that semiotic violence against women in politics works in two related ways: rendering women invisible and rendering women incompetent. By symbolically removing women from the public political sphere, semiotic violence renders women invisible. Examples include using masculine grammar when speaking about and to political women, interrupting female politicians, and not portraying political women in the media. By highlighting the role incongruity between stereotypically feminine attributes (e.g., warm, polite, submissive), and traits typically ascribed to good leaders (e.g., strong, powerful, assertive), semiotic violence emphasizes that women are incompetent to be political actors.

[ 230 ] This form of semiotic violence can manifest through denying and minimizing women's political qualifications, sexual objectification, and labeling political women as emotional, among other actions.

[ 230 ] Higher education Further information: Campus sexual assault Sexual violence on college campuses is considered a major problem in the United States. According to the conclusion of a major Campus Sexual Assault (CSA) Study: "The CSA Study data suggest women at universities are at considerable risk for experiencing sexual assault." [ 231 ] Sports Sport-related violence against women is any physical, sexual, mental acts that are "perpetrated by both male athletes and by male fans or consumers of sport and sporting events, as well as by coaches of female athletes".

[ 232 ] The documenting reports and literature suggest that there are obvious connections between contemporary sport and violence against women. Such events as the 2010 World Cup , the Olympic and Commonwealth Games "have highlighted the connections between sports spectatorship and intimate partner violence, and the need for police, authorities and services to be aware of this when planning sporting events".

[ 232 ] Sport-related violence occurs in various contexts and places, including homes, pubs, clubs, hotel rooms, the streets.

[ 232 ] Violence against women is a topic of concern in the United States' collegiate athletic community. From the 2010 UVA lacrosse murder, in which a male athlete was charged guilty with second degree murder of his girlfriend, to the 2004 University of Colorado Football Scandal when players were charged with nine alleged sexual assaults, [ 233 ] studies suggest that athletes are at higher risk for committing sexual assault against women than the average student.

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] It is reported that one in three college assaults are committed by athletes.

[ 236 ] Surveys suggest that male student athletes who represent 3.3% of the college population, commit 19% of reported sexual assaults and 35% of domestic violence.

[ 237 ] The theories that surround these statistics range from misrepresentation of the student-athlete to an unhealthy mentality towards women within the team itself.

[ 236 ] Sociologist Timothy Curry, after conducting an observational analysis of two big time sports' locker room conversations, deduced that the high risk of male student athletes for gender abuse is a result of the team's subculture.

[ 238 ] Curry states, "Their locker room talk generally treated women as objects, encouraged sexist attitudes toward women and, in its extreme, promoted rape culture." [ 238 ] He proposes that this objectification is a way for the male to reaffirm his heterosexual status and hyper-masculinity. Claims have been made that the atmosphere changes when outsiders (especially women) intrude in the locker room.

[ 239 ] In the wake of the reporter Lisa Olson being harassed by a Patriots player in the locker room in 1990, she said, "We are taught to think we must have done something wrong and it took me a while to realize I hadn't done anything wrong." [ 239 ] Other female sports reporters (college and professional) have said that they often brush off the players' comments, which leads to further objectification.

[ 239 ] Some sociologists challenge this assertion. Steve Chandler says that because of their celebrity status on campus, "athletes are more likely to be scrutinized or falsely accused than non-athletes." [ 235 ] Stephanie Mak says that "if one considers the 1998 estimates that about three million women were battered and almost one million raped, the proportion of incidences [ spelling?

] that involve athletes in comparison to the regular population is relatively small." [ 236 ] In response to the proposed link between college athletes and gender-based violence, and media coverage holding universities as responsible for these scandals more universities are requiring athletes to attend workshops that promote awareness.

[ 240 ] Other groups, such as the National Coalition Against Violent Athletes, have formed to provide support for the victims.

[ 241 ] Military A 1995 study of female war veterans found that 90 percent had been sexually harassed. A 2003 survey found that 30 percent of female vets said they were raped in the military and a 2004 study of veterans who were seeking help for post-traumatic stress disorder found that 71 percent of the women said they were sexually assaulted or raped while serving.

[ 242 ] In 2021, The New York Times reported that about one in four women in the military had experienced sexual assault.

[ 243 ] Until the end of 2023, these reports went through the service member's chain-of-command, and many women reported that their reports were dismissed without due process and/or resulted in professional reprisal, ostracism, or other maltreatment.

[ 244 ] Beginning in December 2023, however, sexual assault reports are handled outside of the chain-of-command, hopefully reducing biases in the process of investigation.

[ 245 ] Online Cyberbullying Cyberbullying is a form of intimidation using electronic forms of contact. In the 21st century, cyberbullying has become increasingly common, especially among teenagers in Western countries.

[ 246 ] Almost 75% of women have encountered harassment and threats of violence online, known as cyber violence , as reported by the United Nations Broadband Commission in 2015.

[ 247 ] Misogynistic rhetoric is prevalent online, and the public debate over gender-based attacks has increased significantly, leading to calls for policy interventions and better responses by social networks like Facebook and Twitter .

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] Some specialists have argued that gendered online attacks should be given particular attention within the wider category of hate speech.

[ 250 ] Abusers quickly identified opportunities online to humiliate their victims, destroy their careers, reputations and relationships, and even drive them to suicide or "trigger so-called 'honor' violence in societies where sex outside of marriage is seen as bringing shame on a family".

[ 251 ] According to a poll conducted by Amnesty International in 2018 across 8 countries, 23% of women have experienced online abuse of harassment. These are often sexist or misogynistic in nature and include direct of indirect threats of physical or sexual violence, abuse targeting aspects of their personality and privacy violations.

[ 252 ] According to Human Rights Watch, 90% of those who experienced sexual violence online in 2019 were women and girls.

[ 251 ] Journalists According to UNESCO , [ 253 ] women journalists in prominent and visible positions tend to attract more virulent abuse. In their survey of 901 journalists, nearly three quarters (73%) said they had experienced online violence.

[ 254 ] In another survey by The Guardian that looked at comments received on articles, women writers were 4 times more likely to be abused compared to their male counterparts.

[ 255 ] This is a trend that is persistent across geography - in the Netherlands, 82% of the 300 female journalists surveyed in 2022 said they encountered abuse online.

[ 256 ] Generative AI Generative AI can lead to an increase in the number of attackers, the creation of sustained and automated attacks and the generation of content such as posts, texts, and emails that are written convincingly from multiple 'voices'. This makes existing harms such as hate speech , cyber harassment , misinformation , and impersonation - all of which rank in the top five most common vectors of technology-facilitated gender-based violence - have a much wider reach and be more dangerous.

[ 253 ] Video games Video games with graphically sexual content have been criticized by scholars for promoting the indecent portrayal of women.

[ 257 ] Games like now banned RapeLay , Custer's Revenge , and Grand Theft Auto incorporate the objectification of women within their plot lines to attract more players, majority of whom are male, but perpetuate a culture of exaggerated gender stereotypes and toxic masculinity .

[ 257 ] A study found that 21% of video games feature violence against women.

[ 258 ] An additional study has shown that players of these violent and sexual video games often have more accepting attitudes to rape, also known as rape myth acceptance , [ 259 ] as the hyperrealism when playing these video games results in a difficult differentiation between the digital and real world.

[ 259 ] Effect on society Demonstration against femicide in Cape Town , South Africa following the murder of Uyinene Mrwetyana , 2019 According to an article published in the Health and Human Rights journal, [ 260 ] regardless of many years of advocacy and involvement of many feminist activist organizations, the issue of violence against women still "remains one of the most pervasive forms of human rights violations worldwide".

[ 260 ] : 91 The violence against women can occur in both public and private spheres of life and at any time of their life span. Violence against women often keeps women from wholly contributing to social, economic, and political development of their communities.

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] Many women are terrified by these threats of violence and this essentially influences their lives so that they are impeded to exercise their human rights; for instance, they fear contributing to the development of their communities socially, economically, and politically.

[ 261 ] Most often, violence against women has been framed as a health issue, and also as a violation of human rights . The research seems to provide convincing evidence that violence against women is a severe and pervasive problem the world over, with devastating effects on the health and well-being of women and children.

[ 262 ] Importantly, other than the issue of social divisions, gendered violence can also extend into the realm of health issues and become a direct concern of the public health sector.

[ 263 ] A health issue such as HIV/AIDS is another cause that also leads to violence. Women who have an HIV/AIDS infection are also among the targets of the violence.

[ 260 ] : 91 The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that violence against women puts an undue burden on health care services, as women who have suffered violence are more likely to need health services and at higher cost, compared to women who have not suffered violence.

[ 102 ] The Council of Europe describes violence against women in private sphere, at home or domestic violence , as the main reason of "death and disability" among the women who encountered violence.

[ 260 ] : 91 In addition, several studies have shown a link between poor treatment of women and international violence. These studies show that one of the best predictors of inter- and intranational violence is the maltreatment of women in the society.

[ 264 ] [ 265 ] Prevalence and extent According to the UN, "there is no region of the world, no country and no culture in which women's freedom from violence has been secured." [ 262 ] Several forms of violence are more prevalent in certain parts of the world, often in developing countries . For example, dowry violence and bride burning is associated with India, Bangladesh, and Nepal.

Acid throwing is also associated with these countries, as well as in Southeast Asia, including Cambodia.

Honor killing is associated with the Middle East and South Asia.

Female genital mutilation is found mostly in Africa, and to a lesser extent in the Middle East and some other parts of Asia.

Marriage by abduction is found in Ethiopia , Central Asia , and the Caucasus . Abuse related to payment of bride price (such as violence, trafficking, and forced marriage) is linked to parts of Sub-Saharan Africa and Oceania (also see Lobolo ).

[ 266 ] [ 267 ] A study in 2002 estimated that at least one in five women in the world had been physically or sexually abused by a man sometime in their lives, and "gender-based violence accounts for as much death and ill-health in women aged 15–44 years as cancer, and is a greater cause of ill-health than malaria and traffic accidents combined." [ 268 ] A 2007 survey by the National Institute of Justice found that 19.0% of college women and 6.1% of college men experienced either sexual assault or attempted sexual assault since entering college.

[ 269 ] In the University of Pennsylvania Law Review in 2017, D. Tuerkheimer reviewed the literature on rape allegations, and reported on the problems surrounding the credibility of rape victims, and how that relates to false rape accusations. She pointed to national survey data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that indicates 1 in every 5 women (and 1 in 71 men) will be raped during their lifetime. Despite the prevalence of rape and the fact that false rape allegations are rare, Tuerkheimer reported that law enforcement officers often default to disbelief about an alleged rape. This documented prejudice leads to reduced investigation and criminal justice outcomes that are faulty compared to other crimes. Tuerkheimer says that women face "credibility discounts" at all stages of the justice system, including from police, jurors, judges, and prosecutors. These credibility discounts are especially pronounced when the victim is acquainted with the accuser, and the vast majority of rapes fall into this category.

[ 270 ] The U.S. Department of Justice estimated from 2005 to 2007 that about 2% of victims who were raped while incapacitated (from drugs, alcohol, or other reasons) reported the rape to the police, compared to 13% of victims who experienced physically forced sexual assault.

[ 269 ] Many kinds of violence against women (specifically rape, sexual assault, and domestic violence) are under-reported, often due to societal norms, taboos, stigma, and the sensitive nature of the subject.

[ 271 ] [ 272 ] It is widely recognized that, even today, a lack of reliable and continuous data is an obstacle to forming a clear picture of violence against women.

[ 262 ] Demographics See also: Estimates of sexual violence and Rape statistics Acts of violence against women are often not unique episodes, but are ongoing over time. More often than not, the violence is perpetrated by someone the woman knows, not by a stranger.

[ 272 ] High risk groups Indigenous people Indigenous women are often targets of physical violence, including sexual assault. Many Indigenous communities are rural, with few resources and little help from the government or non-state actors. They often have strained relationships with law enforcement, making prosecution difficult. Many Indigenous societies find themselves at the center of land disputes between nations and ethnic groups, resulting in these communities sometimes bearing the brunt of national and ethnic conflicts.

[ 273 ] Violence is often perpetrated by the state, such as in Peru , in the 1990s. President Alberto Fujimori has been accused of genocide and crimes against humanity as a result of a forced sterilization program .

[ 274 ] Fujimori put in place a program against Indigenous people (mainly the Quechuas and the Aymaras ), in the name of a " public health plan", in 1995.

[ citation needed ] Many countries have higher rates of violence against Indigenous women than non‐Indigenous women. This includes Bolivia, [ 275 ] which has the highest rate of domestic violence in Latin America; [ 276 ] [ 277 ] and Canada , [ 278 ] where violence against women is falling, except for Indigenous populations.

[ 279 ] Guatemalan Indigenous women have faced extensive violence. Throughout three decades of conflict, Maya women and girls have continued to be targeted.

[ citation needed ] The concept of white dominion over indigenous women's bodies has been rooted in American history since the beginning of colonization. The theory of Manifest destiny went beyond simple land extension and into the belief that European settlers had the right to exploit Native women's bodies as a method of taming and "humanizing" them.

[ 279 ] [ 280 ] In the US, Native American women are more than twice as likely to experience violence than any other demographic.

[ 279 ] One in three Native women is sexually assaulted, and 67% of these assaults are perpetrated by non-Natives, [ 281 ] [ 279 ] [ 282 ] with Native Americans constituting 0.7% of U.S. population in 2015.

[ 283 ] The disproportionate rate of assault is due to a variety of causes, including the historical legal inability of tribes to prosecute on their own on the reservation. The federal Violence Against Women Act was reauthorized in 2013, which for the first time gave tribes jurisdiction to investigate and prosecute felony domestic violence offenses involving Native American and non-Native offenders on the reservation, [ 284 ] as 26% of Natives live on reservations.

[ 285 ] [ 286 ] In 2019 the Democrat House passed the Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2019, which increased tribes' prosecution rights further. However, in the Republican Senate its progress stalled.

[ 287 ] Immigrants and refugees Immigrant and refugee women often face violence, both in the private sphere (by partners and other family members) and in the public sphere (by the police and other authorities). These women are often in a vulnerable position: they do not speak the language of the country they are in, they do not know its laws, and sometimes they are in a legal position where they may be deported if they make contact with the authorities. Women who seek protection from armed conflict in their countries of origin often face more violence while travelling to the destination country or when they arrive there.

[ 288 ] [ 289 ] Women refugees face violence from both the journey facilitator and the detention center guards. Journey facilitator rapes occur in exchange for money for their passage, whereas male guards sexually violate in exchange for faster processing of the refugee case.

[ 290 ] Transgender women See also: Violence against LGBT people Transgender women , especially transgender women of color , are at higher risk of experiencing violence than cisgender women .

[ 291 ] Trans women commonly experience intimate partner violence, with one study finding that 31.1% of trans people experience it, and another finding that half of all trans women experience it.

[ 292 ] [ 293 ] [ 294 ] Trans women also often face abuse by police, and transgender sex workers often face violence from clients.

[ 295 ] Trans women who are survivors of violence can have a harder time finding domestic violence shelters , as some shelters do not accept them.

[ 292 ] [ 296 ] In 2018, more than two dozen transgender people were violently killed in the United States, most of them women of color.

[ 297 ] [ 298 ] Activism Main article: Activism against violence against women A Bulgarian poster urging people to open their eyes about domestic violence against women Memorial in Minto Park , Ottawa, of the victims of the École Polytechnique massacre Protest to end violence against women In the activism for violence against women, the objectives are to address and draw public attention on the issues of VAW, as well as seek and recommend measures to prevent and eliminate this violence.

[ 299 ] Many scholarly articles suggest that the VAW is considered a violation of human rights [ 300 ] [ 301 ] [ 302 ] as well as a "public health issue".

[ 303 ] Papua New Guineans show their support for putting an end to violence against women during a White Ribbon Day march.

The VAW movement was initiated in the 1970s, when some feminist movements started to bring the discussion on the issue of violence into the feminist discourse [ 304 ] and many other groups, on the national as well as international levels, attempted to push for the betterment of women through lobbying of the state officials and delegates, demanding conferences on 'gender issues'.

[ 305 ] Levels of activist movements Poster against child and forced marriage Mass protest against violence against women in Buenos Aires in 2015 On the local or national level, the VAW movements are diverse and differ in their strategic program of intervention. The strategies used in a number of the movements focus on the individual level with the emphases on individuals, relationships and family. Also, many of them take the 'preventive' as an approach to tackle the issues on the ground by encouraging people to "reexamine their attitudes and beliefs" in order to trigger and create fundamental changes in these "deep-rooted beliefs and behaviors".

[ 303 ] To achieve the objectives of the movement, many activists and scholars argue that they have to initiate changes in cultural attitudes and norms on a communal level.

[ 306 ] On the transnational or regional level, the anti-violence movements also deploy different strategies based on the specificities of their cultures and beliefs in their particular regions. On this level, the activist movements are known as "transnational feminist networks" or TFNs.

[ 300 ] : 556 TFNs have a significant effect, like the autonomous movements on the national level, in shaping policies, as well pushing for the recognition and inclusion of language of VAW in the United Nations human rights mechanisms: the international human rights agreements.

[ 300 ] Their activities are ranging from lobbying the policy makers; organizing demonstrations on the local and regional levels; to creating institutional pressure that could push for changes in the international institutional measures.

[ 300 ] On an international level, the movements that advocate for women's rights and against VAW are the mixture of (civil society) actors from domestic and regional levels. The objectives of these VAW movements focus on "creating shared expectations" within the domestic and regional levels as well as "mobilizing numbers of domestic civil society" to create "standards in global civil society".

[ 300 ] : 556 The global women's movement works to transform numbers of international conventions and conferences to "a conference on women's rights" by pushing for a "stronger language and clearer recognition" of VAW issues. In addition, the United Nations also plays a vital role in promoting and campaigning for the VAW movements on the international level.

[ 307 ] The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 5 is also a global initiative with a target to eliminate all forms of violence against women.

[ 308 ] In recent years, there has been a trend of approaching VAW at an international level through means such as conventions or, in the European Union , through directives (such as the directive against sexual harassment , and the directive against human trafficking ).

[ 309 ] [ 310 ] Second order sexual harassment (SOSH) Second-order sexual harassment (SOSH) is the harassment suffered by those who stand with and support victims of violence against women (VAW).

[ 311 ] In 2013 the UN General Assembly passed its first resolution calling for the protection of defenders of women's human rights.

[ 312 ] The resolution urges states to put in place gender-specific laws and policies for the protection of women's human rights defenders and to ensure that defenders themselves are involved in the design and implementation of these measures, and calls on states to protect women's human rights defenders from reprisals for cooperating with the UN and to ensure their unhindered access to and communication with international human rights bodies and mechanisms.

[ 313 ] Legal enforcement As violence is often committed by a family member, women first started by lobbying their governments to set up shelters for domestic violence survivors. The Julia Burgos Protected House established in Puerto Rico in 1979 was the first shelter in Latin America and the Caribbean for "battered women".

[ citation needed ] In 2003, 18 out of the 20 countries in the region had legislation on domestic or family violence, and 11 countries addressed sexual violence in their laws. Legislative measures to protect victims can include restraining orders, which can be found in Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Paraguay, Venezuela, Turkey, the United States and many western European countries for instance.

[ citation needed ] Courts can also be allowed by law (Germany, 2001) to order the perpetrator to leave the home so that victims do not have to seek shelter. Countries were urged to repeal discriminatory legislation by 2005 following the review of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action in 2000. Egypt, for instance, abolished a law that exempted men from rape charges when marrying their victims. However, the goal of antiviolence legislation is often to keep the families together, regardless of the best interests of women, which perpetuate domestic violence.

[ 260 ] Challenges faced by women in accessing justice and limitations of measures There can be a de jure or de facto acceptance of violent behavior and lack of remedies for victims.

[ 260 ] Lack of criminalization: in many places, acts of abuse, especially acts such as female genital mutilation , marital rape , forced marriage and child marriage , are not criminalized, or are illegal but widely tolerated, with the laws against them being rarely enforced. There are instances where crimes against women are also categorized as minor offenses.

Lack of awareness of the existing laws: in many places, although there are laws against violence on the books, many women do not know of their existence. This is especially the case with marital rape – its criminalization being very recent in most countries.

[ 314 ] Challenges in making a case in court: the burden of proof can be placed on the victim. For instance in the Philippines, before a change in law in 1997, rape used to be described as a crime against chastity; and virginity played an important role in court. In various countries, such as Bangladesh , a woman's past sexual experience continues to be very important in a case of rape. Bangladesh has received criticism for its employment of the "two-finger test" in rape investigations. This test consists in a physical examination of women who report rape during which a doctor inserts two fingers in the woman's vagina to determine whether the woman is "habituated to sex". This examination has its origin in the country's colonial-era laws dating to 1872. The test deters many women from reporting incidents of rape. More than 100 experts, including doctors, lawyers, police, and women's rights activists had signed a joint statement in 2013 asking for the test, which they called "demeaning", to be abolished, as it "does not provide any evidence that is relevant to proving the offence". This test is also performed in several other countries in the region, including India.

[ 315 ] It can also be difficult to make a case of sexual assault in court, when members of the judiciary expect evidence of severe struggle and injury as determinative evidence of non-consent. On the other hand, there are measures, such as the 2012 law in Brazil, that allow for cases to be filed even without the representation of the victim.

Existing laws are insufficient, conflicting, and have no effect in practice: some laws on domestic violence, for instance, conflict with other provisions and ultimately contradict their goals. Legal frameworks can also be flawed when laws that integrate protection do so in isolation, notably in relation to immigration laws.

[ citation needed ] Undocumented women in countries where they would have, in theory, access to justice, do not in practice for fear of being denounced and deported. The CEDAW Committee recommends that a State authority's obligation to report undocumented persons be repealed in national legislation.

[ citation needed ] Invoking culture to explain particular forms of violence against women risks appearing to legitimize them. There is also debate and controversy about the ways in which cultural traditions, local customs and social expectations, as well as various interpretations of religion, interact with abusive practices.

[ 262 ] [ 316 ] Specifically, cultural justifications for certain violent acts against women are asserted by some states and social groups within many countries claiming to defend their traditions. These justifications are questionable precisely because the defenses are generally voiced by political leaders or traditional authorities, not by those actually affected.

[ 262 ] Measures to address violence against women range from access to legal-aid to the provision of shelters and hotlines for victims. Despite advances in legislation and policies, the lack of implementation of the measures put in place prevents significant progress in eradicating violence against women globally. This failure to apply existing laws and procedures is often due to the persisting issue of gender stereotyping .

[ 317 ] Accessibility of police Women who report acts of violence most often come into contact first with police workers. Therefore, police attitudes are crucial in facilitating a sense of safety and comfort for women who have been victimized.

[ 318 ] [ 319 ] When police officers misuse their power as agents of the state to physically and sexually harass and assault victims, the survivors, including women, feel much less able to report the violence.

[ 320 ] Human rights violations perpetrated by police and military personnel in many countries are correlated with decreased access to public health services and increased practices of risky behavior among members of vulnerable groups, such as women and female sex workers.

[ 321 ] These practices are especially widespread in settings with a weak rule of law and low levels of police and military management and professionalism. Police abuse in this context has been linked to a wide range of risky behaviors and health outcomes, including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and substance abuse.

[ 321 ] [ 322 ] Extortion of sexual services and police sexual abuse have been linked to a decrease in condom use and an elevated risk of STI and HIV infections among vulnerable groups.

[ 321 ] [ 323 ] Some countries, such as Brazil and Jordan, have created women's police stations , which are police stations that specialize in certain crimes, such as sexual violence , harassment , and domestic violence committed against women.

[ citation needed ] Intervention versus autonomy It is standard procedure for police to force entry into the victim's home even after the victim's numerous requests for them to go away.

[ 324 ] Government agencies often disregard the victim's right to freedom of association with their perpetrator.

[ 325 ] International protection regimes Further information: History of violence against women Efforts to fight violence against women can take many forms and access to justice, or lack thereof, for such violence varies greatly depending on the justice system. International and regional instruments are increasingly used as the basis for national legislation and policies to eradicate violence against women. Experts in the international community generally believe that solely enacting punitive legislation for prevention and punishment of violence against women is not sufficient to address the problem. For example, although much stricter laws on violence against women have been passed in Bangladesh, violence against women is still rising.

[ 268 ] And violence against women has risen dramatically around the world since the late 2010s despite similar measures being taken in many regions as well as increased awareness and discussion of the subject.

[ 326 ] [ 327 ] [ 328 ] Instead, it is thought that wide societal changes to address gender inequalities and women's empowerment will be the way to reduce violence against women.

[ 262 ] [ 268 ] [ 329 ] [ 102 ] Africa In Africa, a series of regional meetings and agreements, was triggered by the UN processes on the international level, such as Third World Conference on Women in Nairobi, 1985; the 1993 Kampala Prep Com; the 1994 Africa-wide UN women's conference [ 330 ] that led to the identification of VAW as a critical issue in the Southern African Women's Charter.

[ 300 ] : 557 Americas In the Americas, the Inter-American Convention on Violence Against Women was formally announced and adopted by the Organization of American States (OAS) in 1994, immediately after the Vienna Conference.

[ 300 ] : 557 The Inter-American Convention to Prevent, Eradicate and Punish Violence Against Women (the Belém do Parà Convention) has been applied by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) in its first case of domestic violence to condemn Brazil in the Maria da Penha case. This led the Brazilian government to enact in 2006 the Maria da Penha Law, the country's first law against domestic violence against women.

[ 331 ] Asia In Asia, there is the South Asian Agreement on Regional Cooperation's (SAARC) Protocol to End Trafficking in Women and Children.

[ 260 ] Europe See also: Istanbul Convention In Europe, the European Union (EU)'s initiatives to combat violence against women include a 1997 resolution calling for zero tolerance, specifically on UN human rights instruments of CEDAW and the Vienna Declaration . The Council of Europe also developed "a series of initiatives" related to the issue of VAW: "the 2000 resolution on trafficking, the 2003 resolution on domestic violence, and the 2004 resolution on honor crimes" as well as promoted "the 2002 recommendation on the protection of women against violence and established its monitoring framework".

[ 300 ] : 557 The Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence (the Istanbul Convention) is the first legally binding instrument in Europe in the field of domestic violence and violence against women, [ 332 ] and came into force in 2014.

[ 333 ] Countries which ratify it must ensure that the forms of violence defined in its text are outlawed. In its Preamble, the Convention states that "the realisation of de jure and de facto equality between women and men is a key element in the prevention of violence against women". The convention also provides a definition of domestic violence as "all acts of physical, sexual, psychological or economic violence that occur within the family or domestic unit or between former or current spouses or partners, whether or not the perpetrator shares or has shared the same residence with the victim".

[ 334 ] See also Forced conversion of minority girls in Pakistan Bodily integrity Children's rights Eve teasing Military sexual trauma Misogyny in horror films Rhinotomy School-related gender-based violence (SRGBV) Sexism Sexual assault in the U.S. military United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 Violence against LGBT people Violence against men Impact of prostitution on mental health Sources This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO. Text taken from Technology-facilitated gender-based violence in an era of generative AI​ , Chowdhury, Rumman, UNESCO.

References ^ a b c Krantz, Gunilla; Garcia-Moreno, Claudia (October 2005).

"Violence against women" .

Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health .

59 (10).

BMJ Group : 818– 821.

doi : 10.1136/jech.2004.022756 .

JSTOR 25570854 .

PMC 1732916 .

PMID 16166351 .

^ Russo, Nancy Felipe; Pirlott, Angela (November 2006). "Gender-based violence: concepts, methods, and findings".

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

1087 (Violence and Exploitation Against Women and Girls).

Taylor and Francis and Oxfam : 178– 205.

Bibcode : 2006NYASA1087..178R .

doi : 10.1196/annals.1385.024 .

PMID 17189506 .

S2CID 34389352 .

^ Sexual and Gender-based Violence (WHO) ^ Citations : Angelari, Marguerite (1997).

"Hate crime statutes: a promising tool for fighting violence against women" . In Maschke, Karen J. (ed.).

Pornography, sex work, and hate speech . New York: Taylor and Francis. pp.

405– 448.

ISBN 9780815325208 .

Gerstenfeld, Phyllis B. (2013).

"The hate debate: constitutional and policy problems" . In Gerstenfeld, Phyllis B. (ed.).

Hate crimes: causes, controls, and controversies . Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. p. 58.

ISBN 9781452256627 .

McPhail, Beverly (2003).

"Gender-bias hate crimes: a review" . In Perry, Barbara (ed.).

Hate and bias crime: a reader . New York: Routledge. p. 271.

ISBN 9780415944076 .

^ Brownmiller (1975) , p. 15-17.

^ Miles (1988) , p. 1-14.

^ "A/RES/48/104 - Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women" . United Nations General Assembly . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ Moradian, Azad (10 September 2010).

"Domestic Violence against Single and Married Women in Iranian Society" .

Tolerancy.org .

The Chicago School of Professional Psychology .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2012 . Retrieved 1 March 2015 .

^ "Details of Treaty No.210: Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ "General recommendations made by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women" .

www.un.org .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2015 . Retrieved 8 May 2015 .

, General Recommendations 12 and 19 ^ "Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action" . UN General Assembly. 12 July 1993 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

, paragraph 18 ^ "What We Do: Ending Violence against Women: Global Norms and Standards" . UN Women . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ "Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment And Eradication of Violence Against Women "Convention of Belem Do Para" " . Organization of American States . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ "Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa" (PDF) . African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 March 2022 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ Richters, J.M. Annemiek (1994).

Women, culture and violence: a development, Health and Human Rights issue . Leiden, The Netherlands: Women and Autonomy Centre (VENA), Leiden University.

ISBN 9789072631374 .

OCLC 905570045 .

^ Sen, Purna (November 1998). "Development practice and violence against women".

Gender & Development .

6 (3).

Taylor and Francis and Oxfam : 7– 16.

doi : 10.1080/741922827 .

JSTOR 4030497 .

PMID 12294415 .

^ "Recommendations of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the protection of women against violence" . Council of Europe Committee of Ministers. 30 April 2002 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ Ertürk, Yakin (2009).

"Towards a post-patriarchal gender order: confronting the universality and the particularity of violence against women" .

Sociologisk Forskning .

46 (4). Sveriges Sociologförbund [Swedish Sociological Association]: 61– 70.

doi : 10.37062/sf.46.19221 .

JSTOR 20853687 .

S2CID 248629521 .

^ Visaria, Leela (13 May 2000). "Violence against women: a field study".

Economic and Political Weekly .

35 (20). Sameeksha Trust, Mumbai, India: 1742– 1751.

JSTOR 4409296 .

^ Michau, Lori (March 2007). "Approaching old problems in new ways: community mobilisation as a primary prevention strategy to combat violence against women".

Gender & Development .

15 (1).

Taylor and Francis and Oxfam : 95– 109.

doi : 10.1080/13552070601179144 .

JSTOR 20461184 .

S2CID 73218820 .

^ a b Prügl, Elisabeth (Director) (25 November 2013).

Violence Against Women. Gender and International Affairs Class 2013. Lecture conducted from The Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies (IHEID) . Geneva, Switzerland.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ CEDAW Committee (1992).

"General recommendation No. 19: Violence against women" (PDF) .

ohchr.org .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2022 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 .

^ "A/RES/48/104 – Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women – UN Documents: Gathering a body of global agreements" .

un-documents.net . 20 December 1993 . Retrieved 11 March 2021 .

^ "Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women (Convention of Belém do Pará)" (PDF) .

oas.org . Organization of American States. 9 June 1994 . Retrieved 11 March 2021 .

^ "Maputo Protocol" .

Wikisource . African Union. 11 July 2003 . Retrieved 11 March 2021 .

^ "Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence" .

coe.int . Council of Europe. 11 May 2021 . Retrieved 11 March 2021 .

^ Carol Hagemann-White (February 2014).

"Analytical study of the results of the fourth round of monitoring the implementation of Recommendation Rec(2002)5 on the protection of women against violence in Council of Europe member states" . Council of Europe Equality Division. pp. 7, 8, 11 . Retrieved 5 April 2020 .

^ Thorbjørn Jagland (May 2014).

"State of democracy, human rights and the rule of law in Europe (2014)" .

Report by the Secretary General of the Council of Europe . Council of Europe. p. 48 . Retrieved 5 April 2020 .

^ a b WHO (July 1997).

Violence against women: Definition and scope of the problem, 1, 1-3 (PDF) .

World Health Organization . Retrieved 30 November 2013 .

^ Dziech, Billie Wright; Weiner, Linda.

The Lecherous Professor: Sexual Harassment on Campus .

[ page needed ] Chicago Illinois: University of Illinois Press, 1990.

ISBN 978-0-8070-3100-1 ; Boland, 2002 [ page needed ] ^ World Health Organization., World report on violence and health (Geneva: World Health Organization , 2002), Chapter 6, pp. 149.

^ [Elements of Crimes, Article 7(1)(g)-6 Crimes against humanity of sexual violence, elements 1. Accessed through "Elements of Crimes" . Archived from the original on 6 May 2015 . Retrieved 19 October 2015 .

] ^ Peter Cameron; George Jelinek; Anne-Maree Kelly; Anthony F. T. Brown; Mark Little (2011).

Textbook of Adult Emergency Medicine E-Book .

Elsevier Health Sciences . p. 658.

ISBN 978-0702049316 . Retrieved 30 December 2017 .

^ Relevant citations : Abbey, Antonia; BeShears, Renee; Clinton-Sherrod, A. Monique; McAuslan, Pam (December 2004).

"Similarities and differences in women's sexual assault experiences based on tactics used by the perpetrator" (PDF) .

Psychology of Women Quarterly .

28 (4).

SAGE : 323– 332.

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-6402.2004.00149.x .

PMC 4527559 .

PMID 26257466 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 January 2013.

"Statistics" .

rainn.org .

Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network (RAINN) . Retrieved 1 January 2008 .

Tjaden, Patricia; Thoennes, Nancy (January 2006).

Extent, nature, and consequences of rape victimization: findings From the national violence against women survey .

National Criminal Justice Reference Service , U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs.

Pdf.

Archived 23 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine ABS (7 September 2004).

"Sexual assault in Australia: a statistical overview, 2004" .

abs.gov.au .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 31 December 2010 .

Myhill, Andy; Allen, Jonathan (2002).

Rape and sexual assault of women: findings from the British Crime Survey (PDF) .

Home Office Findings No. 159. London: Home Office . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 February 2011 . Retrieved 31 December 2010 .

^ AMA (1995).

Strategies for the treatment and prevention of sexual assault . Chicago, Illinois: American Medical Association .

OCLC 33901581 .

^ Kelly, Liz ; Regan, Linda; Lovett, Jo (2005).

A gap or a chasm?: Attrition in reported rape cases (PDF) . London: Home Office Research, Development and Statistics Directorate.

ISBN 9781844735556 . 293. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 February 2011 . Retrieved 31 December 2010 .

^ UNODC .

Rape at the National Level, number of police recorded offenses (spreadsheet) .

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime .

^ Parti, Katalin; Robinson, Robin A. (16 June 2021). "What Hinders Victims from Reporting Sexual Violence: A Qualitative Study with Police Officers, Prosecutors, and Judges in Hungary".

International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy .

10 (2).

doi : 10.5204/ijcjsd.1851 .

hdl : 10919/106368 .

^ Lievore, Denise (2003).

Non-reporting and Hidden Recording of Sexual Assault: An International Literature Review (PDF) . Commonwealth Office of the Status of Women.

ISBN 1-877042-41-2 .

^ "Nearly 97% of women in the US are raped or suffer attempted rape at some point in their lives, a US study says" .

BBC World . 15 December 2011 . Retrieved 15 December 2011 .

^ "National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey 2010 Summary Report" (PDF) . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Retrieved 16 August 2016 .

^ Violence Against Women in Prostitution in San Francisco. San Francisco: San Francisco, CA. Commission on the Status of Women, 1998. Women and Social Movements in the United States,1600-2000 Database. Web.

^ Cho, Grace (2008).

Haunting the Korean Diaspora: Shame, Secrecy, and the Forgotten War .

University of Minnesota Press . p. 103.

ISBN 978-0816652754 .

^ "Netherlands – Facts on Trafficking and Prostitution" . Uri.edu. Archived from the original on 2 October 2012 . Retrieved 26 June 2012 .

^ Washington, Harold C. (2004).

" 'Lest he die in battle and another man take her': violence and the construction of gender in the laws of Deuteronomy 20-22" . In Matthews, Victor H.; Levinson, Bernard M.; Frymer-Kensky, Tikva (eds.).

Gender and law in the Hebrew Bible and the ancient Near East . London New York: T & T Clark. p. 203.

ISBN 9780567080981 .

^ Benedict, Helen (14 August 2008).

"Why soldiers rape" .

In These Times . Archived from the original on 18 May 2019 . Retrieved 10 November 2012 .

^ Morris-Suzuki, Tessa (1 March 2007).

"Japan's 'Comfort Women': It's time for the truth (in the ordinary, everyday sense of the word)" .

Japan Focus (The Asia-Pacific Journal) .

5 (3) . Retrieved 4 August 2011 .

^ UNSC (18 September 1997).

Report of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia Since 1991 (PDF) .

United Nations Security Council . A/52/375 S/1997/729. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 August 2012 . Retrieved 10 November 2012 .

^ Pillay, Navanethem (2005).

Honorary doctorate acceptance address by Navanethem Pillay, Rhodes University . Archived from the original on 26 September 2006 . Retrieved 27 February 2008 .

^ Articles : Radwan, Zahra; Blumenfeld, Zoe (27 June 2014).

"OP-ED: Surging violence against women in Iraq" .

Inter Press Service . Retrieved 5 July 2014 .

Winterton, Clare (25 June 2014).

"Why we must act when women in Iraq document rape" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 10 July 2014 .

Ali, Esraa Mohamed (18 June 2014).

"Kuwaiti media: "Daash" demands the people of Mosul to provide unmarried to "Jihad marriage" " .

The Egyptian Today [Al-Masry Al-Youm] . Retrieved 10 July 2014 .

Original Arabic version : إسراء محمد علي.

"إعلامي كويتي: "داعش" يطالب أهالي الموصل بتقديم غير المتزوجات لـ"جهاد النكاح" .

المصری الیوم . Retrieved 10 July 2014 .

^ Susskind, Yifat (3 July 2014).

"Under Isis, Iraqi women again face an old nightmare: violence and repression" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 July 2014 .

^ "Det jag har bevittnat i al-Raqqa kommer alltid förfölja mig" .

Dagens Nyheter (in Swedish). 23 September 2014 . Retrieved 25 September 2014 .

^ Brekke, Kira (8 September 2014).

"ISIS is attacking women, and nobody is talking about it" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 11 September 2014 .

^ NOW News (17 December 2014).

"ISIS just executed more than 150 women in Fallujah" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 23 February 2015 .

^ Baykan, Dildar (2 December 2019).

"UN official cites horrific crimes against Rohingya" .

Anadolu Agency . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ Quadir, Serajul (12 November 2017).

"U.N. official says will raise sexual violence against Rohingya with ICC" .

Reuters . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ Bigio, Jamille; Vogelstein, Rachel.

"Analysis | 5 reasons the U.N. Security Council should care about the Burmese military's sexual assaults on the Rohingya" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ "Burmese military 'guilty of widespread rape of Rohingya Muslims' " .

The Independent . 16 November 2017 . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ UNODC .

"UNODC on human trafficking and migrant smuggling (index)" .

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ OSCE (15 November 2000).

"U.N. protocol to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women and children, supplementing the United Nations convention against transnational organized crime" .

Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ a b c WHO (2012).

Understanding and addressing violence against women: Human trafficking (PDF) .

World Health Organization . WHO/RHR/12.42 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ McDougall, Gay J.

"Report of the Special Rapporteur on systematic rape, sexual slavery and slavery-like practices during armed conflict" .

United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). E/CN.4/Sub.2/1998/13. Archived from the original on 12 January 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2014 .

^ "Algerian authorities must investigate and stop attacks against women" . Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011 . Retrieved 13 August 2011 .

^ Grozelle, Renee S. (2015).

"Mob Violence Against Women in Algeria: A Historical Case Analysis" .

Inquiries Journal .

7 (3).

^ "Stop renewed attacks on women" . Women Living Under Muslim Laws. Archived from the original on 23 January 2019 . Retrieved 13 August 2011 .

^ "Algerian authorities must investigate and stop attacks against women" . Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011 . Retrieved 13 August 2011 .

^ "Stalking information" .

victimsofcrime.org . Stalking Resource Center . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ a b McFarlane, Judith M.; Campbell, Jacquelyn C.; Wilt, Susan; Sachs, Carolyn J.; Ulrich, Yvonne; Xu, Xiao (November 1999). "Stalking and intimate partner femicide".

Homicide Studies .

3 (4).

SAGE : 300– 316.

doi : 10.1177/1088767999003004003 .

S2CID 145522253 .

Pdf.

Archived 23 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ Dussuyer, Inez (December 2000).

Is stalking legislation effective in protecting victims?

(PDF) . Sydney: Australian Institute of Criminology . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

Paper presented at the Stalking: Criminal Justice Responses Conference convened by the Australian Institute of Criminology and held in Sydney 7–8 December 2000.

^ de Castella, Tom (9 August 2013).

"How many acid attacks are there?" .

BBC News . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Vig, Krishan (2014).

"Corrosive poisons: vitriolage" . In Vig, Krishan (ed.).

Textbook of forensic medicine and toxicology: principles and practice (5th ed.). India: Elsevier. p. 462.

ISBN 9788131226841 .

^ Swanson, Jordan (Spring 2002).

"Acid attacks: Bangladesh's efforts to stop the violence" .

Harvard Health Policy Review .

3 (1). Harvard Internfaculty Initiative in Health Policy: 3. Archived from the original on 17 January 2006.

^ AP (12 November 2000).

"Bangladesh combats an acid onslaught against women" .

CNN . Archived from the original on 22 September 2007 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ Bahl, Taur; Syed, M. H. (2003).

Encyclopaedia of Muslim world . New Delhi: Anmol Publications.

ISBN 9788126114191 .

^ Articles : Shackle, Samira (9 November 2012).

"Acid attacks in Pakistan: A sorry litany of male egotism" .

New Statesman . Retrieved 8 September 2013 .

Interview with Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy one of the directors the documentary " Saving Face ".

CBC (28 October 2012).

"Longueuil woman burned and in coma after acid attack" .

HuffPost . Archived from the original on 19 December 2013 . Retrieved 8 September 2013 .

Ungaro, Cosima (28 November 2012).

"Nurbanu, Bangladeshi woman, forced to return to husband after acid attack" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 8 September 2013 .

Scholte, Marianne (17 March 2006).

"Acid attacks in Bangladesh: a voice for the victims" .

Spiegel Online . Retrieved 21 March 2008 .

Various.

Combating acid violence in Bangladesh, India, and Cambodia (PDF) . New York: Avon Global Center for Women and Justice at Cornell Law School , Committee on International Human Rights of the, New York City Bar Association , Cornell Law School International Human Rights Clinic and the Virtue Foundation . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

CASC (May 2010).

Breaking the silence: addressing acid attacks in Cambodia (PDF) . Cambodian Acid Survivors Charity (CASC). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 December 2013 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ Citations : "Ethics guide – Slavery: Modern slavery" .

BBC . Retrieved 5 September 2013 .

Shahinian, Gulnara (10 July 2012).

Report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences, Gulnara Shahinian: Thematic report on servile marriage (A/HRC/21/41) (PDF) . United Nations. Human Rights Council Twenty-first session.

UNIFEM (August 2010).

Ending violence against women & girls – Evidence, data and knowledge in the Pacific Island Countries: literature review and annotated bibliography (PDF) .

UNIFEM . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2011 . Retrieved 8 July 2011 .

^ News articles : "World: Africa, Ethiopia: Revenge of the abducted bride" .

BBC News . 18 June 1999 . Retrieved 19 November 2013 .

Gena, Alem (23 February 2007).

"Ethiopia: Surviving forced marriage" .

IRIN . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

PI (July 2006).

Report on causes and consequences of early marriage in Amhara Region (PDF) .

Pathfinder International . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 March 2013 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ a b "Tanzania: Child Marriage Harms Girls" .

Human Rights Watch . 29 October 2014 . Retrieved 30 November 2018 .

^ Ezer, Tamar; Kerr, Kate; Major, Kara; Polavarapu, Aparna; Tolentino, Tina (2006).

"Child Marriage and Guardianship in Tanzania: Robbing Girls of Their Childhood and Infantilizing Women" (PDF) .

The Georgetown Journal of Gender and the Law .

7 : 357– 450.

SSRN 3936796 .

^ Glicksman, Robert; Kaime, Thoko (2015). "An International Legal Framework for SE4All: Human Rights and Sustainable Development Law Imperatives".

Fordham International Law Journal .

38 (5): 1405– 1444.

doi : 10.15495/EPub_UBT_00004910 .

SSRN 3621546 .

^ UN Women (24 December 2012).

Confronting dowry-related violence in India: women at the center of justice .

UN Women . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Chambers, Clare (1 September 2005).

Recognizing marriage as a symbolic institution . Washington, D.C.: American Political Science Association. Archived from the original on 28 December 2017 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Political Science Association.

For a later version of this paper, see Chambers, Clare (10 April 2008).

Feminism, liberalism and marriage (workshop) . Political Philosophy Workshop at Brown University .

Word document.

^ Jeffreys, Sheila (2009).

The industrial vagina: the political economy of the global sex trade . RIPE Series in Global Political Economy. London New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415412322 .

^ Stedman, Berne (August 1917). "Right of husband to chastise wife".

The Virginia Law Register .

3 (4).

University of Virginia School of Law : 241– 248.

doi : 10.2307/1106112 .

JSTOR 1106112 .

Also available at HeinOnline . Full text available here [1] .

^ Blackstone, William (2016) [1765].

"Husband and wife" .

Commentaries on the laws of England (1765-1769), vol 1: Of the rights of persons . Oxford, United Kingdom New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199600991 . Archived from the original on 13 October 2014 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

^ Calvert, Robert (1974).

"Criminal and civil liability in husband-wife assaults" . In Steinmetz, Suzanne; Straus, Murray A. (eds.).

Violence in the family . New York: Harper & Row. pp.

88– 91.

ISBN 9780060464196 .

^ R. v. Jackson [1891]. 1 Q.B. 671 ^ Renton, Alexander Wood (1911).

"Corporal Punishment" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 07 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

189– 190.

^ AI (November 2009).

Yemen's dark side: discrimination and violence against women and girls .

Amnesty International . MDE 31/014/2009 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

^ Statutory notice: The [Iraqi] penal-code with amendments (PDF) . Case Western Reserve University School of Law. 1969. STS 251/88. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2012 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

^ Citations : Allwood, Gill.

"Women in France" (PDF) .

Modern & Contemporary France .

Taylor and Francis . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

"France's leading women show the way" .

marinablue.fr . Paris Voice. November 1997 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

"" The Wife is Obliged ": The French Civil Code (Napoleonic Code) 1800-1820" .

womeninworldhistory . Women in World History Curriculum . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

^ Solsten, Eric; Meditz, Sandra W. (1988).

"Social values and attitudes" . In Solsten, Eric; Meditz, Sandra W. (eds.).

Spain: a country study . Washington, DC: Library of Congress, Federal Research Division.

OCLC 712557481 .

^ Card, Claudia (1996). "Against Marriage and Motherhood".

Hypatia .

11 (3): 1– 23.

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.1996.tb01013.x .

JSTOR 3810319 .

S2CID 143516578 .

^ "Intimate partner violence: fact sheet" .

cdc.gov/ncipc . National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 2006. Archived from the original on 11 February 2007 . Retrieved 4 September 2007 .

^ Girshick, Lori B. (December 2002). "No sugar, no spice: reflections on research on woman-to-woman sexual violence".

Violence Against Women .

8 (12).

SAGE : 1500– 1520.

doi : 10.1177/107780102237967 .

S2CID 73280087 .

^ Rose, Suzana.

"Lesbian partner violence fact sheet" .

Medical University of South Carolina .

^ "Intimate partner violence: consequences" .

cdc.gov/ncipc . National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Archived from the original on 29 January 2010 . Retrieved 9 February 2010 .

^ "Wheel gallery" . The Duluth Model. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 9 February 2010 .

^ Report on Domestic Violence in New York City: Listening With the Third Ear. New York: New York, NY. Commission on the Status of Women, 1996. Women and Social Movements in the United States,1600-2000 Database. Web.

^ "All domestic abuse deaths to have multi-agency review" .

BBC News . 13 April 2011 . Retrieved 14 April 2011 .

^ L'action du ministère dans le cadre des violences au sein du couple / Aide aux victimes: présentation des différents dispositifs (PDF) (in French).

Ministère de l'Intérieur . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2012 . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ a b c WHO (1 September 2011).

Violence against women .

World Health Organization . Retrieved 2 December 2013 .

^ "Ethiopian women are most abused" .

BBC News . 11 October 2006.

^ Bott, Sarah; Guedes, Alessandra; Goodwin, Mary; Mendoza, Jennifer Adams (2012).

Violence against women in Latin America and the Caribbean: a comparative analysis of population-based data from 12 countries .

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Pan American Health Organization .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) English pdf.

Archived 4 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine Spanish pdf.

Archived 8 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ Clarke, Kris (5 July 2011). "The Paradoxical Approach to Intimate Partner Violence in Finland".

International Perspectives in Victimology .

6 (1): 9– 19.

^ McKie, Linda; Hearn, Jeff (August 2004). "Gender-Neutrality and Gender Equality: Comparing and Contrasting Policy Responses to 'Domestic Violence' in Finland and Scotland".

Scottish Affairs . 48 (First Serie (1): 85– 107.

doi : 10.3366/scot.2004.0043 .

^ Case Closed: Rape and Human Rights in the Nordic Countries (PDF) (Report). Amnesty International. September 2008. pp.

89– 91.

Finland is repeatedly reminded of its widespread problem of violence against women and recommended to take more efficient measures to deal with the situation. International criticism concentrates on the lack of measures to combat violence against women in general and in particular on the lack of a national action plan to combat such violence and on the lack of legislation on domestic violence. (...) Compared to Sweden, Finland has been slower to reform legislation on violence against women. In Sweden, domestic violence was already illegal in 1864, while in Finland such violence was not outlawed until 1970, over a hundred years later. In Sweden the punishment of victims of incest was abolished in 1937, but not until 1971 in Finland. Rape within marriage was criminalised in Sweden in 1962, but the equivalent Finnish legislation only came into force in 1994 – making Finland one of the last European countries to criminalise marital rape. In addition, assaults taking place on private property did not become impeachable offences in Finland until 1995. Only in 1997 did victims of sexual offences and domestic violence in Finland become entitled to government-funded counselling and support services for the duration of their court cases.

^ a b c d e f First, Michael B.; Bell, Carl C.; Cuthbert, Bruce; Krystal, John H.; Malison, Robert; Offord, David R.; Reiss, David; Shea, M. Tracie; Widger, Tom; Wisner, Katherine L. (2002).

"Personality disorders and relational disorders: a research agenda for addressing crucial gaps in DSM" (PDF) . In Kupfer, David J.; First, Michael B.; Regier, Darrel A. (eds.).

A research agenda for DSM-V . Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association .

ISBN 9780890422922 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ Anderson, Michelle J. (6 June 2016), "Marital Rape Laws Globally" , Marital Rape , Oxford University Press, pp.

177– 186, doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190238360.003.0012 , ISBN 978-0-19-023836-0 , retrieved 10 January 2024 ^ Grady, William (2011).

Crime in Canadian context: debates and controversies . Don Mills, Ontario: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195433784 .

^ Brennan, Shannon; Taylor-Butts, Andrea (2008).

Sexual assault in Canada, 2004 (PDF) . Ottawa: Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics.

ISBN 9781100111636 . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ SIECCAN (October 2011).

Sexual assault in Canada: what do we know?

(PDF) . The Sex Information and Education Council of Canada (SIECCAN). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2014 . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ Temkin, Jennifer (2002). "Defining and redefining rape". In Temkin, Jennifer (ed.).

Rape and the legal process (second ed.). Oxford New York: Oxford University Press. p. 86.

ISBN 9780198763543 .

Citing : "Criminal Law (Rape) (Amendment) Act, 1990, section 5" .

irishstatutebook.ie .

Irish Statute Book . Archived from the original on 29 April 2017 . Retrieved 21 December 2017 .

^ Associated Press (2 July 1993).

"N.C. the last state to outlaw marital rape" .

The Daily Gazette . New York . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ "R v R [1991] UKHL 12 (23 October 1991)" . British and Irish Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ Zeegers, Nicolle (January 2012).

"What epistemology would serve criminal law best in finding the truth about rape?" .

Law and Method .

2 (1): 60– 71.

doi : 10.5553/ReM/221225082012002001005 .

^ Kieler, Marita (2003).

Tatbestandsprobleme der sexuellen Nötigung, Vergewaltigung sowie des sexuellen Mißbrauchs widerstandsunfähiger Personen (Thesis).

University of Osnabrück via Tenea.

OCLC 758907108 . Archived from the original on 25 June 2014 . Retrieved 22 December 2017 .

Pdf.

Archived 20 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ "1 corinthians 7:3-7:5 NKJV" .

biblegateway.com .

Bible Gateway . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ "Valley paper criticized over pastor's column on spousal rape" .

Alaska Dispatch . 22 July 2011. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ "Hadith 4:460" .

Sacred-texts.com .

Internet Sacred Text Archive . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ Halliday, Josh (8 November 2010).

"Islam Channel censured by Ofcom" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ "Cleric 'must deny' views on rape" .

BBC News . 22 January 2009 . Retrieved 11 December 2013 .

^ "Intimate partner violence: teen dating violence" .

cdc.gov .

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 2016. Archived from the original on 30 December 2018 . Retrieved 21 October 2017 .

Fact sheet pdf.

^ Owen, Margaret (1996).

"Human rights, equality and legal protection" . In Owen, Margaret (ed.).

A world of widows . London Atlantic Highlands, New Jersey: Zed Books.

ISBN 9781856494205 .

^ Peers, Douglas M.

(2006).

India under colonial rule: 1700-1885 . Pearson Education. pp.

52– 53.

ISBN 978-0-582-31738-3 . Retrieved 8 November 2018 .

^ Uhn, Cho (1999). "The Invention of Chaste Motherhood: A Feminist Reading of the Remarriage Ban in the Chosun Era".

Asian Journal of Women's Studies .

5 (3): 45– 63.

doi : 10.1080/12259276.1999.11665854 .

^ "Arrests in Indian ritual burning" .

BBC News . 7 August 2002 . Retrieved 25 January 2014 .

^ "Sons arrested in sati death probe" .

BBC News . 21 September 2006 . Retrieved 25 January 2014 .

^ Rachel Awuor (1 November 2007).

"Widow cleansing: 'Good' intentions – negative consequences" .

Farm Radio International . Retrieved 23 July 2016 .

^ "The gruesome fate of "witches" in Papua New Guinea" .

The Economist . 13 July 2017 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 .

^ Ireland, Patricia (1996).

No Safe Place: Violence Against Women (script) .

PBS documentary . Retrieved 2 December 2013 .

^ Citations : Diwan, Mohammed A. (Summer 2004).

"Conflict between state legal norms and norms underlying popular beliefs: witchcraft in Africa as a case study" .

Duke Journal of Comparative & International Law .

14 (2).

Duke Law School : 351– 388.

Ally, Yaseen (June 2009).

Witch hunts in modern South Africa: an under-represented facet of gender-based violence (fact sheet) (PDF) .

South African Medical Research Council . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 April 2012 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

"Woman burned alive for 'sorcery' in Papua New Guinea" .

BBC News . 7 February 2013 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

^ a b "Son preference" .

stopvaw.org . Stop Violence Against Women. June 2010 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

^ "Discrimination kills 230,000 girls under five in India each year, study shows" .

The Guardian . 15 May 2018 . Retrieved 20 August 2018 .

^ Thurston, Anne F. (1 April 1996).

"In a Chinese Orphanage" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ Staff, P. R. I. (1 January 1996).

"The dying rooms: Chinese orphanages adopt a 'zero population growth policy' " .

PRI . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ News articles : Sarwary, Bilal (30 January 2012).

"Afghan woman is killed 'for giving birth to a girl' " .

BBC News . Kabul, Afghanistan . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

Agarwal, Keshav (23 March 2017).

"23-year-old woman killed for giving birth to twin daughters" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

"56 killed for giving birth to girl child in Pakistan" .

Deccan Chronicle . Hyderabad, Telangana, India. 27 November 2013 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

^ End FGM European Network, U.S. End FGM/C Network e Equality Now (March 2020).

"Female genital mutilation/cutting: a call for a global response" (PDF) .

End FGM European Network .

^ a b WHO (June 2000).

Female genital mutilation (factsheet) .

World Health Organization . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ a b c UNICEF (2016).

"Female Genital Mutilation: A global concern" .

UNICEF .

^ "Female genital mutilation/cutting: What might the future hold?" (PDF) .

data.unicef.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2014.

^ Nussbaum, Martha (1999).

"Judging other cultures: the case of genital mutilation" . In Nussbaum, Martha (ed.).

Sex & social justice . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

120–121 .

ISBN 978-0195110326 .

^ a b Webber, Sarah; Schonfeld, Toby (May 2003). "Cutting History, Cutting Culture: Female Circumcision in the United States".

The American Journal of Bioethics .

3 (2): 65– 66.

doi : 10.1162/152651603766436324 .

PMID 12859826 .

S2CID 13202773 .

Project MUSE 44151 .

^ Kinnear, Karen L. (2011).

Women in Developing Countries: A Reference Handbook . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 9781598844252 .

^ Citations : Lyons, Kate (24 November 2015).

"The Gambia bans female genital mutilation" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 May 2016 .

Richards, Kimberly (3 June 2015).

"History has been made: female genital mutilation banned in Nigeria" .

A Plus . Retrieved 9 May 2016 .

UNFPA (December 2015).

Female genital mutilation (FGM) frequently asked questions .

United Nations Population Fund . Retrieved 9 May 2016 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence . 12 April 2011 . Retrieved 8 October 2017 .

^ " Rwandan Women View The Elongation Of Their Labia As Positive ", retrieved on 18 June 2008 ^ "Labia stretching: Why some British girls are told to do it" .

BBC News . BBC. 7 April 2017 . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .

^ Hershatter, Gail (2019).

Women and China's Revolutions . The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group. p. 47.

ISBN 978-1-4422-1568-9 .

^ Citations : Popenoe, Rebecca (2004).

"Getting fat" . In Popenoe, Rebecca (ed.).

Feeding desire: fatness, beauty, and sexuality among a Saharan people . London New York: Routledge. pp.

33– 50.

ISBN 9780415280969 .

Book review : Fan (3 August 2012).

"Space and body modification: Rebecca Popenoe's Feeding Desire (blog)" . Savage Mind via WordPress . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

LaFraniere, Sharon (4 July 2007).

"In Mauritania, seeking to end an overfed ideal" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 30 June 2011 .

Girls as young as 5 and as old as 19 had to drink up to five gallons of fat-rich camel's or cow's milk daily, aiming for silvery stretch marks on their upper arms. If a girl refused or vomited, the village weight-gain specialist might squeeze her foot between sticks, pull her ear, pinch her inner thigh, bend her finger backward or force her to drink her own vomit. In extreme cases, girls die, due to a burst stomach. The practice was known as gavage, a French term for force-feeding geese to obtain foie gras.

^ Smith, Alex Duval (1 March 2009).

"Girls being force-fed for marriage as junta revives fattening farms" .

The Observer . Retrieved 22 December 2015 .

^ Ed Butler (21 July 2016).

"The man hired to have sex with children" .

BBC News . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .

^ Anderson, E-L (2015).

Gender, HIV and Risk: Navigating structural violence . Palgrave MacMillan.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Beenish Ahmed (20 January 2014).

"Confronting a Sexual Rite of Passage in Malawi" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .

^ "Kusasa Fumbi – The Sexual Rite Of Passage" .

The Guardian . 2 February 2020 . Retrieved 22 October 2021 .

^ "the role of community in combating honor killings" .

web.stanford.edu . Archived from the original on 30 September 2017 . Retrieved 8 December 2018 .

^ a b c "Ethics guide – Honour crimes" .

BBC . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ "Definition of honor killing" .

merriam-webster.com .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ a b Harter, Pascale (14 June 2011).

"Libya rape victims 'face honour killings' " .

BBC News . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Relevant articles : PTI (19 March 2011).

"Rape victim threatened to withdraw case in UP" .

Zee News . Mumbai, India: Essel Group . Retrieved 3 February 2013 .

"Stigmatization of rape & honor killings" .

WISE Muslim Women .

Women's Islamic Initiative in Spirituality and Equality . 31 January 2002. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012 . Retrieved 3 February 2013 .

Harter, Pascale (14 June 2011).

"Libya rape victims 'face honour killings' " .

BBC News . Retrieved 3 February 2013 .

"Morocco protest after raped Amina Filali kills herself" .

BBC News . 15 March 2012 . Retrieved 19 November 2013 .

^ Kirti, Anand; Kumar, Prateek; Yadav, Rachana (2011). "The Face of Honour Based Crimes: Global Concerns and Solutions".

International Journal of Criminal Justice Sciences .

6 (1/2): 343– 357.

ProQuest 1011050411 .

^ Barazzetti, Donatella; Garreffa, Franca; Marsico, Rosaria (July 2007).

Daphne Project "Proposing new indicators: measuring violence's effects, GVEI (Gender Violence Effects Indicators)" (PDF) . Rende, Italy: Centre Women's Studies "Milly Villa", University of Calabria .

Before 1981, Art. 587 read: He who causes the death of a spouse, daughter, or sister upon discovering her in illegitimate carnal relations and in the heat of passion caused by the offence to his honour or that of his family will be sentenced to three to seven years. The same sentence shall apply to whom, in the above circumstances, causes the death of the person involved in illegitimate carnal relations with his spouse, daughter, or sister.

^ UN Women .

"Violence against women: work of the General Assembly on violence against women" .

un.org/womenwatch .

UN Women , Violence Against Women . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

Listing for : UN Secretary-General (2 July 2002).

Working towards the elimination of crimes against women committed in the name of honour .

United Nations General Assembly . A/57/169.

Arabic pdf.

Chinese pdf.

French pdf.

Russian pdf.

Spanish pdf.

^ Ghanizada (9 June 2013).

"240 cases of honor killing recorded in Afghanistan, AIHRC" . Afghanistan: Khaama Press . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ UPI (10 June 2013).

"AIHRC: 400 rape, honor killings registered in Afghanistan in 2 years" .

Latin Business Today . Kabul, Afghanistan. Archived from the original on 14 February 2015 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Bayoumy, Yara; Kami, Aseel (6 March 2012).

" "Honor killings" require tougher laws, say Iraqi women" .

Reuters . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ "International Domestic Violence Issues" .

sanctuaryforfamilies.org . Sanctuary for Families. Archived from the original on 16 October 2014.

^ Donald, Alice; Bishop, Hilary.

"World agenda: what justice?" .

BBC World Service . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ "India court seeks 'honour killing' response" .

BBC News . 21 June 2010 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Rainsford, Sarah (19 October 2005).

" 'Honour' crime defiance in Turkey" .

BBC News . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Kardam, Filiz (2005). Murray, Genevra (ed.).

The dynamics of honor killings in Turkey: prospects for action .

United Nations Development Programme , Population Association (Turkey) and United Nations Population Fund . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) Pdf.

Archived 11 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Country Comparison: Maternal Mortality Rate Archived 8 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine in The CIA World Factbook . Date of Information: 2010 ^ Habek, Dubravko; Vuković Bobić, Mirna; Hrgović, Zlatko (2008).

"Possible feto-maternal clinical risk of the Kristeller's expression" .

Central European Journal of Medicine .

3 (2).

Walter de Gruyter : 3– 6.

doi : 10.2478/s11536-008-0008-z .

S2CID 57243548 .

^ WHO (1996).

Care in normal birth: a practical guide . Safe Motherhood Practical Guide. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization . WHO/FRH/MSM/96.24. Archived from the original on 26 December 2011 . Retrieved 2 December 2013 .

Pdf.

Also as : Technical Working Group, World Health Organization (June 1997). "Care in normal birth: a practical guide".

Birth .

24 (2).

Wiley : 121– 123.

doi : 10.1111/j.1523-536X.1997.00121.pp.x .

^ WHO (2015).

"Sexual and reproductive health: Prevention and elimination of disrespect and abuse during childbirth" .

who.int .

World Health Organization . Retrieved 21 October 2017 .

See also : WHO (2015).

WHO statement: The prevention and elimination of disrespect and abuse during facility-based childbirth (PDF) . Human Reproduction Programme (HRP). Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization . WHO/RHR/14.23.

^ Grace KT, Anderson JC (October 2018).

"Reproductive Coercion: A Systematic Review" .

Trauma, Violence & Abuse .

19 (4): 371– 390.

doi : 10.1177/1524838016663935 .

PMC 5577387 .

PMID 27535921 .

^ "Joint United Nations statement on ending discrimination in health care settings" .

www.who.int .

^ Articles : "PM concerned over death of woman in Chaupadi" .

The Kathmandu Post . 19 November 2016 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

Pokharel, Sugam (10 July 2017).

"Nepali 'mensuration hut' ritual claims life of teenage girl" .

CNN . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

"Nepal criminalises banishing menstruating women to huts" .

BBC News . 10 August 2017 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

"Nepali girl dies due to banned mensuration practice" .

Al Jazeera . December 2016 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

^ "Freedom of movement and women's economic empowerment" .

Empower Women . February 2016 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

^ Anderson, Natalae (22 September 2010).

Memorandum: Charging forced marriage as a crime against humanity (PDF) . Documentation Center of Cambodia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 October 2017 . Retrieved 8 October 2017 .

^ Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (14 July 2017).

General recommendation No. 35 on gender-based violence against women, updating general recommendation No. 19 (PDF) .

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). CEDAW/C/GC/35. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 February 2019 . Retrieved 8 October 2017 .

Violations of women's sexual and reproductive health and rights, such as forced sterilizations, forced abortion, forced pregnancy, criminalisation of abortion , denial or delay of safe abortion and post abortion care , forced continuation of pregnancy , abuse and mistreatment of women and girls seeking sexual and reproductive health information, goods and services, are forms of gender based violence that, depending on the circumstances, may amount to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment .

^ "El Salvador: Rape survivor sentenced to 30 years in jail under extreme anti-abortion law" .

www.amnesty.org . 6 July 2017.

^ "Jailed for a miscarriage" .

BBC News .

^ Prügl, E. (Lecturer) (2 December 2013). Gender and International Affairs 2013. INTERNATIONAL FEMINIST MOVEMENTS. Lecture conducted from The Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies (IHEID), Geneva, Switzerland.

^ Hosenball, Mark (6 June 2013).

"Obama administration defends massive phone record collection" .

Reuters . Retrieved 6 March 2016 .

^ EIGE (24 August 2015).

"What is gender-based violence?" .

eige.europa.eu .

European Institute for Gender Equality . Archived from the original on 9 May 2015 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ CoE (12 April 2011).

Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence .

Council of Europe .

^ "Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women" .

United Nations General Assembly . Retrieved 9 May 2016 .

^ a b c d Volscho, Thomas W. (Spring 2010).

"Sterilization racism and pan-ethnic disparities of the past decade: the continued encroachment on reproductive rights" .

Wíčazo Ša Review .

25 (1).

Johns Hopkins University Press : 17– 31.

doi : 10.1353/wic.0.0053 .

JSTOR 40891307 .

S2CID 159856987 .

^ Kessel, Michelle; Jessica, Hopper (7 November 2011).

"Victims speak out about North Carolina sterilization program, which targeted women, young girls and Blacks" .

Rock Center with Brian Williams .

NBC News . Archived from the original on 8 November 2011 . Retrieved 9 May 2016 .

^ Vincenti Carpio, Myla (2004). "The Lost Generation: American Indian Women and Sterilization Abuse".

Social Justice .

31 (4): 40– 53.

^ ERRC (November 2016).

Coercive and cruel – a report by the European Roma Rights Centre: Sterilisation and its consequences for Romani women in the Czech Republic (1966–2016) (PDF) . Budapest, Hungary: European Roma Right Centre.

ISBN 9789638991638 .

^ Goldberg, Justin (14 November 2012).

"European Court of Human Rights Finds Slovakia violated Romani women's rights in another involuntary sterilization case" .

Center for Reproductive Rights . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ Boesten, Jelke (2007).

"Free choice or poverty alleviation? Population politics in Peru under Alberto Fujimori" .

European Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies .

82 (82). Centre for Latin American Research and Documentation: 3– 20.

doi : 10.18352/erlacs.9637 .

^ "Mass sterilisation scandal shocks Peru" .

BBC News . 24 July 2002 . Retrieved 9 May 2016 .

^ Citations : Jackson, Allison (9 April 2013).

"China: Mother of 2 dies after forced sterilization" .

GlobalPost . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

AI (22 April 2010).

"Thousands at risk of forced sterilization in China" .

Amnesty International . Archived from the original on 29 May 2013 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

"China forced abortion photo sparks outrage" .

BBC News . 14 June 2012 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

Hawk, David (2012).

The Hidden Gulag (PDF) (2nd ed.). Washington DC: The Committee for Human Rights in North Korea.

OCLC 793983613 . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Antelava, Natalia (12 April 2012).

"Uzbekistan's policy of secretly sterilising women" .

BBC World Service . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Natalia Antelava (reporter) and Wesley Stephenson (producer) (16 April 2012).

Forced sterilisation in Uzbekistan (Audio).

Crossing Continents .

BBC Radio 4 .  20:30 minutes in . Retrieved 18 November 2013 .

^ Ramezani, Reza (2010).

Hijab dar Iran az Enqelab-e Eslami ta payan Jang-e Tahmili [Hijab in Iran from the Islamic Revolution to the end of the Imposed war] (Persian), Faslnamah-e Takhassusi-ye Banuvan-e Shi'ah [Quarterly Journal of Shiite Women], Qom: Muassasah-e Shi'ah Shinasi, ISSN 1735-4730 ^ a b Milani, Farzaneh (1992).

Veils and Words: The Emerging Voices of Iranian Women Writers , Syracuse, New York: Syracuse University Press , p. 19, 34–37, ISBN 9780815602668 ^ Welle (www.dw.com), Deutsche.

"Why Iranian authorities force women to wear a veil | DW | 21 December 2020" .

Deutsche Welle . Retrieved 8 July 2022 .

^ The Oxford Handbook of Islam and Politics. (2016). Storbritannien: Oxford University Press.

^ "Women in Saudi Arabia do not need to wear head cover, says crown prince" .

The Irish Times . March 2018.

^ "Taliban order all Afghan women to cover their faces in public | Afghanistan | the Guardian" .

TheGuardian.com . 7 May 2022.

^ Bergenfeld, Irina; Clark, Cari Jo; Sandhu, Seema; Yount, Kathryn M.; Essaid, Aida A.; Sajdi, Jude; Abu Taleb, Rand; Robbin, Zoe; Batayeh, Brian; Zwooqar, Ahad; Spencer, Rachael A. (2022). " "There Is Always an Excuse to Blame the Girl": Perspectives on Sexual Harassment at a Jordanian University".

Violence Against Women .

28 (14): 3457– 3481.

doi : 10.1177/10778012221079373 .

ISSN 1077-8012 .

PMID 35200046 .

^ "Österreich beschließt Kopftuchverbot an Grundschulen" .

Spiegel Online (in German). 15 May 2019 . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

^ : The Bosnian Muslims in the Second World War ^ Headscarf ban sparks debate over Kosovo's identity news.bbc.co.uk 24 August 2010. Link retrieved 24 August 2010 ^ "KAZAKHSTAN: Parents challenge schoolgirl headscarf ban" .

UN Refugee Agency .

Forum 18 . April 2018.

^ Northrop (2001a) , p. 115.

^ Abdelhadi, Magdi Tunisia attacked over headscarves , BBC News , 26 September 2006. Accessed 6 June 2008.

^ "How did Reza Pahlavi's dictatorship affect Iranian women?" .

navideshahed.com .

^ Hoodfar, Homa (1993). "The veil in their minds and on our heads: the persistence of colonial images of Muslim women".

Resources for Feminist Research .

22 (3/4): 5– 18.

ProQuest 194879317 .

^ UN General Assembly (1979).

The convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women (CEDAW) .

UN Women, Division for the Advancement of Women . Archived from the original on 26 March 2014 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

^ Lee, Dave (29 June 2011).

"Saudi Arabian woman challenges male guardianship laws" .

BBC World Service . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

^ Laura Bashraheel (27 June 2009).

"Women's transport: Solutions needed" .

Arab News .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2019 . Retrieved 6 October 2012 .

^ Batha, Emma (29 September 2013).

"FACTBOX: Stoning - where does it happen?" .

Thomson Reuters Foundation News .

Thomson Reuters Foundation . Archived from the original on 25 January 2016 . Retrieved 19 November 2013 .

^ Lang, Olivia (26 February 2013).

"Maldives girl to get 100 lashes for pre-marital sex" .

BBC News . Retrieved 19 November 2013 .

^ Jamali, Hasan (21 November 2006).

"Rape case brings Saudi laws into focus" .

Today .

NBC . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013 . Retrieved 19 November 2013 .

^ katharina.kiener-manu.

"Crime Prevention & Criminal Justice Module 9 Key Issues: Topic 1 - Gender-based discrimination and women in conflict with the law" .

www.unodc.org . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ "Sexism, harassment, and violence against women parliamentarians" .

Inter-Parliamentary Union Issues Brief . 2016.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2023.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Krook, Mona Lena; Sanín, Juliana Restrepo (September 2020).

"The Cost of Doing Politics? Analyzing Violence and Harassment against Female Politicians" .

Perspectives on Politics .

18 (3): 740– 755.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592719001397 .

S2CID 198599058 .

^ a b "Facts and figures: Women's leadership and political participation" .

UN Women . 18 September 2023 . Retrieved 26 February 2021 .

^ Schneider, Paige; Carroll, David (25 November 2020), "Conceptualizing more inclusive elections: violence against women in elections and gendered electoral violence" , Building Inclusive Elections , Routledge, pp.

60– 77, doi : 10.4324/9781003051954-4 , ISBN 978-1-003-05195-4 , S2CID 241638877 , retrieved 26 February 2021 ^ Garnett, Holly Ann; James, Toby S. (3 July 2021).

"Measuring electoral integrity: using practitioner knowledge to assess elections" (PDF) .

Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties .

31 (3): 348– 367.

doi : 10.1080/17457289.2020.1824186 .

S2CID 224924792 .

^ "Violence Against Female Politicians" .

Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ "Violence against female politicians" .

CEPR . 21 September 2023 . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ a b Bardall, Gabrielle (2011).

Breaking the Mold: Understanding Gender and Electoral Violence . United States: International Foundation for Electoral Systems. pp.

1– 6.

^ a b c d e "Violence Against Women in Politics" .

Journal of Democracy . Retrieved 26 March 2023 .

^ a b c Krook, Mona Lena (2022). "Semiotic Violence against Women: Theorizing Harms against Female Politicians".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

47 (2): 371– 397.

doi : 10.1086/716642 .

S2CID 244923072 .

^ Krebs, Christopher P.; Lindquist, Christine H.; Warner, Tara D.; Fisher, Bonnie S.; Martin, Sandra L. (October 2007).

Campus sexual assault (CSA) study: final report .

RTI International .

NCJ 243011 Pdf.

^ a b c Palmer, Catherine (2011).

Violence against women and sport: Literature review . London: Durham University. pp.

2– 5. Archived from the original on 6 November 2014.

^ Vaughan, Kevin (9 June 2009).

"Colorado woman seeks justice in alleged sexual assault Read more: Colorado woman seeks justice in alleged sexual assault" .

The Denver Post . Retrieved 17 April 2012 .

^ Brady, Jeff .

"Scandal Returns to University of Colorado Football" .

Weekend Edition .

NPR . Retrieved 12 March 2012 .

^ a b Chandler, Steve B.; Johnson, Dewayne J.; Carroll, Pamela S. (1 December 1999). "Abusive behaviors of college athletes".

College Student Journal .

33 (4).

University of South Alabama : 638– 645.

OCLC 193500507 .

^ a b c Mak, Stephanie (2004).

"Are athletes more abusive than the rest of the student population?" .

Hopkins Undergraduate Research Journal Online . Archived from the original on 29 February 2012 . Retrieved 12 March 2012 .

^ "Game stats" . The National Coalition Against Violent Athletes (NCVA). Archived from the original on 17 November 2016 . Retrieved 27 December 2017 .

Citing : Crosset, Todd W.; Benedict, Jeffrey R.; McDonald, Mark A. (May 1995). "Male student-athletes and violence against women: a survey of campus judicial affairs offices".

Journal of Sport & Social Issues .

19 (2).

SAGE : 126– 140.

doi : 10.1177/019372395019002002 .

PMID 12295457 .

S2CID 146752259 .

Crosset, Todd W.; Ptacek, James; McDonald, Mark A.; Benedict, Jeffrey R. (June 1996).

"Male student-athletes and violence against women: a survey of campus judicial affairs offices" .

Violence Against Women .

2 (2).

SAGE : 163– 179.

doi : 10.1177/1077801296002002004 .

PMID 12295457 .

S2CID 22814832 .

See also : Benedict, Jeff; Keteyian, Armen (2013).

The system: the glory and scandal of big-time college football . New York: Doubleday.

ISBN 9780345803030 .

^ a b Curry, Timothy Jon (1991).

"Fraternal Bonding in the Locker Room: A Profeminist Analysis of Talk About Competition And Women" (PDF) .

Sociology of Sport Journal .

8 (2): 119– 135.

doi : 10.1123/ssj.8.2.119 . Retrieved 12 March 2012 .

^ a b c Disch, Lisa; Kane, Mary Jo (Winter 1996). "When a Looker is Really a Bitch: Lisa Olson, Sport, and the Heterosexual Matrix".

Signs .

21 (2): 278– 308.

doi : 10.1086/495067 .

JSTOR 3175065 .

S2CID 145061857 .

^ Newsom, John (22 March 1992).

"Few Colleges Tackle Issue of Athlete Sex Assaults" .

Los Angeles Times Online . Retrieved 12 March 2012 .

^ "Mission" . National Coalition Against Violent Athletes. Archived from the original on 16 April 2012 . Retrieved 12 March 2012 .

^ Benedict, Helen (6 May 2009).

"The plight of women soldiers" .

The Nation .

NPR . Retrieved 10 November 2012 .

^ Wenner Moyer, Melinda (2021).

" 'A Poison in the System': The Epidemic of Military Sexual Assault" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 10 January 2021 .

^ "Prevalence of Sexual Assault in the Military: Risk and Protective Factors, Data Sources, and Data Uses" . 2019 . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

^ "Sexual Assault Now Tried Outside Military Chain of Command" .

U.S. Department of Defense . Retrieved 10 January 2024 .

[ dead link ] ^ Smith, Peter K.; Mahdavi, Jess; Carvalho, Manuel; Fisher, Sonja; Russell, Shanette; Tippett, Neil (2008).

"Cyberbullying: its nature and impact in secondary school pupils" .

Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry .

49 (4).

Wiley : 376– 385.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2007.01846.x .

PMID 18363945 .

S2CID 28942016 .

^ "cyber violence report press release" . UN Women. 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ Jane, Emma Alice (2014). " 'Back to the kitchen, cunt': speaking the unspeakable about online misogyny".

Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies .

28 (4).

Taylor and Francis : 558– 570.

doi : 10.1080/10304312.2014.924479 .

hdl : 1959.4/unsworks_81563 .

S2CID 144492709 .

^ Filipovic, Jill (2007).

"Blogging while female: how internet misogyny parallels real-world harassment" .

Yale Journal of Law and Feminism .

19 (2).

Yale Law School : 295– 303.

Pdf.

^ KhosraviNik, Majid; Esposito, Eleonora (26 June 2018).

"Online hate, digital discourse and critique: Exploring digitally-mediated discursive practices of gender-based hostility" .

Lodz Papers in Pragmatics .

14 (1): 45– 68.

doi : 10.1515/lpp-2018-0003 .

S2CID 149965889 .

^ a b "Internet Bringing New Forms of Violence Against Women" .

Human Rights Watch . 28 October 2019.

^ "Read about violence against women online in 2018" .

www.amnesty.org . 10 December 2018.

^ a b Dr. Rumman Chowdhury (2023).

Technology-Facilitated Gender-Based Violence in an Era of Generative AI . UNESCO.

ISBN 978-92-3-100631-9 .

^ UNESCO (2021).

"The Chilling: global trends in online violence against women journalists; research discussion paper" .

^ Gardiner, Becky; Mansfield, Mahana; Anderson, Ian; Holder, Josh; Louter, Daan; Ulmanu, Monica (12 April 2016).

"The dark side of Guardian comments" .

the Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ International Press Institute (24 March 2023).

"Netherlands: Women journalists facing widespread online harassment" .

International Press Institute . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ a b Imran, Mohd (19 August 2021).

"Sexual Violence Depicted Against Women in Video Games: The Effect of Virtual World on the Real World" .

doi : 10.5281/ZENODO.5223922 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Alias, Dilla (1 January 1998).

"An examination of violence and gender role portrayals in video games: Implications for gender socialization and aggressive behavior" .

Sex Roles .

^ a b Beck, Victoria Simpson; Boys, Stephanie; Rose, Christopher; Beck, Eric (October 2012).

"Violence Against Women in Video Games: A Prequel or Sequel to Rape Myth Acceptance?" .

Journal of Interpersonal Violence .

27 (15): 3016– 3031.

doi : 10.1177/0886260512441078 .

ISSN 0886-2605 .

PMID 22550147 .

^ a b c d e f g h Fried, Susana T. (2003). "Violence against women".

Health and Human Rights .

6 (2).

Harvard University Press : 88– 111.

doi : 10.2307/4065431 .

JSTOR 4065431 .

Pdf.

Archived 29 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Bardall, Gabrielle; Bjarnegård, Elin; Piscopo, Jennifer M (November 2020). "How is Political Violence Gendered? Disentangling Motives, Forms, and Impacts".

Political Studies .

68 (4): 916– 935.

doi : 10.1177/0032321719881812 .

^ a b c d e f UN (2006).

In-depth study on all forms of violence against women. Report of the Secretary-General . United Nations General Assembly. A/61/122/Add . Retrieved 2 December 2013 .

^ Colarossi, Lisa (Winter 2005). "A response to Danis & Lockhart: What guides social work knowledge about violence against women?".

Journal of Social Work Education .

41 (1).

Taylor and Francis on behalf of the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE): 147– 159.

doi : 10.5175/JSWE.2005.200400418 .

JSTOR 23044038 .

S2CID 143655449 .

See also : Danis, Fran S.; Lockhart, Lettie (Spring–Summer 2003). "Guest Editorial – Domestic violence and social work education: what do we know, what do we need to know?".

Journal of Social Work Education, Special Section: Domestic Violence and Social Work Education .

39 (2).

Taylor and Francis on behalf of the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE): 215– 224.

doi : 10.1080/10437797.2003.10779132 .

JSTOR 23044061 .

S2CID 141110449 .

^ Maffly, Brian (21 March 2009).

"BYU study links women's safety, nation's peace" .

The Salt Lake Tribune . Archived from the original on 2 February 2010.

^ Strearmer, Matthew; Emmett, Chad F. (2007).

The great divide: Revealing differences in the Islamic world regarding the status of women and its impact on international peace (PDF) .

WomanStats Project . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

Paper prepared for presentation at the annual meeting of the American Political Science Association , Chicago, Illinois, 29 August – 1 September 2007.

^ "Papua New Guinea: police cite bride price major factor in marital violence" .

Island Business . 21 November 2011. Archived from the original on 18 February 2015 . Retrieved 6 August 2014 – via Violence is not our Culture.

^ "An exploratory study of bride price and domestic violence in Bundibugyo District, Uganda" (PDF) . Centre for Human Rights Advancement (CEHURA) and South African Medical Research Council . April 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 July 2013 . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ a b c Venis, Sarah; Horton, Richard (6 April 2002). "Violence against women: a global burden".

The Lancet .

359 (9313).

Elsevier : 1172.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08251-X .

PMID 11955533 .

S2CID 41832376 .

^ a b Krebs, Christopher P.; Lindquist, Christine H.; Warner, Tara D.; Fisher, Bonnie S.; Martin, Sandra L. (December 2007).

"The Campus Sexual Assault (CSA) Study" (PDF) . National Institute of Justice.

^ Deborah, Tuerkheimer (2017).

"Incredible Women: Sexual Violence and the Credibility Discount" .

University of Pennsylvania Law Review .

166 (1).

^ Krug, Etienne G.; Dahlberg, Linda L.; Mercy, James A.; Zwi, Anthony B.; Lozano, Rafael (2002).

World report on violence and health . Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization .

ISBN 9789241545617 .

Also available as : Krug, Etienne G.; Dahlberg, Linda L.; Mercy, James A.; Zwi, Anthony B.; Lozano, Rafael (5 October 2002).

"The world report on violence and health" .

The Lancet .

360 (9339).

Elsevier : 1083– 1088.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11133-0 .

PMID 12384003 .

S2CID 20828803 .

^ a b Watts, Charlotte; Zimmerman, Cathy (6 April 2002). "Violence against women: global scope and magnitude".

The Lancet .

359 (9313).

Elsevier : 1232– 1237.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08221-1 .

PMID 11955557 .

S2CID 38436965 .

^ UNFPA ; UNICEF ; UN Women ; ILO ; Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children (OSRSG/VAC) (May 2013).

Breaking the silence on violence against indigenous girls, adolescents and young women: A call to action based on an overview of existing evidence from Africa, Asia Pacific and Latin America .

UNICEF . Retrieved 10 May 2016 .

Pdf.

^ "Mass sterilization scandal shocks Peru" .

BBC News . 24 July 2002 . Retrieved 30 April 2006 .

^ UN (June 2014).

Thematic paper on the elimination and responses to violence, exploitation and abuse of indigenous girls, adolescents and young women (PDF) (Report). Inter-agency Support Group on Indigenous Peoples' Issues . Retrieved 9 May 2016 .

^ Dhillon, Jaskiran; Allooloo, Siku (14 December 2015).

"Violence against indigenous women is woven into Canada's history" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 May 2016 .

^ Shiriari, Sara (30 April 2015).

"Bolivia struggles with gender-based violence" .

Al Jazeera America . Retrieved 9 May 2016 .

^ Sinha, Maire, ed. (2006).

Measuring violence against women: statistical trends 2006 (85-570-XWE) (PDF) . Juristat. Ottawa, Ontario: Statistics Canada. p. 19.

Citing : Brennan, Shannon (2011).

Violent victimization of Aboriginal women in the Canadian provinces, 2009 . Juristat. Ottawa, Ontario: Statistics Canada.

Catalogue no. 85-002.

Perreault, Samuel (2011).

Violent victimization of Aboriginal women in the Canadian provinces, 2009 . Juristat. Ottawa, Ontario: Statistics Canada.

Catalogue no. 85-002.

^ a b c d Roe, Bubar; Jumper Thurman, Pamela (2004).

"Violence against native women" .

Social Justice .

31 (4 [98]): 70– 86.

JSTOR 29768276 .

^ Ramirez, Renya (2004).

"Healing, violence, and Native American women" .

Social Justice .

31 (4 [98]): 103– 116.

JSTOR 29768279 .

^ Policy Insights - Brief Statistics on Violence Against Native Women (PDF) . NCAI Policy Research Center. 2013. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 11 January 2020 .

A previously reported statistic that, "Among [American Indian and Alaska Native] victims of rape or sexual assault, 86 percent described the offender as non‐Indian" is accurate according to Perry's analysis (2004) in American Indians and Crime: A BJS Statistical Profile, 1992-2002. However, Perry's analysis includes reports by both Native men and women victims of rape or sexual assault. Given this brief's focus on violence against Native women, we include the updated rate of 67 percent reported by Native women victims of rape or sexual assault indicated in Bachman, et al., (2008).

^ Chekuru, Kavitha (6 March 2013).

"Sexual violence scars Native American Women" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 9 May 2016 .

^ "ACS Demographic and Housing Estimates – 2011–2015" . U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on 13 February 2020 . Retrieved 23 December 2019 .

^ Cook, Andrea J. (1 April 2015).

"Tribal leaders urged to apply Violence Against Women Act" .

Rapid City Journal . Retrieved 11 January 2020 .

^ Milke, Mark (12 January 2013).

"Increasing number of Aboriginals choose not to live on reserves" .

Calgary Herald and Regina Leader Post . Retrieved 23 December 2019 .

^ Bachman, Ronet; Zaykowski, Heather; Kallmyer, Rachel; Poteyeva, Margarita; Lanier, Christina (August 2008).

Violence against American Indian and Alaska Native women and the criminal justice response: what is known (PDF) .

National Institute of Justice . Retrieved 10 May 2016 .

NCJ 245615 ^ Willis, Jay (13 December 2019).

"Why Can't the Senate Pass the Violence Against Women Act?" .

GQ . Retrieved 11 January 2020 .

^ Freedman, Jane (2017).

"Sexual and gender-based violence against refugee women: a hidden aspect of the refugee "crisis" " (PDF) .

Reproductive Health Matters .

24 (47).

Taylor and Francis : 18– 26.

doi : 10.1016/j.rhm.2016.05.003 .

PMID 27578335 .

S2CID 21202414 .

^ Robbers, Gianna; Gunta, Lazdane; Dinesh, Sethi (2016).

"Sexual violence against refugee women on the move to and within Europe" .

Entre Nous .

84 .

WHO /Europe: 26– 29. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 27 December 2017 .

Pdf.

Archived 19 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ Freedman, Jane (January 2016).

"Sexual and gender-based violence against refugee women: a hidden aspect of the refugee "crisis" " .

Reproductive Health Matters .

24 (47): 18– 26.

doi : 10.1016/j.rhm.2016.05.003 .

PMID 27578335 .

S2CID 21202414 .

^ American Psychological Association (2018).

APA Guidelines for Psychological Practice with Girls and Women (PDF) (Report). p. 11.

Transgender women are at a notably higher risk of violence than their cisgender counterparts...especially transgender women of color ^ a b Brown, Taylor N.T.; Herman, Jody L. (2015).

"Intimate Partner Violence and Sexual Abuse Among LGBT People: A Review of Existing Research" (PDF) .

The Williams Institute: UCLA School of Law .

^ Langenderfer-Magruder, Lisa; Whitfield, Darren L.; Walls, N. Eugene; Kattari, Shanna K.; Ramos, Daniel (March 2016). "Experiences of Intimate Partner Violence and Subsequent Police Reporting Among Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Adults in Colorado: Comparing Rates of Cisgender and Transgender Victimization".

Journal of Interpersonal Violence .

31 (5): 855– 871.

doi : 10.1177/0886260514556767 .

PMID 25392392 .

S2CID 24880033 .

^ Risser, Jan M. H.; Shelton, Andrea; McCurdy, Sheryl; Atkinson, John; Padgett, Paige; Useche, Bernardo; Thomas, Brenda; Williams, Mark (11 October 2005). "Sex, Drugs, Violence, and HIV Status Among Male-to-Female Transgender Persons in Houston, Texas".

International Journal of Transgenderism .

8 ( 2– 3): 67– 74.

doi : 10.1300/J485v08n02_07 .

S2CID 71399447 .

^ "Transgender people" .

World Health Organization . Archived from the original on 27 November 2015 . Retrieved 10 August 2019 .

^ Apsani, Rishita (1 October 2018).

"Are Women's Spaces Transgender Spaces? Single-Sex Domestic Violence Shelters, Transgender Inclusion, and the Equal Protection Clause" .

California Law Review .

106 (5): 1689.

doi : 10.15779/Z38125Q91G . Archived from the original on 10 August 2019 . Retrieved 10 August 2019 .

^ "Violence Against the Transgender Community in 2019" .

Human Rights Campaign .

^ Christensen, Jen (16 January 2019).

"Killings of transgender people in the US saw another high year" .

CNN . Retrieved 10 August 2019 .

^ Youngs, Gillian (Summer 2003). "Private pain/public peace: women's rights as human rights and Amnesty International's report on violence against women".

Signs .

28 (4).

University of Chicago Press : 1209– 1229.

doi : 10.1086/368325 .

JSTOR 10.1086/368325 .

S2CID 144980514 .

^ a b c d e f g h Htun, Mala; Weldon, S. Laurel (August 2012). "The civic origins of progressive policy change: combating violence against women in global perspective, 1975–2005".

American Political Science Review .

106 (3).

Cambridge University Press : 548– 569.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055412000226 .

JSTOR 23275433 .

S2CID 15986250 .

Pdf.

^ Carraway, G. Chezia (July 1991). "Violence against women of color".

Stanford Law Review .

43 (6).

Stanford Law School : 1301– 1309.

doi : 10.2307/1229040 .

JSTOR 1229040 .

^ Robinson, Nancy P. (July–December 2006). "Origins of the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women: The Caribbean contribution".

Caribbean Studies .

34 (2).

UPR, Rio Piedras Campus : 141– 161.

JSTOR 25613539 .

^ a b Michau, Lori (March 2007). "Approaching old problems in new ways: community mobilisation as a primary prevention strategy to combat violence against women".

Gender & Development .

15 (1).

Taylor and Francis : 95– 109.

doi : 10.1080/13552070601179144 .

JSTOR 20461184 .

S2CID 73218820 .

^ Eng, Phoebe (August 2005).

Stopping the violence against women: the movement from intervention to prevention (PDF) . A Safety Program Report. New York: Ms. Foundation for Women . p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 December 2013 . Retrieved 3 December 2013 .

^ Prügl, Elisabeth (Lecturer) (2 December 2013).

Violence Against Women. Gender and International Affairs Class 2013 . Geneva, Switzerland: Lecture conducted from The Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies (IHEID). Archived from the original on 21 July 2018 . Retrieved 27 December 2017 .

^ Heise, L.; Gottemoeller, M. (December 1999).

"Ending violence against women" (PDF) .

Population Reports .

L (11). Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, Population and Information Program: 38.

^ UNiTE (2013).

"Take action to Orange your day" .

UN Women . Archived from the original on 20 December 2013 . Retrieved 20 December 2013 .

^ "Sustainable Development Goal 5: Gender equality" .

UN Women . Retrieved 23 September 2020 .

^ "Directive 2002/73/EC - equal treatment of 23 September 2002 amending Council Directive 76/207/EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions" . September 2002.

^ "Directive 2011/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2011 on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims, and replacing Council Framework Decision 2002/629/JH" .

Official Journal of the European Union . Retrieved 4 April 2016 .

^ Flecha, Ramón (2021).

"Second-Order Sexual Harassment: Violence Against the Silence Breakers Who Support the Victims" .

Violence Against Women .

27 (11): 1980– 1999.

doi : 10.1177/1077801220975495 .

PMC 8343204 .

PMID 33635745 .

^ NRK (30 November 2013).

"Protection of women human rights defenders" .

The Norway Post . Archived from the original on 13 December 2013 . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ "UN adopts landmark resolution on Protecting Women Human Rights Defenders" .

Association for Women's Rights in Development (AWID). 28 November 2013. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014 . Retrieved 6 August 2014 .

^ Citations : AI (10 May 2007).

Hungary – Cries unheard: The failure to protect women from rape and sexual violence in the home .

Amnesty International . EUR 27/002/2007 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

"Hungary law 'fails rape victims' " .

BBC News . 10 May 2007 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

Moy, Patsy (23 November 2003).

"Publicity urged for law on marital rape" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

^ Citations : Press release (2 February 2013).

100 experts demand change in medical evidence laws and justice for rape victims (PDF) . Bangladesh Legal Aid Services Trust . Retrieved 4 April 2016 .

Agence France-Presse (4 February 2013).

"Bangladesh activists urge ban on rape victim 'finger test' " .

NDTV . Retrieved 4 April 2016 .

Park, Madison (5 February 2013).

"Activists: Get rid of 'degrading' parts of India's sexual assault exam" .

CNN . Retrieved 4 April 2016 .

^ Narayan, Uma (1997).

"Cross-cultural connections, border-crossings, and "Death by Culture": thinking about dowry-murders in India and domestic-violence murders in the United States" . In Narayan, Uma (ed.).

Dislocating cultures: identities, traditions, and Third-World feminism . New York: Routledge. pp.

81– 118.

ISBN 9780415914192 .

^ CEDAW (18 February 2013).

General discussion on women and access to justice . Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

^ Logan, T. K.; Shannon, Lisa; Walker, Robert (October 2006). "Police attitudes toward domestic violence offenders".

Journal of Interpersonal Violence .

21 (10).

SAGE : 1365– 1374.

doi : 10.1177/0886260506291653 .

PMID 16940401 .

S2CID 1956897 .

^ Travis, Alan (17 May 2016).

"Police treatment of domestic abuse victims to be investigated" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 21 October 2017 .

^ Barbara Laker and Wendy Ruderman, hosted by Terry Gross (3 May 2010).

"Covering 'Tainted Justice' and winning a Pulitzer" .

Fresh Air . Philadelphia. NPR.

WHYY .

^ a b c Beletsky, Leo; et al. (May 2012).

"Mexico's northern border conflict: collateral damage to Health and Human Rights of vulnerable groups" .

Pan American Journal of Public Health .

31 (5).

Pan American Health Organization : 403– 410.

doi : 10.1590/s1020-49892012000500008 .

PMC 3660986 .

PMID 22767041 .

^ Other citations : Strathdee, Steffanie A.; et al. (25 April 2011).

"Social and structural factors associated with HIV infection among female sex workers who inject drugs in the Mexico-US border region" .

PLOS One .

6 (4).

PLOS : e19048.

Bibcode : 2011PLoSO...619048S .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0019048 .

PMC 3081836 .

PMID 21541349 .

Ramos, Rebeca; et al. (December 2009).

"A tale of two cities: social and environmental influences shaping risk factors and protective behaviors in two Mexico-US border cities" .

Health & Place .

15 (4).

Elsevier : 999– 1005.

doi : 10.1016/j.healthplace.2009.04.004 .

PMC 2735581 .

PMID 19464228 .

Pollini, Robin A.; et al. (January 2008).

"Syringe possession arrests are associated with receptive syringe sharing in two Mexico-US border cities" .

Addiction .

103 (1).

Wiley : 101– 108.

doi : 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2007.02051.x .

PMC 2214830 .

PMID 18028520 .

Pollini, Robin A.; et al. (September 2010).

"High prevalence of abscesses and self-treatment among injection drug users in Tijuana, Mexico" .

International Journal of Infectious Diseases .

14 (S3).

Elsevier : e117 – e122 .

doi : 10.1016/j.ijid.2010.02.2238 .

PMC 2917477 .

PMID 20381396 .

Strathdee, Steffanie A; Lozada, Remedios; Pollini, Robin A; Brouwer, Kimberly C; Mantsios, Andrea; Abramovitz, Daniela A; Rhodes, Tim; Latkin, Carl A; Loza, Oralia; Alvelais, Jorge; Magis-Rodriguez, Carlos; Patterson, Thomas L (1 March 2008).

"Individual, Social, and Environmental Influences Associated With HIV Infection Among Injection Drug Users in Tijuana, Mexico" .

Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes .

47 (3): 369– 376.

doi : 10.1097/QAI.0b013e318160d5ae .

PMC 2752692 .

PMID 18176320 .

Raj, Anita; Gupta, Jhumka; Silverman, Jay G. (2009).

"Women, migration, conflict and risk for HIV" . In Forbes Martin, Susan; Tirman, John (eds.).

Women, migration, and conflict: breaking a deadly cycle . Dordrecht: Springer. p. 107.

ISBN 9789048128242 .

^ Blankenship, Kim M.; Koester, Stephen (December 2002).

"Criminal law, policing policy, and HIV risk in female street sex workers and injection drug users" .

The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics .

30 (4).

Wiley : 548– 559.

doi : 10.1111/j.1748-720X.2002.tb00425.x .

PMID 12561263 .

S2CID 7242766 .

^ Suk, Jeannie (2009).

At home in the law: how the domestic violence revolution is transforming privacy . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300172621 .

^ Hanna, Cheryl (June 1996). "No right to choose: mandated victim participation in domestic violence prosecutions".

Harvard Law Review .

109 (8). The Harvard Law Review Association: 1849– 1910.

doi : 10.2307/1342079 .

JSTOR 1342079 .

S2CID 143393426 .

SSRN 1276830 .

^ "The Number of Women Murdered by a Partner is Rising | Psychology Today" .

^ Gupta, Alisha Haridasani (4 December 2019).

"Across the Globe, a 'Serious Backlash Against Women's Rights' " .

The New York Times .

^ Doubek, James (9 March 2020).

"Mexican Women Stay Home to Protest Femicides in 'A Day Without Us' " .

NPR .

^ Fawole, Olufunmilayo I.; Ajuwon, Ademola J.; Osungbade, Kayode O.; Faweya, Olufemi C. (April 2003). "Interventions for violence prevention among young female hawkers in motor parks in South-Western Nigeria: a review of effectiveness".

African Journal of Reproductive Health .

7 (1). Women's Health and Action Research Centre (WHARC): 71– 82.

doi : 10.2307/3583347 .

hdl : 1807/2587 .

JSTOR 3583347 .

PMID 12816315 .

^ Tripp, Aili Mari ; Casimiro, Isabel; Kwesiga, Joy; Mungwa, Alice (2009).

African women's movements: transforming political landscapes . Cambridge New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780511479014 .

^ Spieler, Paula (Winter 2011).

"The Maria da Penha Case and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights: contributions to the debate on domestic violence against women in Brazil" .

Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies .

18 (1).

Indiana University Maurer School of Law : 121– 143.

doi : 10.2979/indjglolegstu.18.1.121 .

S2CID 154383871 .

^ "The Convention of Belém do Pará and the Istanbul Convention: A response to violence against women worldwide" (PDF) . Retrieved 31 December 2021 .

^ Bureau des Traités.

"Liste complète" . Conventions.coe.int . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ "Council of Europe – Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence (CETS No. 210)" .

coe.int . Retrieved 8 October 2015 .

Bibliography Almosaed, Nora (2004). "Violence against women: a cross-cultural perspective".

Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs .

24 (1).

Taylor and Francis : 67– 88.

doi : 10.1080/1360200042000212124 .

S2CID 144455844 .

Appiah, Kwame Anthony (21 September 2010).

"Convincing other cultures to change" .

Big Think .

Archived from the original on 12 December 2013.

Bellemare, Marc F.; Steinmetz, Tara L. (17 June 2013).

"All in the family: explaining the persistence of female genital cutting in the Gambia" .

Social Science Research Network .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.2280086 .

SSRN 2280086 .

Pdf.

Brownmiller, Susan (1975).

Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape . Fawcett Columbine.

ISBN 0-449-90820-8 .

Buscatto, Marie; Karttunen, Sari; Provansal, Mathilde, eds. (2025).

Gender-Based Violence in Arts and Culture: Perspectives on Education and Work .

Open Book Publishers .

doi : 10.11647/obp.0436 .

ISBN 978-1-80511-452-9 .

Durham, Meenakshi G.

(February 2013). " "Vicious Assault Shakes Texas Town": the politics of gender violence in The New York Times ' coverage of a schoolgirl's gang rape".

Journalism Studies .

14 (1).

Taylor & Francis : 1– 12.

doi : 10.1080/1461670X.2012.657907 .

S2CID 141709189 .

Heise, L (1993). "Violence against women: the hidden health burden".

World Health Statistics Quarterly. Rapport Trimestriel de Statistiques Sanitaires Mondiales .

46 (1): 78– 85.

PMID 8237054 .

Republished as: Heise, Lori; Pitanguy, Jacqueline; Germain, Adrienne; Bank, World (1994).

Violence Against Women: The Hidden Health Burden . World Bank.

ISBN 978-0-8213-2980-1 .

OCLC 654453001 .

James, Stanlie M. (Summer 1998). "Shades of othering: reflections on female circumcision/genital mutilation".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

23 (4).

University of Chicago Press : 1031– 1048.

doi : 10.1086/495300 .

JSTOR 3175202 .

S2CID 144380933 .

Jones, Helen; Diop, Nafissatou; Askew, Ian; Kaboré, Inoussa (September 1999). "Female genital cutting practices in Burkina Faso and Mali and their negative health outcomes".

Studies in Family Planning .

30 (3).

Wiley : 219– 230.

doi : 10.1111/j.1728-4465.1999.00219.x .

PMID 10546313 .

Jones, Wanda K.; Smith, Jack; Kieke Jr., Burney; Wilcox, Lynne (September 1997).

"Female genital mutilation/female circumcision: who is at risk in the US?" .

Public Health Reports .

112 (5): 368– 377.

PMC 1381943 .

PMID 9323387 .

Pdf.

Kelly, Liz (December 2005). "Inside outsiders: Mainstreaming violence against women into human rights discourse and practice".

International Feminist Journal of Politics .

7 (4).

Taylor and Francis : 471– 495.

doi : 10.1080/14616740500284391 .

S2CID 143985481 .

Mackie, Gerry (June 2003). "Female genital cutting: a harmless practice?".

Medical Anthropology Quarterly .

17 (2).

Wiley on behalf of the American Anthropological Association : 135– 158.

doi : 10.1525/maq.2003.17.2.135 .

JSTOR 3655332 .

PMID 12846114 .

Pdf.

Archived 9 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine Miles, Rosalind (1988).

Who Cooked the Last Supper? The Womens History of the World . Three Rivers Press.

ISBN 0-609-80695-5 .

Seftaoui, Jamila (2009) Bringing Security Home: Combating Violence against Women in the OSCE Region; A Compilation of Good Practices.

Vienna: OSCE Secretariat, OSG/Gender Section, ISBN 9789292345341 (also published in French and Russian translations) Shell-Duncan, Bettina; Herniund, Yiva (August 2006).

"Are there "Stages of Change" in the practice of female genital cutting?: Qualitative research findings from Senegal and The Gambia" .

African Journal of Reproductive Health .

10 (2). Women's Health and Action Research Centre (WHARC): 57– 71.

doi : 10.2307/30032459 .

JSTOR 30032459 .

PMID 17217118 .

Skaine, Rosemarie (2005).

Female genital mutilation: legal, cultural, and medical issues . Jefferson, North Caroline: McFarland & Company, Inc.

ISBN 9780786421671 .

Wagner, Natascha (March 2013).

Why female genital cutting persist?

(PDF) . Working Paper. University of Rotterdam. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 May 2022 . Retrieved 20 December 2017 .

True, Jacqui (2012).

The political economy of violence against women . New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199755912 .

Wakabi, Wairagala (31 March 2007). "Africa battles to make female genital mutilation history".

The Lancet .

369 (9567).

Elsevier : 1069– 1070.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60508-X .

PMID 17405200 .

S2CID 29006442 .

Williams, Lindy; Sobieszczyk, Teresa (November 1997). "Attitudes surrounding the continuation of female circumcision in the Sudan: passing the tradition to the next generation".

Journal of Marriage and Family .

59 (4).

Wiley : 966– 981.

doi : 10.2307/353796 .

JSTOR 353796 .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Violence against women .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Violence against women .

Violence against women , a factsheet on ECtHR case law Virtual Knowledge Centre to End Violence against Women and Girls (in English, French, and Spanish) UN Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences World Health Organization's reports on FGM , Health complications of female genital mutilation v t e Domestic violence General Outline Abuse Controlling behavior Conflict tactics scale Cycle of abuse Cycle of violence Epidemiology Traumatic bonding Forms Sexual Genital modification and mutilation Marital rape Birth control sabotage Reproductive coercion Sexual violence by intimate partners Physical Acid attack Bride burning Domestic violence and pregnancy Dowry death Honor killing Murder of pregnant women Sati Situational couple violence Psychological Bullying Deny, attack, and reverse victim and offender (DARVO) Economic abuse Embarrassment / Humiliation Emotional blackmail False accusation Gaslighting Intimidation Major depressive disorder Mind games Nagging Narcissistic abuse Passive-aggressive behavior Setting up to fail Silent treatment Stalking Verbal abuse Victims Adults Bride buying Domestic violence against men Domestic violence and pregnancy Elder abuse Intimate partner violence Lesbian Mariticide Misandry Misogyny Parental abuse by children Same-sex relationships Social emotional development Uxoricide Children Adverse childhood experiences Child abuse Effects of domestic violence on children Narcissistic parent Parental bullying of children Sibling abuse Stress in early childhood Prevention Domestic violence hotlines Duluth model Management of domestic violence Women's shelter Prevention initiatives Country Argentina Armenia Albania Australia Bangladesh Bolivia Brazil Chile China Colombia Ecuador Ghana Guyana India Iran Mexico Kenya Lithuania New Zealand Norway Nigeria Norway Pakistan Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Romania Russia Samoa Saudi Arabia South Africa South Korea Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Uganda United Kingdom United States Religion Domestic violence in Christian culture Domestic violence in Islamic culture Experts Academics Jacquelyn Campbell Kenneth Dodge Emily Douglas Mary Ellsberg David Finkelhor Nicola Graham-Kevan Denise Hines Linda Saltzman Murray Straus Activists Ruahine Albert Angela Barker Sarah Buel Elizabeth Celi Anne Cools Donna Ferrato Karen Ingala Smith Ellen Pence Erin Pizzey Deborah Tucker Media Documentaries A Better Man The Conspiracy of Silence Defending Our Lives Power and Control: Domestic Violence in America Silent Voices Sin by Silence Other films American Tragedy Black and Blue Blinded Bordertown The Burning Bed Our Mother's Murder Enough Looking for Angelina Once Were Warriors One Minute to Nine Provoked Sleeping with the Enemy Submission What's Love Got to Do with It Books Life with Billy Mommie Dearest The War on Women Periodicals Contemporary Family Therapy Family Process Family Relations Journal of Family Issues Journal of Interpersonal Violence Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society Trauma, Violence, & Abuse Violence Against Women Organizations Gulabi Gang ManKind Initiative National Coalition Against Domestic Violence National Domestic Violence Hotline Nia Refuge Respect Legal Battered woman defense Domestic violence court v t e Abuse Types Adverse childhood experiences Anti-social behaviour Bullying Child abuse neglect sexual military marriage Cruelty to animals Disability abuse military draft Domestic abuse Elder abuse Financial Marriage Gaslighting Harassment Humiliation Incivility Institutional abuse Intimidation Neglect Persecution Professional abuse Psychological abuse Physical abuse Police brutality Religious abuse Social abuse Sexual abuse Stalking Structural abuse Substance abuse Alcohol abuse Surveillance abuse Referee and umpire abuse Verbal abuse more...

Related topics Abusive supervision Abuse of power Controlling behavior Complex post-traumatic stress disorder Dehumanization Denial Destabilisation Discrimination Exaggeration Just-world fallacy Lying Manipulation Minimisation Narcissism Playing the victim Psychological projection Psychological trauma Psychopathy Rationalization Sexual grooming Traumatic bonding Victim blaming Victimisation Victimology v t e Violence against women by country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Ethiopia Morocco Namibia Nigeria South Africa Uganda Asia Afghanistan Bangladesh Cambodia China India Israel Pakistan Philippines Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates Vietnam Americas Argentina Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Guatemala Mexico Peru United States Venezuela Europe Belarus Belgium France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Spain United Kingdom Ukraine Oceania Australia Fiji New Zealand Transcontinental Russia Turkey v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases International FAST National Czech Republic Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9r4b6
Cached time: 20250817132853
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.893 seconds
Real time usage: 4.255 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 28264/1000000
Revision size: 260940/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1167198/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 39230/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 55/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1675654/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.573/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11823679/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3530.420      1 -total
 62.32% 2200.157      1 Template:Reflist
 17.88%  631.345     97 Template:Cite_journal
 15.00%  529.555     96 Template:Cite_book
 12.50%  441.226     97 Template:Cite_news
 10.98%  387.812     94 Template:Cite_web
  7.29%  257.422      1 Template:Discrimination_sidebar
  7.25%  255.795      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.75%  238.256      9 Template:Excerpt
  4.67%  164.825      2 Template:Sfnp Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3634424:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817132853 and revision id 1303507802. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Violence_against_women&oldid=1303507802 " Categories : Violence against women Sex industry Feminism and health Gender-related violence Misogyny Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2012 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1: long volume value CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2025 CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected from banned users Use dmy dates from April 2025 Articles with excerpts Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from January 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Free-content attribution Free content from UNESCO Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 11:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Violence against women 65 languages Add topic

