Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concepts Toggle Concepts subsection 1.1 Costs rather than outlays 1.2 Hidden costs 1.3 Overhead and indirect costs 1.4 Past and future outlays 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 Waste management 2.1.1 Benefits 2.2 Food and Agriculture 3 Motives for adoption 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Environmental full-cost accounting 3 languages العربية Hausa Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cost accounting method Environmental full-cost accounting ( EFCA ) is a  method of cost accounting that traces direct costs and allocates indirect costs [ 1 ] by collecting and presenting information about the possible environmental costs and benefits or advantages – in short, about the " triple bottom line " – for each proposed alternative. It is one aspect of true cost accounting (TCA), along with Human capital and Social capital. As definitions for "true" and "full" are inherently subjective, experts consider both terms problematic.

[ n 1 ] Since costs and advantages are usually considered in terms of environmental , economic and social impacts, full or true cost efforts are collectively called the "triple bottom line". Many standards now exist in this area including Ecological Footprint , eco-labels , and the International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives ' approach to triple bottom line using the ecoBudget metric. The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has several accredited standards useful in FCA or TCA including for greenhouse gases , the ISO 26000 series for corporate social responsibility coming in 2010, and the ISO 19011 standard for audits including all these.

Because of this evolution of terminology in the public sector use especially, the term full-cost accounting is now more commonly used in management accounting , e.g. infrastructure management and finance. Use of the terms FCA or TCA usually indicate relatively conservative extensions of current management practices, and incremental improvements to GAAP to deal with waste output or resource input.

These have the advantage of avoiding the more contentious questions of social cost.

Concepts [ edit ] Full-cost accounting embodies several key concepts that distinguish it from standard accounting techniques. The following list highlights the basic tenets of FCA.

Accounting for: Costs rather than outlays (see explanation below); Hidden costs and externalities; Overhead and indirect costs; Past and future outlays; Costs according to lifecycle of the product.

Costs rather than outlays [ edit ] Expenditure of cash to acquire or use a resource. A cost is the cash value of the resource as it is used. For example, an outlay is made when a vehicle is purchased, but the cost of the vehicle is incurred over its active life (e.g., ten years). The cost of the vehicle must be allocated over a period of time because every year of its use contributes to the depreciation of the vehicle's value.

Hidden costs [ edit ] The value of goods and services is reflected as a cost even if no cash outlay is involved. One community might receive a grant from a state, for example, to purchase equipment. This equipment has value, even though the community did not pay for it in cash. The equipment, therefore, should be valued in an FCA analysis.

Government subsidies in the energy and food production industries keep true costs low through artificially cheap product pricing . This price manipulation encourages unsustainable practices and further hides negative externalities endemic to fossil fuel production and modern mechanized agriculture .

Overhead and indirect costs [ edit ] FCA accounts for all overhead and indirect costs, including those that are shared with other public agencies. Overhead and indirect costs might include legal services , administrative support, data processing , billing , and purchasing. Environmental costs as indirect costs include the full range of costs throughout the life-cycle of a product ( Life cycle assessment ), some of which even do not show up in the firm's bottom line.

[ 2 ] It also contains fixed overhead, fixed administration expense etc.

Past and future outlays [ edit ] Past and future cash outlays often do not appear on annual budgets under cash accounting systems. Past (or upfront) costs are initial investments necessary to implement services such as the acquisition of vehicles, equipment, or facilities. Future (or back-end) outlays are costs incurred to complete  operations such as facility closure and postclosure care, equipment retirement, and post-employment health and retirement benefits.

Examples [ edit ] Car life cycle Waste management [ edit ] The State of Florida uses the term full-cost accounting for its solid waste management. In this instance, FCA is a systematic approach for identifying, summing, and reporting the actual costs of solid waste management . It takes into account past and future outlays, overhead (oversight and support services) costs, and operating costs.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Integrated solid waste management systems consist of a variety of municipal solid waste (MSW) activities and paths. Activities are the building blocks of the system, which may include waste collection , operation of transfer stations , transport to waste management facilities , waste processing and disposal, and sale of byproducts. Paths are the directions that MSW follows in the course of integrated solid waste management (i.e., the point of generation through processing and ultimate disposition) and include recycling , composting , waste-to-energy , and landfill disposal. The cost of some activities is shared between paths. Understanding the costs of MSW activities is often necessary for compiling the costs of the entire solid waste system, and helps municipalities evaluate whether to provide a service itself or contract out for it. However, in considering changes that affect how much MSW ends up being recycled, composted, converted to energy, or landfilled, the analyst should focus the costs of the different paths. Understanding the full costs of each MSW path is an essential first step in discussing whether to shift the flows of MSW one way another.

Benefits [ edit ] Identify the costs of MSW management When municipalities handle MSW services through general tax funds , the costs of MSW management can get lost among other expenditures. With FCA, managers can have more control over MSW costs because they know what the costs are.

See through the peaks and valleys in MSW cash expenditures Using techniques such as depreciation and amortization , FCA produces a more accurate picture of the costs of MSW programs, without the distortions that can result from focusing solely on a given year's cash expenditures.

Explain MSW costs to citizens more clearly FCA helps you collect and compile the information needed to explain to citizens what solid waste management actually costs. Although some people might think that solid waste management is free (because they are not billed specifically for MSW services), others might overestimate its cost. FCA can result in "bottom line" numbers that speak directly to residents. In addition, public officials can use FCA results to respond to specific public concerns.

Adopt a business-like approach to MSW management By focusing attention on costs, FCA fosters a more businesslike approach to MSW management. Consumers of goods and services increasingly expect value, which means an appropriate balance between quality and cost of service. FCA can help identify opportunities for streamlining services, eliminating inefficiencies, and facilitating cost-saving efforts through informed planning and decision-making.

Develop a stronger position in negotiating with vendors When considering privatization of MSW services, solid waste managers can use FCA to learn what it costs (or would cost) to do the work. As a result, FCA better positions public agencies for negotiations and decision-making. FCA also can help communities with publicly run operations determine whether their costs are competitive with the private sector.

Evaluate the appropriate mix of MSW services FCA gives managers the ability to evaluate the cost of each element of their solid waste system, such as recycling, composting, waste-to-energy, and landfilling. FCA can help managers avoid common mistakes in thinking about solid waste management, notably the error of treating avoided costs as revenues.

Fine-tune MSW programs As more communities use FCA and report the results, managers might be able to "benchmark" their operations to similar communities or norms. This comparison can suggest options for "re-engineering" current operations. Furthermore, when cities, counties, and towns know what it costs to manage MSW independently, they can better identify any savings that might come from working together.

Food and Agriculture [ edit ] Over the last ten years there has been considerable attention on Full Cost Accounting (FCA) or True Cost Accounting (TCA) in the field of food and agriculture. In 2013 and 2016, the Sustainable Food Trust organised two conferences on True Cost Accounting in food and farming, in the UK and the USA respectively.

[ 5 ] The FAO published two studies in 2014 and 2015 with a TCA-analysis of the impact of food wastage ("Food wastage footprint: full cost accounting" [ 6 ] ) and another TCA-analysis of the total impact of world food production on Natural Capital ("Natural Capital Impacts in Agriculture" [ 7 ] ). In the first report, the FAO came to the conclusion that the yearly hidden impact of food wastage on Natural Capital amounted to USD 700 billion while the hidden impact on social capital amounted to USD 900 billion dollars. In the second report, the FAO estimated the environmental damage of the world food production at USD 2330 billion per year.

Motives for adoption [ edit ] Various motives for adoption of FCA/TCA have been identified.  The most significant of which tend to involve anticipating market or regulatory problems associated with ignoring the comprehensive outcome of the whole process or event accounted for.

In green economics , this is the major concern and basis for critiques of such measures as GDP .

The public sector has tended to move more towards longer term measures to avoid accusations of political favoritism towards specific solutions that seem to make financial or economic sense in the short term, but not longer term.

Corporate decision makers sometimes call on FCA/TCA measures to decide whether to initiate recalls , practice voluntary product stewardship (a form of recall at the end of a product's useful life).  This can be motivated as a way to reduce future liabilities arising from those who are negatively affected by the waste a product becomes.  Advanced theories of FCA, such as Natural Step , focus firmly on these.  According to Ray Anderson , who instituted a form of FCA/TCA at Interface Carpet, used it to rule out decisions that increase Ecological Footprint and focus the company more clearly on a sustainable marketing strategy.

The urban ecology and industrial ecology approaches inherently advocate FCA — treating the built environment as a sort of ecosystem to minimize its own wastes.

See also [ edit ] Environmental accounting Environmental pricing reform Environmental profit and loss account Externalities Genuine Progress Indicator Opportunity cost Pollution credit Total cost Total cost of ownership True cost accounting Whole-life cost Notes [ edit ] ^ See Green economics .

References [ edit ] ^ Schaltegger, S. & Burritt, R. (2000), Contemporary Environmental Accounting: Issues, Concepts and Practice , Sheffield: Greenleaf Publishing, p. 111.

^ Schaltegger, S. & Burritt, R. (2000): Contemporary Environmental Accounting. Issues, Concepts and Practice. Sheffield: Greenleaf Publ., p.112 ^ Solid Waste Full Cost Accounting , www.dep.state.fl.us , Department of Environmental Protection, Florida, Accessed 24.11.06 ^ Full Cost Accounting on Municipal Solid Waste Management at US-EPA , www.epa.gov , US Environmental Protection Agency, Accessed 24.11.06 ^ True Cost Accounting , sustainablefoodtrust.org , Sustainable Food Trust, Accessed 20.06.20.

^ Food wastage footprint , www.fao.org , FAO, Accessed 12.06.20.

^ Natural Capital Impacts in Agriculture , www.fao.org , FAO, Accessed 20.06.20.

v t e Industrial ecology Tools Agent-based model Cost–benefit analysis DPSIR Ecolabel Ecological footprint Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental impact assessment Environmental management system EIO-LCA Input–output model Integrated chain management ISO 14000 Life-cycle assessment Life-cycle cost analysis Material flow analysis MET Matrix Stakeholder analysis Concepts Circular economy Cradle-to-cradle design Dematerialization Eco-efficiency Eco-industrial development Eco-industrial park Ecological modernization Efficient energy use Exergy Extended producer responsibility Industrial metabolism Industrial symbiosis Polluter pays principle Precautionary principle Rebound effect Waste hierarchy Waste minimisation Waste valorization Related fields Cleaner production Design for environment Earth systems engineering and management Ecological economics Ecological modernization Environmental economics Green chemistry Sustainable development Urban ecology Urban metabolism v t e Social and environmental accountability Ethics and principles Aarhus Convention Climate justice Corporate accountability / behaviour / environmental responsibility / responsibility / social responsibility Dirty hands Environmental racism / in Russia / in the United States / in Western Europe / inequality in the UK / injustice in Europe Ethical banking Ethical code Extended producer responsibility Externality Harm Little Eichmanns Loss and damage Organizational ethics Organizational justice Pollution Principles for Responsible Investment Racism Social impact assessment Social justice Social responsibility Stakeholder theory Sullivan principles Transparency (behavioral social) UN Global Compact Social accounting Corporate crime Double bottom line Ethical positioning index Higg Index Impact assessment ( environmental equality social ) ISO 26000 ISO 45001 Genuine progress indicator Performance indicator SA 8000 OHSAS 18001 Social return on investment Whole-life cost Environmental accounting Carbon accounting Eco-Management and Audit Scheme Emission inventory Environmental full-cost accounting / Environmental conflict / impact assessment / management system / profit-and-loss account ISO 14000 ISO 14031 Life-cycle assessment Pollutant release and transfer register Sustainability accounting / measurement / metrics and indices / standards and certification / supply chain Toxics Release Inventory Triple bottom line Reporting Global Reporting Initiative GxP guidelines Sustainability reporting Auditing Community-based monitoring Environmental ( certification ) Fair trade ( certification ) ISO 19011 Related Bangladesh Accord Benefit corporation Child labour Community interest company Conflict of interest Disasters Disinvestment Eco-labeling Environmental degradation Environmental pricing reform Environmental, social, and corporate governance Ethical consumerism Euthenics Global justice movement Health impact assessment Market governance mechanism Product certification Public participation SDG Publishers Compact Social enterprise Socially responsible business Socially responsible investing Socially responsible marketing Stakeholder ( engagement ) Supply chain management Environment portal Category Commons Organizations NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐shkfq
Cached time: 20250812054852
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.163 seconds
Real time usage: 0.215 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 666/1000000
Revision size: 13276/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 32282/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 544/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 22339/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.081/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2006564/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  152.260      1 -total
 49.76%   75.761      2 Template:Navbox
 43.05%   65.546      1 Template:Industrial_ecology
 35.86%   54.600      1 Template:Short_description
 19.50%   29.683      2 Template:Pagetype
 10.97%   16.697      4 Template:Main_other
  9.93%   15.112      1 Template:SDcat
  8.72%   13.274      1 Template:Social_accountability
  8.70%   13.243      2 Template:Reflist
  4.06%    6.185      3 Template:Icon Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:188644:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812054852 and revision id 1301527453. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_full-cost_accounting&oldid=1301527453 " Categories : Industrial ecology Ecological economics Management accounting Waste management concepts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 09:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental full-cost accounting 3 languages Add topic

