Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Depth and layers Toggle Depth and layers subsection 1.1 Epipelagic (sunlight) 1.2 Mesopelagic (twilight) 1.3 Bathypelagic (midnight) 1.4 Abyssopelagic (abyssal zone) 1.5 Hadopelagic (hadal zone) 2 Pelagic ecosystem Toggle Pelagic ecosystem subsection 2.1 Pelagic invertebrates 2.2 Pelagic fish 2.3 Pelagic reptiles 2.4 Pelagic birds 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Pelagic zone 55 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Pelagic ) Water column of the open ocean "Pelagic" and "Open sea" redirect here. For the writer, see Vasa Pelagić . For the marketplace, see OpenSea . For ocean not controlled by any sovereign territory, also called the "high seas", see International waters .

Layers of the pelagic zone (scaled) Marine habitats Coastal habitats Littoral zone Intertidal zone Estuaries Mangrove forests Seagrass meadows Kelp forests Coral reefs Continental shelf Neritic zone Ocean surface Surface microlayer Epipelagic zone Open ocean Pelagic zone Oceanic zone Sea floor Seamounts Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Benthic zone Marine sediment v t e The pelagic zone consists of the water column of the open ocean and can be further divided into regions by depth . The word pelagic is derived from Ancient Greek πέλαγος ( pélagos ) ' open sea ' .

[ 1 ] The pelagic zone can be thought of as an imaginary cylinder or water column between the surface of the sea and the bottom .

Conditions in the water column change with depth: pressure increases; temperature and light decrease; salinity, oxygen, micronutrients (such as iron, magnesium and calcium) all change. In a manner analogous to stratification in the Earth's atmosphere , the water column can be divided vertically into up to five different layers (illustrated in the diagram), with the number of layers depending on the depth of the water.

Marine life is affected by bathymetry (underwater topography) such as the seafloor, shoreline, or a submarine seamount , as well as by proximity to the boundary between the ocean and the atmosphere at the ocean surface, which brings light for photosynthesis, predation from above, and wind stirring up waves and setting currents in motion. The pelagic zone refers to the open, free waters away from the shore, where marine life can swim freely in any direction unhindered by topographical constraints.

The oceanic zone is the deep open ocean beyond the continental shelf , which contrasts with the inshore waters near the coast , such as in estuaries or on the continental shelf. Waters in the oceanic zone plunge to the depths of the abyssopelagic and further to the hadopelagic . Coastal waters are generally the relatively shallow epipelagic. Altogether, the pelagic zone occupies 1.33 billion km 3 (320 million cu mi), with a mean depth of 3.68 km (2.29 mi) and maximum depth of 11 km (6.8 mi).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Pelagic life decreases as depth increases.

The pelagic zone contrasts with the benthic and demersal zones at the bottom of the sea. The benthic zone is the ecological region at the very bottom, including the sediment surface and some subsurface layers. Marine organisms such as clams and crabs living in this zone are called benthos . Just above the benthic zone is the demersal zone.

Demersal fish can be divided into benthic fish , which are denser than water and rest on the bottom, and benthopelagic fish , which swim just above the bottom. Demersal fish are also known as bottom feeders and groundfish .

Depth and layers [ edit ] Aquatic layers Pelagic Photic Epipelagic Aphotic Mesopelagic Bathypelagic Abyssopelagic Hadopelagic Demersal Benthic Stratification Pycnocline Isopycnal Chemocline Nutricline Halocline Thermocline Thermohaline See also Marine habitats Lake stratification Ocean stratification Aquatic ecosystems Wild fisheries v t e The pelagic zone is subdivided into five vertical regions. From the top down, these are: Epipelagic (sunlight) [ edit ] See also: Photic zone and Epipelagic fish From the surface ( MSL ) down to around 200 m (660 ft) The illuminated zone at the surface of the sea with sufficient light for photosynthesis. Nearly all primary production in the ocean occurs here, and marine life is concentrated in this zone, including plankton , floating seaweed , jellyfish , tuna , many sharks and dolphins .

[ citation needed ] Mesopelagic (twilight) [ edit ] See also: Mesopelagic zone and Pelagic fish § Mesopelagic fish From 200 m (660 ft) down to around 1,000 m (3,300 ft) The most abundant organisms thriving into the mesopelagic zone are heterotrophic bacteria.

[ 5 ] Creatures living in this zone include swordfish , squid , wolffish and some species of cuttlefish . Many organisms living here are bioluminescent .

[ 6 ] Some mesopelagic creatures rise to the epipelagic zone at night to feed.

[ 6 ] Bathypelagic (midnight) [ edit ] See also: Bathyal zone and Pelagic fish § Bathypelagic fish From 1,000 m (3,300 ft) down to around 4,000 m (13,000 ft) The name stems from Ancient Greek βαθύς ' deep ' . The ocean is pitch black at this depth apart from occasional bioluminescent organisms, such as anglerfish . No plants live here. Most creatures survive on detritus known as " marine snow " falling from the zones above or, like the marine hatchetfish , by preying on other inhabitants of this zone. Other examples of this zone's inhabitants are giant squid , smaller squid , viperfish , gulper eel , and dumbo octopus .

Abyssopelagic (abyssal zone) [ edit ] Main article: Abyssal zone From around 4,000 m (13,000 ft) down to above the ocean floor The name is derived from Ancient Greek ἄβυσσος ' bottomless ' – a holdover from times when the deep ocean was believed to be bottomless. Among the very few creatures living in the cold temperatures, high pressures and complete darkness here are several species of squid; echinoderms including the basket star , swimming cucumber, and the sea pig ; and marine arthropods including the sea spider . Many species at these depths are transparent and eyeless.

[ 6 ] Hadopelagic (hadal zone) [ edit ] Main article: Hadal zone The name is derived from the realm of Hades , the Greek underworld . This is the deepest part of the ocean at more than 6,000 m (20,000 ft) or 6,500 m (21,300 ft), depending on authority. Such depths are generally located in trenches .

[ citation needed ] Pelagic ecosystem [ edit ] The pelagic ecosystem is based on phytoplankton . Phytoplankton manufacture their own food using a process of photosynthesis . Because they need sunlight, they inhabit the upper, sunlit epipelagic zone, which includes the coastal or neritic zone . Biodiversity diminishes markedly in the deeper zones below the epipelagic zone as dissolved oxygen diminishes, water pressure increases, temperatures become colder, food sources become scarce, and light diminishes and finally disappears.

[ 7 ] Pelagic invertebrates [ edit ] Some examples of pelagic invertebrates include krill , copepods , jellyfish , decapod larvae , hyperiid amphipods , rotifers and cladocerans .

Thorson's rule states that benthic marine invertebrates at low latitudes tend to produce large numbers of eggs developing to widely dispersing pelagic larvae, whereas at high latitudes such organisms tend to produce fewer and larger lecithotrophic (yolk-feeding) eggs and larger offspring.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Pelagic fish [ edit ] Main article: Pelagic fish Pelagic fish live in the water column of coastal, ocean, and lake waters, but not on or near the bottom of the sea or the lake. They can be contrasted with demersal fish, which do live on or near the bottom, and coral reef fish .

[ 10 ] Pelagic fish are often migratory forage fish , which feed on plankton , and the larger predatory fish that follow and feed on the forage fish. Examples of migratory forage fish are herring , anchovies , capelin , and menhaden . Examples of larger pelagic fish which prey on the forage fish are billfish , tuna , and oceanic sharks .

[ citation needed ] Pelagic reptiles [ edit ] Hydrophis platurus , the yellow-bellied sea snake, is the only one of the 65 species of marine snakes to spend its entire life in the pelagic zone. It bears live young at sea and is helpless on land. The species sometimes forms aggregations of thousands along slicks in surface waters. The yellow-bellied sea snake is the world's most widely distributed snake species.

[ citation needed ] Many species of sea turtles spend the first years of their lives in the pelagic zone, moving closer to shore as they reach maturity.

[ citation needed ] Pelagic birds [ edit ] See also: Seabird The pelagic wandering albatross ( Diomedea exulans ) ranges over huge areas of ocean and can circle the globe.

Pelagic birds , also called oceanic birds or seabirds , live on open seas and oceans rather than inland or around more restricted waters such as rivers and lakes. Pelagic birds feed on planktonic crustaceans , squid and forage fish . Examples are the Atlantic puffin , macaroni penguins , sooty terns , shearwaters , and Procellariiformes such as the albatross , Procellariidae and petrels .

[ citation needed ] Some representative ocean animals (not drawn to scale) within their approximate depth-defined ecological habitats.

Marine microorganisms also exist on the surfaces and within the tissues and organs of the diverse life inhabiting the ocean, across all ocean habitats. The animals rooted to or living on the ocean floor are not pelagic but are benthic animals.

[ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ Harper, Douglas.

"pelagic" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Costello, Mark John; Cheung, Alan; De Hauwere, Nathalie (2010). "Surface Area and the Seabed Area, Volume, Depth, Slope, and Topographic Variation for the World's Seas, Oceans, and Countries".

Environmental Science & Technology .

44 (23): 8821– 8.

Bibcode : 2010EnST...44.8821C .

doi : 10.1021/es1012752 .

PMID 21033734 .

^ Charette, Matthew; Smith, Walter (2010).

"The Volume of Earth's Ocean" .

Oceanography .

23 (2): 112– 4.

Bibcode : 2010Ocgpy..23b.112C .

doi : 10.5670/oceanog.2010.51 .

hdl : 1912/3862 .

^ Ocean's Depth and Volume Revealed Archived 23 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine OurAmazingPlanet , 19 May 2010.

^ Mazuecos, E.; Arístegui, J.; Vázquez-Domínguez, E.; Ortega-Retuerta, E.; Gasol, J.M.; Reche, I. (2012).

"Temperature control of microbial respiration and growth efficiency in the mesopelagic zone of the South Atlantic and Indian Oceans" .

Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers .

95 : 131– 138.

doi : 10.3354/ame01583 .

hdl : 10261/95626 .

^ a b c The Open Ocean - MarineBio.org ^ Walker P and Wood E (2005) The Open Ocean (volume in a series called Life in the sea ), Infobase Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8160-5705-4 .

^ Thorson, G (1957). "Bottom communities (sublittoral or shallow shelf)". In Hedgpeth, J.W. (ed.).

Treatise on Marine Ecology and Palaeoecology . Geological Society of America. pp.

461– 534.

^ Mileikovsky, S. A. (1971). "Types of larval development in marine bottom invertebrates, their distribution and ecological significance: a re-evaluation".

Marine Biology .

10 (3): 193– 213.

Bibcode : 1971MarBi..10..193M .

doi : 10.1007/BF00352809 .

S2CID 84623588 .

^ Lal, Brij V.

; Fortune, Kate (January 2000).

The Pacific Islands: An Encyclopedia . University of Hawaii Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-8248-2265-1 .

^ Apprill, A. (2017)"Marine animal microbiomes: toward understanding host–microbiome interactions in a changing ocean".

Frontiers in Marine Science , 4 : 222.

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2017.00222 .

Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .

Further reading [ edit ] Ryan, Paddy "Deep-sea creatures" Te Ara – the Encyclopedia of New Zealand , updated 21 September 2007 "Pelagic-zone (oceanography)" Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 21 March 2009.

Grantham HS, Game ET, Lombard AT, et al. (2011) "Accommodating Dynamic Oceanographic Processes and Pelagic Biodiversity in Marine Conservation Planning" PLOS One 6 (2): e16552.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0016552 .

Wrobel, David; Mills, Claudia (2003) [1998].

Pacific Coast Pelagic Invertebrates: A Guide to the Common Gelatinous Animals . Sea Challengers and Monterey Bay Aquarium.

ISBN 0-930118-23-5 .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal v t e Aquatic ecosystems General components and freshwater ecosystems General Acoustic ecology Algal bloom Anoxic waters Aquatic adaptation Aquatic animal Insect Mammal Water bird Aquatic biomonitoring Aquatic plant Aquatic population dynamics Aquatic predation Aquatic respiration Aquatic science Aquatic toxicology Benthos Bioluminescence Biomass Cascade effect Colored dissolved organic matter Dead zone Ecohydrology Eutrophication Fisheries science Food chain Food web GIS and aquatic science Hydrobiology Hypoxia Macrobenthos Meiobenthos Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial loop Nekton Neuston Particle Pelagic zone Photic zone Phytoplankton Plankton Pleuston Productivity Ramsar Convention Sediment trap Semiaquatic Shoaling and schooling Siltation Spawn Stable isotope analysis in aquatic ecosystems Stream metabolism Substrate Thermal pollution Trophic level Underwater camouflage Water column Zooplankton Freshwater Freshwater biology Freshwater biome Freshwater environmental quality parameters Freshwater fish Hyporheic zone Limnology Lake ecosystem Lake stratification Macrophyte Pond Fish pond Rheotaxis River Ecosystem Stream bed Stream pool Trophic state index Upland and lowland Water garden Wetland Bog Brackish marsh Fen Freshwater marsh Freshwater swamp forest Ecoregions List of freshwater ecoregions (WWF) Africa and Madagascar Latin America and the Caribbean List of marine ecoregions Specific examples Everglades Maharashtra North Pacific Subtropical Gyre San Francisco Estuary Marine ecosystems ( components ) General Deep scattering layer Diel vertical migration f-ratio Iron fertilization Large marine ecosystem Marine biology Marine chemistry Marine food web Marine primary production Marine snow Ocean fertilization Oceanic physical-biological process Ocean turbidity Photophore Thorson's rule Upwelling Viral shunt Whale fall Marine life Census of Marine Life Deep-sea community Deep-water coral Marine fungi Marine invertebrates Marine larval ecology Seagrass Seashore wildlife Wild fisheries Microorganisms Marine bacteriophage Marine prokaryotes Marine protists Marine viruses Paradox of the plankton Vertebrates Marine mammal Marine reptile Saltwater fish Coastal fish Coral reef fish Deep-sea fish Demersal fish Pelagic fish Seabird Marine habitats Bay mud Marine coastal ecosystem Coastal biogeomorphology Cold seep Coral reef Davidson Seamount § Ecology Estuary Intertidal ecology Intertidal wetland Kelp forest Hydrothermal vent Lagoon Mangrove Marine biomes Mudflat Oyster reef Rocky shore Salt marsh Salt pannes and pools Seagrass meadow Sponge ground Sponge reef Tide pool Conservation Coral bleaching Ecological values of mangroves Fisheries and climate change HERMIONE Human impact on marine life Marine conservation activism Marine pollution Marine protected area Lakes portal Oceans portal Category v t e Biogeographic regions Biomes Terrestrial biomes Polar/montane Tundra Taiga Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Temperate Coniferous forests Broadleaf and mixed forests Deciduous forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Tropical and subtropical Coniferous forests Cloud forest Moist broadleaf forests list Dry broadleaf forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Dry Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Deserts and xeric shrublands Steppe Wet Flooded grasslands and savannas Riparian Wetland Mangroves Aquatic biomes Pond Littoral Intertidal Kelp forests Coral reefs Neritic zone Pelagic zone Benthic zone Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Other biomes Endolithic zone Biogeographic realms Terrestrial Afrotropical Antarctic Australasian Holarctic Nearctic Palearctic Indomalayan Neotropical Oceanian Marine Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Central Indo-Pacific Eastern Indo-Pacific Temperate Australasia Temperate Northern Atlantic Temperate Northern Pacific Temperate South America Temperate Southern Africa Tropical Atlantic Tropical Eastern Pacific Western Indo-Pacific Subdivisions Biogeographic provinces Bioregions Ecoregions Lists of ecoregions Global 200 ecoregions See also Altitudinal zonation Ecological classification Floristic kingdoms Vegetation classifications Wallace Line Zoogeography Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐r75vz
Cached time: 20250814215415
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.726 seconds
Real time usage: 0.933 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4066/1000000
Revision size: 14247/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 181715/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5612/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 100208/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.451/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17409063/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  766.872      1 -total
 20.09%  154.059      1 Template:Reflist
 17.49%  134.149      1 Template:Etymology
 14.77%  113.260      2 Template:Sidebar
 13.43%  102.988      1 Template:Wikt-lang
 10.31%   79.037      1 Template:OEtymD
 10.15%   77.805      1 Template:Cite_web
  9.74%   74.676      1 Template:Ocean_habitat_topics
  8.70%   66.692      1 Template:Short_description
  8.56%   65.676      8 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:522347:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215415 and revision id 1300555464. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pelagic_zone&oldid=1300555464 " Categories : Aquatic biomes Fisheries science Oceanographical terminology Oceanography Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 01:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pelagic zone 55 languages Add topic

