Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Before Big Bang theories 2 The Big Bang theory evolves 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Big Bang (Singh book) 5 languages Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia עברית Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Popular science book by Simon Singh This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Big Bang" Singh book – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Big Bang First edition Author Simon Singh Subject The Big Bang theory Genre Nonfiction Publisher Fourth Estate Publication date 2004 ISBN 0-00-719382-3 Big Bang: The most important scientific discovery of all time and why you need to know about it is a book written by Simon Singh and published in 2004 by Fourth Estate.

Big Bang chronicles the history and development of the Big Bang model of the universe, from the ancient Greek scientists who first measured the distance to the Sun to the 20th century detection of the cosmic radiation still echoing the dawn of time.

The book discusses how different theories of the universe evolved, along with a personal look at the people involved.

Before Big Bang theories [ edit ] The book takes up how the inaccuracies of the theories of Copernicus and Galileo lead them to be dismissed. Copernicus and Galileo used false arguments to persuade people that the Earth went in circles around the Sun, and that the Sun was the center of the universe. Both these statements were alien to the public at the time, and are still alien to a modern public. Only the finally mathematically correct interpretation of Johannes Kepler made the theories accepted, within a single generation. As Singh points out, the old generation must die before a new theory can be accepted.

The Big Bang theory evolves [ edit ] In parallel to the evolution of the Big Bang theory, the book tells the personal stories of the people who played a part in advancing it, both by hypothesis and by experiment . These include Albert Einstein , for his General Relativity, Alexander Alexandrovich Friedman for first discovering that this theory led to an expanding universe, Georges Lemaître who independently of Friedman discovered an expanding universe, and then concluded the theory must lead to an initial event of creation, which is the Big Bang theory we know today, Edwin Hubble for observing that the universe expanded, thereby confirming Friedman and Lemaître, George Gamow , Ralph Asher Alpher , Robert Herman , Martin Ryle , Arno Allan Penzias and Robert Woodrow Wilson , among many others.

Another theme of the book is the scientific method itself: how serendipity , curiosity, theory and observation come together to expand our understanding of the world.

Singh notes that Einstein initially dismissed the theory out of hand; such was his authority in the scientific community that none dared oppose him, thereby stifling research in this area for many years. However, when Hubble confirmed the theory, Einstein was quick to endorse both Lemaître and his theories.

Reception [ edit ] William Grimes of The New York Times praised Singh's ability to retain the reader's entertainment and comprehension even whilst explaining difficult scientific concepts, through use of diagrams, writing and illustrations. He wrote that, "[m]ore than the history of a single theory, [ Big Bang ] is an argument for the scientific method and for the illuminating power of human reason." [ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ Grimes, William (February 2, 2005).

"Course: Cosmos Explained. Prerequisites: None" .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 31, 2022 .

External links [ edit ] "Big Bang" web page at Simon Singh's site Big Bang at GoogleBooks v t e Works by Simon Singh Fermat's Last Theorem (1997) The Code Book (1999) Big Bang (2004) Trick or Treatment?

(2008) The Simpsons and Their Mathematical Secrets (2013) This article about an astronomy -related book is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Big_Bang_(Singh_book)&oldid=1284366625 " Categories : 2004 non-fiction books Astronomy books Books by Simon Singh Popular physics books English-language non-fiction books Cosmology books Fourth Estate books Books about the history of physics Astronomy book stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from October 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All stub articles This page was last edited on 7 April 2025, at 04:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Big Bang (Singh book) 5 languages Add topic

