Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 The triumvirate 2.2 Religious experience 2.3 Students for America 2.4 Role in the Christian Coalition 2.5 1998 Georgia gubernatorial election 2.6 Century Strategies 2.7 Georgia Republican Party chairman 2.8 Campaign for lieutenant governor 2.9 Indian gambling scandals 2.10 Faith and Freedom Coalition 3 Publications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ralph Reed 7 languages العربية تۆرکجه Español Íslenska Italiano Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American political pundit (born 1961) For other people named Ralph Reed, see Ralph Reed (disambiguation) .

Ralph Reed Reed in February 2011 Chair of the Georgia Republican Party In office May 6, 2001 – February 21, 2003 Preceded by Chuck Clay [ 1 ] Succeeded by Alec Poitevint [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Personal details Born Ralph Eugene Reed Jr.

( 1961-06-24 ) June 24, 1961 (age 64) Portsmouth, Virginia , U.S.

Political party Republican Spouse JoAnne Young ​ ( m.

1987) ​ Children 4 Education University of Georgia ( AB ) Emory University ( MA , PhD ) Ralph Eugene Reed Jr.

(born June 24, 1961) is an American political consultant and lobbyist , best known as the first executive director of the Christian Coalition during the early 1990s. He sought the Republican nomination for Lieutenant Governor of Georgia but lost the primary election on July 18, 2006, to State Senator Casey Cagle . Reed started the Faith and Freedom Coalition in June 2009. He is a member of the Council for National Policy .

[ 4 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Born in Portsmouth, Virginia , to Navy ophthalmologist Ralph Reed and mother Marcy Reed, Ralph Jr. moved often as a child, but spent most of his childhood in Miami, Florida . He moved with his family to Toccoa, Georgia , in 1976, earning Eagle Scout at BSA Troop 77 [ 5 ] and graduating from Stephens County High School in 1979. He graduated from the University of Georgia with a BA in history in 1985. Reed served as a columnist and editor of the college newspaper, The Red & Black . In 1983, Reed, then a senior at the University of Georgia, wrote a column for The Red & Black with the headline "Gandhi: Ninny of the Twentieth Century." Shortly after the article ran, another student wrote that "every assertion, every quote, and several seemingly original Reed phrases may be found directly or in slightly modified form" in a commentary article by Richard Grenier . Reed was then discharged from his role on the college newspaper for plagiarism .

[ 6 ] He was a member of the Demosthenian Literary Society , the Jasper Dorsey Intercollegiate Debate Society, and College Republicans . He is also an alumnus of the Leadership Institute in Arlington, Virginia, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] an organization that teaches conservative Americans to influence public policy through activism and leadership.

[ 9 ] Reed obtained his PhD in American history from Emory University in 1991.

[ 10 ] Career [ edit ] Reed spent much of his college career as a political activist, taking six years to earn his undergraduate degree. He started with the University of Georgia College Republicans , steadily rising to state and then national leadership. He was later profiled in Gang of Five by Nina Easton , along with Grover Norquist and other young activists who got their start in the 1980s.

[ 11 ] The triumvirate [ edit ] In 1981, Reed moved to Washington, D.C.

, to intern at the College Republican National Committee (CRNC). At the CRNC, Jack Abramoff , Norquist, and Reed formed what was known as the "Abramoff-Norquist-Reed triumvirate ." Abramoff promoted Reed in 1983, appointing him to succeed Norquist as Executive Director of the CRNC. Norquist later served as president of Americans for Tax Reform , in Washington, D.C.

[ citation needed ] Religious experience [ edit ] Reed has said that, in September 1983, he had a religious experience while at Bullfeathers , an upscale pub in Capitol Hill popular with staffers (and, to a lesser extent, members) of the House of Representatives . Of the experience, Reed said, "the Holy Spirit simply demanded me to come to Jesus ". He walked outside the pub to a phone booth , thumbed through the yellow pages under "Churches," and found the Evangelical Assembly of God Church in Camp Springs , Maryland .

[ 12 ] He visited the next morning and became a born-again Christian .

[ 13 ] Students for America [ edit ] After receiving his AB he moved to Raleigh, North Carolina to help start and lead Students for America (SFA), a conservative activist group supported by U.S. Senator Jesse Helms . SFA became largely dominated by members of Maranatha Campus Ministries , and this brought Reed into contact with Ed Buckham and Jim Backlin, the current Legislative Director of the Christian Coalition . Reed's links to Tom DeLay were forged through his association with Buckham and Backlin.

[ citation needed ] SFA established chapters on college campuses up and down the East Coast and held conferences. Among other issues, SFA supported Helms' bid for re-election and organized abortion clinic protests. Reed was temporarily arrested during an abortion protest at the Fleming Center Abortion Clinic in Raleigh but was not charged with any crime. After Reed left SFA for a bigger job at the Christian Coalition , SFA faded out of existence by the early 1990s.

[ citation needed ] Role in the Christian Coalition [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Reed was hired by religious broadcaster and Presidential candidate Pat Robertson as executive director of the Christian Coalition in Virginia Beach, Virginia . Robertson, his son, Gordon P. Robertson , Dick Weinold, a Robertson activist from Texas , and Billy McCormack , a pastor from Shreveport , Louisiana , were the original four directors of the organization. McCormack also held the title of "vice president" and had been his state director of "Americans for Robertson" in 1988.

[ 14 ] Reed led the organization from 1989 to 1997. After Republicans lost in the 1996 elections many thought Reed would not be long for the Coalition, and would soon depart seeking new challenges.

[ 15 ] Some alleged that another factor in Reed's decision was an investigation by federal prosecutors due to charges made by the Christian Coalition's former chief financial officer , Judy Liebert.

[ 16 ] Reed resigned from his post, and moved to Georgia . The Coalition's finances were collapsing, and the Internal Revenue Service and Federal Election Commission were investigating.

[ citation needed ] The Coalition organized former Robertson supporters and other religious conservatives to oppose political liberalism . Eschewing confrontational tactics of street protest learned in college, Reed attempted to project a "softer" public face for Christian conservatism, self-described as " guerrilla ", putting "enemies" in " body bags " before they even realized he had struck.

[ 17 ] In the 1990s, Reed and the coalition protested the Clinton administration 's policies. They were credited with mobilizing Christian conservatives in support of Republican candidates in the 1994 Congressional elections .

[ citation needed ] Reed appeared on the cover of Time on May 15, 1995, under the title "The Right Hand of God: Ralph Reed of the Christian Coalition." In 1996, the Federal Election Commission (FEC) brought an enforcement action in United States District Court, [ 18 ] alleging Reed and the coalition "violated federal campaign finance laws during congressional elections in 1990, 1992 and 1994, and the presidential election in 1992." After a three-year investigation and lawsuit, a federal court ordered the Coalition to pay a small fine for two minor infractions, significantly less than the FEC had called for.

[ 19 ] On resigning as executive director of the Christian Coalition, Reed moved to the Atlanta, Georgia , suburb of Duluth to begin a career as a political consultant and lobbyist.

[ citation needed ] 1998 Georgia gubernatorial election [ edit ] Main article: 1998 Georgia gubernatorial election In late 1997, Reed joined the campaign of Fulton County Commission Chairman Mitch Skandalakis for lieutenant governor of Georgia , becoming its general consultant. In addition to planning campaign strategy, Reed appeared in advertisements, identifying himself as the former head of the Christian Coalition and vouching for Skandalakis's conservative credentials and personal integrity.

[ citation needed ] In the primary, Skandalakis placed first among the five Republican candidates, but did not receive a majority of the vote and was forced into a run-off with second-place finisher State Senator Clint Day. Reed planned a series of advertisements that included charges that Day had "desecrated Indian graves" on a plot of land owned by a Day family foundation. The Skandalakis campaign held a conference at which tribal leaders, wearing headdress and other ceremonial clothing, attacked Day as a "vandal" and " grave robber ." [ citation needed ] Reed's strategy initially met with success, as Skandalakis narrowly defeated Day in the Republican primary run-off. But Skandalakis lost the general election.

[ citation needed ] Century Strategies [ edit ] While running the Skandalakis campaign in 1997, Reed co-founded Century Strategies with political strategist Tim Phillips .

[ 20 ] Century Strategies describes itself as "one of the nation's leading public affairs and public relations firms." While initially engaged primarily in campaign consulting for Republican candidates its mission evolved into advocacy and lobbying.

[ citation needed ] Reed helped Alabama Governor Fob James win renomination in a bitterly contested Republican primary, only to become the first Republican in over a decade to lose the Alabama governor's election. Immediately after the 1998 election, Reed shifted gears to corporate work. In 1999, Abramoff helped Reed get hired [ 21 ] as a consultant subcontractor for Preston Gates & Ellis .

[ citation needed ] Reed is credited with attacks on Senator John McCain in the 2000 South Carolina presidential primary, together with Roberta Combs, then head of the South Carolina Christian Coalition, who later took over the national Christian Coalition. Bush's defeat of McCain in that primary came at a key moment and ended McCain's early momentum from an upset victory in the New Hampshire primary.

[ citation needed ] Reed's $20,000 per month contract with Microsoft [ 22 ] proved a minor embarrassment to the Bush campaign in the summer of 2000 when it was revealed that the software giant, which was being prosecuted for antitrust violations, had hired a number of Bush aides as consultants and lobbyists. Reed apologized for the "appearance of conflict" but continued to accept the money until 2005, when Microsoft terminated Reed amid the Indian gaming scandal.

[ citation needed ] Some conservatives have criticized Reed's choice of clients and suggested that he has inappropriately profited from his credentials as a conservative Christian leader. The conservative Alabama group Obligation, Inc. is a fierce critic of Reed's client Channel One News , arguing that the company pumps classrooms full of "commercials for junk food and sleazy movies." [ citation needed ] In 1999, Reed's firm sent out a mailer to Alabama conservative Christians asking them to call then-Representative Bob Riley and tell him to vote against legislation that would have made the Northern Mariana Islands subject to federal wage and worker safety laws. Abramoff represented the commonwealth as a partner of Greenberg Traurig and received $4.04 million from 1998 to 2002. Greenberg Traurig, in turn, hired Reed's firm to print the mailing.

[ citation needed ] Georgia Republican Party chairman [ edit ] In 2001, Reed mounted a campaign for State Chairman of the Georgia Republican Party , a volunteer job. His candidacy attracted national media attention, and challenges from three opponents.

[ citation needed ] Reed's principal opponent was David Shafer , a former executive director of the Georgia Republican Party recruited to the race by Congressman John Linder . Shafer campaigned on Republican gains made when he served as state executive director in the early 1990s, but was hampered by his subsequent association with the failed campaigns of Mack Mattingly , Guy Millner and Clint Day in the later half of the decade.

[ citation needed ] The state convention, held at the Cobb Galleria in May 2001, was the most heavily attended and longest running in the history of the party. Reed won on the first ballot, capturing almost 60% of the delegate vote to Shafer's 40%. Lobbyist Maria Rose Strollo won 1%.

[ citation needed ] Reed was endorsed by the "Confederate Republican Caucus," a block of almost 500 "heritage" activists who had participated in the state convention as a protest against the removal of the Confederate battle emblem from the State Flag . The organization later claimed it had been "double-crossed" by Reed.

[ 23 ] Documents released by federal investigators in 2005 show that Reed's 2001 campaign for State Chairman was partially financed with contributions from the Choctaws , an Indian gaming tribe represented by Abramoff.

[ citation needed ] The party experienced success in the 2002 elections under Reed's leadership.

Saxby Chambliss was elected U.S. senator and Sonny Perdue was elected governor. Reed, however, was asked to relinquish his job as State Chairman by Perdue, whose long-shot candidacy was largely ignored by Reed in favor of Chambliss.

[ citation needed ] Reed supported the candidacy of Congressman Bob Barr , who had moved into the neighboring district of Congressman John Linder and challenged his renomination. Linder decisively defeated Barr.

[ citation needed ] Campaign for lieutenant governor [ edit ] See also: Georgia statewide elections, 2006 Speculation about a Reed candidacy for Lieutenant Governor began building shortly after the 2004 general election . Republican party leaders were unenthusiastic about the candidacy of Insurance Commissioner John Oxendine , who had been "exploring" a race for Lieutenant Governor for over a year. Aides to Governor Sonny Perdue tried to recruit House Republican Leader Jerry Keen as a candidate for Lieutenant Governor, while State Senators Casey Cagle and Bill Stephens jockeyed for support among Senate Republicans.

[ citation needed ] Reed claimed support of the White House, access to the Bush fundraising apparatus and command of a large grass roots organization. His official declaration of candidacy on February 17, 2005 largely cleared the field of opposition; Keen, Stephens and Oxendine all left the race. Keen, a former state chairman of the Christian Coalition, was the first to drop, followed quickly by Stephens. Although insisting at the time of Reed's entry into the race that he would "never" withdraw, Oxendine ended his candidacy two weeks later. Only Cagle, a relatively unknown lawmaker, remained in the race to challenge Reed.

[ citation needed ] A poll conducted for Oxendine was the first indication of trouble for Reed.

[ 24 ] Released shortly before Oxendine's exit from the race, the poll showed Oxendine defeating Reed among likely Republican voters by a large margin. It also showed Reed losing the general election to the only announced Democratic candidate for Lieutenant Governor, former State Senator Greg Hecht . Little attention was paid to the poll because Oxendine folded his own candidacy shortly after it was released. Reed himself dismissed the poll as a face-saving gesture by an embarrassed Oxendine.

[ citation needed ] Reed's campaign experienced a loss of momentum with revelations about his role in the Jack Abramoff Indian lobbying scandal . Email documents released in the investigation revealed details about Reed's financial relationships with Abramoff.

[ 25 ] Reed's early lead in fund-raising evaporated by December 31, 2005, when disclosure reports showed Cagle raising almost twice as much money as Reed in the last six months of the year.

[ citation needed ] Bob Irvin , a former U.S. House of Representatives Republican leader, was the first prominent Republican to publicly call on Reed to withdraw from the race.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] 21 state senators signed a letter in February 2006 calling on Reed to withdraw from the race, "declaring that his ties to Washington lobbyist Jack Abramoff could jeopardize the re-election of Gov. Sonny Perdue and the rest of the GOP ticket.” Reed rejected the petition as a useless stunt, and expressed confidence that his record and ideas would prevail.

[ 28 ] Aides to Speaker of the House Glenn Richardson, ostensibly neutral in the race, released a poll that showed Reed's mounting negatives could hurt Perdue and the Republican ticket. On March 21, 2006, political consultant Matt Towery of Insider Advantage released a poll showing Reed represented an eight-point drag on the Perdue ticket.

[ 29 ] Insurance Commissioner John Oxendine , whose ambitions had been upended by Reed's candidacy, endorsed Cagle in June 2006, saying that Reed's nomination threatened the success of the Republican ticket.

[ citation needed ] Two dozen members of the Reed steering committee, including a Reed State Co-Chairman, resigned from the Reed campaign and endorsed Cagle, but Reed continued his pursuit of the nomination.

[ citation needed ] New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani traveled to Georgia to campaign for Reed. A Democrat, conservative former United States Senator Zell Miller , also endorsed Reed.

[ citation needed ] On July 18, 2006, Reed lost the Republican primary to Cagle with 44% of the vote to Cagle's 56%. According to Politics1.com, Reed indicated he would not likely seek elective office ever again.

[ 30 ] Indian gambling scandals [ edit ] See also: Jack Abramoff Indian lobbying scandal Reed was named, but never charged with any wrongdoing, in the scandal arising from lobbying work Jack Abramoff performed on behalf of Indian gambling tribes. Emails released by federal investigators in 2005 revealed that Reed secretly accepted payments from Abramoff to lobby against Indian casino gambling and oppose an Alabama education lottery [ 25 ] and that Reed also worked for another Abramoff client seeking to block a congressional ban on Internet gambling. These cases are being investigated by multiple federal and state grand juries and by the U.S. Senate Committee on Indian Affairs . Abramoff pleaded guilty to three felony counts in federal court, raising the prospects of Abramoff testifying against others.

[ citation needed ] Those emails and other evidence revealed the participation of the Christian Coalition in the alleged fraud, particularly its Alabama chapter, which received large amounts of donations from the casino money. It is alleged that Abramoff engaged Reed to set up an anti-gambling campaign to include the U.S. Family Network , the Christian Coalition, and Focus on the Family in order to frighten the tribes into spending as much as $82 million for Abramoff to lobby on their behalf. To represent him in connection with the scandal, Reed retained defense attorney W. Neil Eggleston , then of Debevoise & Plimpton LLP. Eggleston served as White House associate counsel during the administration of President Bill Clinton .

[ citation needed ] In 2004, Reed confirmed that he had been paid more than $1 million in fees by lobbyists working on behalf of American Indian casinos.

[ 31 ] In December 2005, three Texas public interest groups filed a complaint with Travis County Attorney David Escamilla on December 1, 2005, alleging that Reed failed to register as a lobbyist in 2001 or 2002 when he was working for Abramoff.

[ 32 ] Escamilla said on March 27, 2006, "his office had concluded its investigation—but that a two-year statute of limitations on misdemeanors from 2001 and 2002 had expired." [ 33 ] On June 22, 2006, the U.S. Senate Committee on Indian Affairs released its final report on the scandal.

[ 34 ] It said that Reed had used his contacts to conservative Christian groups to prevent the opening or expansion of casinos competing with the casinos operated by Abramoff's clients from 1998 to 2002 and had been paid $5.3 million through Abramoff's law firm and from organizations controlled by Abramoff's partner Michael Scanlon .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] The report did not accuse Reed of having known about Abramoff's illegal activities.

[ 35 ] The report also says that under the guidance of the Mississippi Choctaw tribe's planner, Nell Rogers, the tribe agreed to launder money because "Ralph Reed did not want to be paid directly by a tribe with gaming interests", that Reed used nonprofits like Grover Norquist 's Americans for Tax Reform as pass-throughs to disguise the funds' origin, and that "the structure was recommended by Jack Abramoff to accommodate Mr. Reed’s political concerns." [ 34 ] Reed was never charged with any wrongdoing in the Indian gambling scandals.

[ citation needed ] Faith and Freedom Coalition [ edit ] In 2009, Reed founded the Faith and Freedom Coalition , and as of 2025 continues to serve as its chairman.

[ 37 ] Publications [ edit ] Reed has written seven books; four non-fiction and three fictional political thrillers .

After the Revolution (1996, ISBN 978-0-8499-3859-7 ) Politically Incorrect: The Emerging Faith Factor in American Politics (1996, ISBN 978-90-71676-34-5 ) Active Faith: How Christians Are Changing the Face of American Politics (1996, ISBN 978-0-684-00304-7 ) Dark Horse: A Political Thriller (2010, ISBN 1-4391-8241-8 ) The Confirmation (2010, ISBN 1-4391-8241-8 ) Ballots and Blood (2011, ISBN 1-4336-6925-0 ) Awakening: How America Can Turn From Moral and Economic Destruction Back to Greatness (2014, ISBN 978-1-617-95287-6 ) For God and Country: The Christian Case For Trump (2020, ISBN 978-1684510573 ) He has also written several articles.

Reed, Ralph E. (1983). " 'Fighting the Devil with Fire': Carl Vinson's Victory over Tom Watson in the 1918 Tenth District Democratic Primary".

The Georgia Historical Quarterly .

67 (4): 451– 479.

JSTOR 40581142 .

Reed, Ralph E. (1988). "Emory College and the Sledd Affair of 1902: A Case Study in Southern Honor and Racial Attitudes".

The Georgia Historical Quarterly .

72 (3): 463– 492.

JSTOR 40581859 .

Reed, Ralph E. (1988).

"From Riots to Revivalism: the Gordon Riots of 1780, Methodist Hymnody, and the Halevy Thesis Revisited" (PDF) .

Methodist History .

26 (3): 172 . Retrieved August 2, 2016 .

Reed, Ralph E. (1993).

"Casting a Wider Net: Religious Conservatives Move Beyond Abortion and Homosexuality" .

Policy Review .

65 : 31 . Retrieved August 2, 2016 .

Reed, Ralph E. (December 17, 2012).

"Conservatives Need Super PACs" .

National Review .

64 : 18 . Retrieved August 3, 2016 .

See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Life of the Party: A Political Press Tart Bares All Christian right References [ edit ] ^ New York Times, "Ralph Reed Wins Election To Lead Georgia Republicans" May 6, 2001.

^ Remarks by Democratic National Committee Chairman Terry McAuliffe PR Newswire; New York [New York] 22 Feb 2003: 1.ProQuest Copyright PR Newswire - NY Feb 22, 2003 ^ "Ralph Reed Quits As Georgia GOP Chairman" .

Plainview Daily Herald . February 21, 2003. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020 . Retrieved August 23, 2018 .

^ O'Harrow Jr., Robert (October 25, 2021).

"God, Trump and the Closed-Door World of a Major Conservative Group" .

The Washington Post Magazine . Retrieved June 16, 2022 .

^ "Eagle Scout Alumni from Troop 77" .

BSA Troop 77, Northeast Georgia Council . Archived from the original on September 12, 2014 . Retrieved May 31, 2013 .

^ Barrett, Laurence I. (September 13, 1993).

"Fighting For God and the Right Wing: RALPH REED" .

Time . Archived from the original on November 6, 2012.

^ Horwitz, Jeff (May 25, 2005).

"My Right-Wing Degree: How I learned to convert liberal campuses into conservative havens at Morton Blackwell's Leadership Institute, alma mater of Karl Rove, Ralph Reed, Jeff Gannon and two Miss Americas" .

Salon.com .

^ Jerome Armstrong (2006).

Crashing the Gate: Netroots, Grassroots, and the Rise of People-Powered Politics . Chelsea Green Publishing. p.

119 .

ISBN 9781931498999 .

^ "The LI Difference" . The Leadership Institute. Archived from the original on November 2, 2010 . Retrieved October 7, 2010 .

^ "Reed defends role of religion in the political arena" . February 19, 1996 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

^ Nina J. Easton (2000).

Gang of Five: Leaders at the Center of the Conservative Crusade . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 0-7432-0320-8 .

^ "Evangel Assembly of God" . LocalSearch.com. Archived from the original on September 11, 2011 . Retrieved October 7, 2010 .

^ Laurence I. Barrett (June 24, 2001).

"Fighting For God and the Right Wing" . TIME. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012 . Retrieved October 7, 2010 .

^ "We've Come a Long Way, Baby, in Race Relations, March 16, 2008" . demo.openlogicsys.com. Archived from the original on December 28, 2012 . Retrieved June 6, 2012 .

^ Joel D. Vaughan, "The Rise and Fall of the Christian Coalition," Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2009, 108.

^ Vaughan, 90-95.

^ "Quotes On and From Ralph Reed" .

Public Campaign Action Fund . CampaignMoney.org. 2005. Archived from the original on September 18, 2010 . Retrieved October 7, 2010 .

^ "Federal Election Commission v. The Christian Coalition" .

Judgment . August 2, 1999. Archived from the original on November 21, 2008 . Retrieved October 7, 2010 .

^ Vaughan, 177.

^ Sonmez, Felicia (August 26, 2010).

"Who is Americans for Prosperity?" .

Washington Post . Archived from the original on August 31, 2010 . Retrieved March 23, 2015 .

^ [1] Archived September 12, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ Charles Pope (April 27, 2005).

"Microsoft defends ties to Ralph Reed Critics want conservative consultant fired" .

Seattle Post-Intelligencer . Retrieved October 7, 2010 .

^ Steve Scroggins (April 27, 2005).

"Ralph "Roll-them-Dice" Reed gets his just desserts for being a lying hypocrite---and there's more coming..." Archived from the original on October 25, 2005.

^ "Haven't we seen that hat before? Now it's in the ring for sure" .

Atlanta Metro News . The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. February 17, 2005 . Retrieved October 7, 2010 .

^ a b "Exhibits to the 2005-06-22 Hearing of the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 29, 2007 . Retrieved September 2, 2007 .

^ Pettys, Dick (June 19, 2005).

"Christian right's Ralph Reed making 1st run for elected office" .

decaturdaily.com . Associated Press. Archived from the original on October 19, 2006.

^ Bob Moser (April 4, 2006).

"Campaign Turns Into Reed's Nightmare" . CBS News . Retrieved October 7, 2010 .

^ [2] Archived February 14, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ [3] [ dead link ] ^ "American Politics, Elections, Candidates & Campaigns" . Politics1. Archived from the original on October 20, 2010 . Retrieved October 7, 2010 .

^ Edsall, Thomas B. (August 30, 2004).

"Reed Confirms Fees From Indian Casino Lobbyists" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 10, 2018 .

^ [4] [ dead link ] ^ "Prosecutors conclude Reed investigation" .

KLTV . Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007.

^ a b Committee on Indian Affairs (June 22, 2006).

"Final Report before the Committee on Indian Affairs - Oversight and Investigation -Indian Lobbying Report" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 28, 2006 . Retrieved October 7, 2010 .

^ a b Shenon, Philip (June 23, 2006).

"Senate Report Lists Lobbyist's Payments to Ex-Leader of Christian Coalition" .

The New York Times . Retrieved July 10, 2018 .

^ Lane, Alexander (August 13, 2008).

"Ghost of Abramoff haunts McCain" .

Politifact . Retrieved July 10, 2018 .

^ "About" .

Faith & Freedom Coalition .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2025 . Retrieved March 2, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ralph Reed .

Profile at Century Strategies Profile at Faith and Freedom Coalition Appearances on C-SPAN Ralph Reed on Charlie Rose Ralph Reed at IMDb Ralph Reed collected news and commentary at The New York Times U.S. Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, Investigative Exhibits v t e Jack Abramoff controversies Events and scandals Indian lobbying scandal Guam investigation Marianas/Saipan scandal Internet gambling Monetary influence SunCruz Casinos Pleaded guilty or convicted Jack Abramoff John Albaugh Trevor Blackann Todd Boulanger Robert Coughlin Italia Federici J. Steven Griles William Heaton James Hirni Adam Kidan Bob Ney Tony Rudy Michael Scanlon Mark Zachares David Safavian Indicted/charged Kevin A. Ring Fraser Verrusio Named but not charged Ed Buckham Tom DeLay Tom Feeney Ernest Istook Films Casino Jack Casino Jack and the United States of Money Others Team Abramoff Gus Boulis Grover Norquist Amy Ridenour Susan Ralston Ralph Reed Lou Sheldon Lists Related organizations Tribal clients Trips funded Timeline of events Category v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Norway Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐7f67d69dcb‐5269b
Cached time: 20250817051937
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.289 seconds
Real time usage: 2.739 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18666/1000000
Revision size: 37753/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 351390/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 29411/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 178453/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.325/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22321843/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2225.766      1 -total
 18.70%  416.271      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 17.36%  386.460     31 Template:Citation_needed
 14.69%  327.071      1 Template:Reflist
 14.61%  325.188     33 Template:Fix
  9.72%  216.315      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  7.58%  168.679      1 Template:Conservatism_footer
  7.19%  159.964      3 Template:Navbox
  7.00%  155.770     17 Template:Infobox_officeholder/office
  6.31%  140.542     16 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1235535:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051937 and revision id 1294205260. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ralph_Reed&oldid=1294205260 " Categories : People associated with the Jack Abramoff controversies 1961 births Living people 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century evangelicals 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century evangelicals American anti-abortion activists American Evangelical writers American male non-fiction writers American political commentators American political writers Candidates in the 2006 United States elections Christians from Georgia (U.S. state) Christians from Virginia College Republicans Emory University alumni Georgia (U.S. state) Republicans Leaders of Christian parachurch organizations People from Toccoa, Georgia University of Georgia alumni Washington, D.C., Republicans Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2010 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2008 Commons category link from Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 08:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ralph Reed 7 languages Add topic

