Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Journalistic career 3 Political life 4 Literary career 5 Marriage and personal life 6 List of works Toggle List of works subsection 6.1 Short stories 6.2 Novellas 6.3 Novels 6.4 Theories 6.5 Essays 6.6 Drama script 6.7 Translation 6.8 Others 7 Transition of female characters 8 References 9 Sources 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Mao Dun 36 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Беларуская Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша मराठी مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Runa Simi Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese writer (1896–1981) This article is about the writer. For the Xiongnu ruler, see Modu Chanyu .

In this Chinese name , the family name is Shen .

Mao Dun 茅盾 Mao Dun as pictured in The Most Recent Biographies of Chinese Dignitaries Minister of Culture In office 21 October 1949 – January 1965 Premier Zhou Enlai Succeeded by Lu Dingyi Chairman of the China Writers Association In office 23 July 1949 – 27 March 1981 Succeeded by Ba Jin Personal details Born ( 1896-07-04 ) 4 July 1896 Tongxiang , Jiaxing , Zhejiang , Qing Empire Died 27 March 1981 (1981-03-27) (aged 84) Beijing , China Spouse Kong Dezhi ( 孔德沚 ) Relations Shen Zemin (brother) Alma mater Beijing University Mao Dun Chinese 茅盾 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Máo Dùn Wade–Giles Mao Tun Shen Dehong Traditional Chinese 沈德鴻 Simplified Chinese 沈德鸿 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Shěn Déhóng Wade–Giles Shen Te-hung Shen Yanbing Chinese 沈雁冰 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Shěn Yànbīng Wade–Giles Shen Yen-ping Mao Dun Memorial at his home town Wuzhen The primary school Lizhi College where Mao Dun studied in Wuzhen Shen Dehong ( Shen Yanbing ; 4 July 1896 [ 1 ] – 27 March 1981), best known by the pen name of Mao Dun , was a Chinese novelist, essayist, journalist, playwright, literary and cultural critic. He was highly celebrated for his realist novels, including Midnight , which depicts life in cosmopolitan Shanghai .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Mao was one of the founders of the Chinese Communist Party and participated in a number of left-wing cultural movements during the 1920s and 1930s. He was the editor-in-chief of Fiction Monthly and helped lead the League of Left-Wing Writers . He formed a strong friendship with fellow left-wing Chinese author Lu Xun .

[ 4 ] From 1949 to 1965, Mao served as the first Minister of Culture in the People's Republic of China.

[ 2 ] In addition to novels, Mao Dun published a number of essays, scripts, theories, short stories, and novellas. He was well known for translating Western literature , as he had gained academic knowledge of European literature from his studies at Peking University . Additionally, although he was not the first person in China to translate the works of Scottish historical novelist Walter Scott , he is considered to be the first person to popularize Walter Scott's work in China through his "Critical Biography".

[ 2 ] He adopted the pen name "Mao Dun" (Chinese: 矛盾 ) to express the tension in the conflicting revolutionary ideology within China in the 1920s. The name means "contradiction", as Mao means spears and Dun means shields. His friend Ye Shengtao changed the first character from 矛 to 茅 , which literally means "thatch".

Early life [ edit ] His father, Shen Yongxi (Chinese: 沈永錫 ) taught and designed the curriculum for his son, but he died when Mao Dun was ten. Mao Dun's mother Chen Aizhu (Chinese: 陳愛珠 ) then became his teacher. He mentions in his memoirs that "my first instructor is my mother". Through learning from his parents, Mao Dun developed great interest in writing as well as reading during his childhood.

Mao Dun had already started to develop his writing skills when he was still in primary school. In one examination the examiner commented on Mao Dun's script: '12 year old young child, can make this language, not says motherland nobody'. There were other similar comments which indicate that Mao Dun had been a brilliant writer since his youth.

While Mao Dun was studying in secondary school in Hangzhou , extensive reading and strict writing skills training filled his life. He read the Wen Xuan , Shishuo Xinyu , and a large number of classical novels, which influenced his writing style.

Mao Dun entered the three-year foundation school offered by Peking University in 1913, in which he studied Chinese and Western literature.

[ 2 ] Due to financial difficulties, he had to quit in the summer of 1916, before his graduation. After quitting from university, he immediately got married with the daughter of Kong family, Kong Dezhi (孔德沚).

[ 4 ] The trainings in Chinese and English as well as knowledge of Chinese and Western literature provided by the fifteen years of education Mao Dun received had prepared him to show up in the limelight of the Chinese journalistic and literary arena.

Journalistic career [ edit ] After graduation, Mao Dun soon got his first job in the English editing and translation sections of the Commercial Press , [ 5 ] : 139 Shanghai branch. At the age of 21, he was invited to be the assistant editor of Xuesheng Zazhi ( Chinese : 學生雜誌 ; lit.

' Students' Magazine ') under the Commercial Press, which had published many articles about the new ideologies that had emerged in China at that time.

Apart from editing, Mao Dun also started to write about his social thoughts and criticisms. To some extent, he was inspired by the famous magazine New Youth . Like in 1917 and 1918, he wrote two editorials for Xuesheng Zazhi : Students and Society (學生與社會) and The Students of 1918 , those were significant in stimulating political consciousness among the young educated Chinese.

His early literary career also included writing children's literature.

[ 5 ] : 139 At 24 years of age, Mao Dun was already renowned as a novelist by the community in general, and in 1920, he and a group of young writers took over the magazine Fiction Monthly , [ 6 ] to publish literature by western authors, such as Tolstoy , Chekhov , Balzac , Flaubert , Zola , Byron , Keats , and Shaw , and make new theories of literature better known. Despite the fact that he was a naturalistic novelist, he admired writers like Leo Tolstoy for their great artistic style.

In 1920, he was invited to edit a new column: The Fiction-New-Waves ( 小說新潮 ) in Fiction Monthly . He even took up the post of Chief Editor of the Monthly in the same year and was obliged to reform it thoroughly, in response to the May Fourth Movement . His young writer friends in Beijing supported him by submitting their creative writings, translating Western literature and their views on new literature theories and techniques to the magazines. Literary Study Group ( 文學研究會 ) was formed partly because of this.

[ 2 ] The reformed Monthly was proved to be a success. It had facilitated the continuation of the New Culture Movement by selling ten thousand copies a month and more importantly by introducing Literature for life, a brand new realistic approach to Chinese literature. In this period, Mao Dun had become a leading figure of the movement in the southern part of China.

On the notion of content reformation, both the innovative and conservative parties in the Commercial Press could not make a compromise. Mao Dun resigned from the Chief Editor of Fiction Monthly in 1923, but in 1927 he became the chief columnist of the Minguo yuebao (民国月报). He wrote more than 30 editorials for this newspaper to criticize Chiang Kai-shek , and to support revolutions.

Political life [ edit ] Inspired by the October Revolution of 1917 in Russia, Mao Dun took part in the May Fourth Movement in China. In 1920, he joined the Shanghai Communist Team, and helped to establish the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in 1921.

[ 2 ] At first, he worked as a liaison for the party. He also wrote for the party magazine The Communist Party .

At the time, the CCP was allied with the Kuomintang in the First United Front . Mao Dun participated in Chiang Kai-shek 's Northern Expedition to reunite the country. He quit, however, when Chiang's Kuomintang broke with the Communists in 1927. In July 1928, he went to Japan in order to take refuge. As he returned to China in 1930, he joined the League of Left-Wing Writers .

[ 7 ] Later, China went to war with Japan and he actively engaged in resisting the Japanese attack in 1937. In 1949, the communist government took over and he was responsible for working as Mao Zedong 's secretary and Culture Minister until 1965.

[ 2 ] Literary career [ edit ] As a literary man, Mao Dun had a great number of achievements. His reforms at Fiction Monthly were his first contribution to Chinese literature. The magazine then became a place where "New Literature" circulated. Many famous writers like Lu Xun , Xu Dishan , Bing Xin , Ye Shengtao , had their works published through it. Mao Dun supported movements such as "New Literature" and "New Thinking". He believed that Chinese literature should have a place in the world.

[ 8 ] The experience of political conflict broadened his horizon in literature, therefore the theme of his later writing was mostly based on this. He helped to found the League of Left-Wing Writers in 1930. After that, he worked together with Lu Xun to fight for the right of the society and the revolutionary movement in literature. The harvest period of Mao Dun's writing is considered to have been from 1927 to 1937.

Shi (蚀), also translated in English as The Eclipse , was Mao's first novel. It was published in three volumes: Disillusions (幻灭, 1927), Wavering (动摇, 1928), and Pursuits (追求, 1928).

[ 1 ] It tells the story of a generation of young intellectuals caught up in the world of revolutionary fervor without a true understanding of the nature of social change. His next major work was Rainbow (虹, 1929), which became famous for having no less than 70 main characters and numerous plot twists and turns. In 1933 came his next work, Midnight , which gained great popularity, to a point that it was also published in French and English, and it allowed to develop a sense of revolutionary realism.

[ 3 ] It is a naturalistic novel exploring the commercial world of Shanghai in detail. In addition, his fiction offered a sympathetic portrayal of working-class life and praise of revolution. He left a work unfinished, the trilogy Shuangye Hongsi Eryuehua (霜叶红似二月花, 1942).

The League of Left-Wing Writers was dissolved in a quarrel in 1936. After the initiation of the Sino-Japanese War in 1937, Mao traveled to many places and started a literary magazine in Wuhan . He edited the periodical Literary Front and the literary page of the newspaper Libao in Hong Kong and worked as a teacher.

In May 1940, Mao and his family traveled to Yan'an .

[ 9 ] : 146 In Yan'an, he wrote essays praising the Communist Party's transformation of the region through both cultivation of culture and of labor.

[ 9 ] : 146 After 1943 Mao Dun did not produce any major works, but still wrote some articles and essays. In 1946 he visited the Soviet Union .

When the People's Republic of China was established in 1949, he became active in several committees and he worked as the Secretary and then the Minister of Culture for Mao Zedong until 1965.

[ 2 ] He started the monthly literary journal Chinese Literature, which became the most popular for western readers. He was dismissed from his position as minister in 1964 due to the ideological upheavals. Despite this fact, Mao Dun survived the Cultural Revolution and was afterwards rehabilitated. In the 1970s he became an editor of a children's magazine, and began working on his memoirs, which were serialized in the Party publication, the quarterly Historical Materials on New literature ( 新文学史料 ), but he died on 27 March 1981, before he could finish it. His influence on Chinese literature continues to the present day because he used his savings to set up a fund called the Mao Dun Literature Scholarship to promote an atmosphere for writing fiction.

Mao Dun's achievements in literature were also seen at his 50th birthday, which was also the 25th anniversary of his literary life. More than five hundred guests came to celebrate with him. Russian and American friends also joined the celebration. Wong Roufei wrote an essay as congratulations on behalf of the Chinese Communist Party . Mao Dun's influence and achievements in the literary field were witnessed. On the other hand, he was twice elected as the chairman and then once elected as the vice-chairman of the China Literary Arts Representative Assembly. His status in the literary field has been highly recognized. Although he suffered great pain from illness in his old age, he still kept writing his memoirs, called The Road I Walked ( 我走过的路 ).

Besides his achievements, Mao Dun also had great influence on Chinese literature. The Mao Dun Literature Prize was created due to Mao Dun's wish that outstanding novels should be encouraged and communist literature should be promoted.

[ 2 ] It is one of the most honorable literature awards in China. Many famous modern Chinese literary authors like Wei Wei and Zhou Keqin have received the prize.

Marriage and personal life [ edit ] Mao Dun had a typical traditional Chinese marriage. His family got him engaged to the Kong family when he was five years old and he married the daughter of Kong family after he quit from university. After their marriage, the daughter of Kong family had been renamed as Kong Dezhi (孔德沚), and she would go on to assist Mao Dun with his literary and political career during their marriage.

[ 4 ] However, Mao had had a two-year long affair with Qin Dejun (秦德君) during his marriage, which is also believed to have effects on his novel Rainbow . In the end, Mao Dun ended the affair and returned to his own family.

[ 4 ] List of works [ edit ] A bust of Mao Dun in his former residence in Wuzhen , Zhejiang.

A bust of Mao Dun in his former residence in Beijing .

Mao Dun has over 100 publications throughout his life, which includes short stories, novels, theories etc. Some of his most famous works include: Short stories [ edit ] Wild Rose ( 《野薔薇》 Ye Qiangwei (1929) The Smoke and Cloud Collection 《煙雲集》 Yanyunji (1937) Novellas [ edit ] Disillusions 《幻滅》 Huanmie (1927) Wavering 《動搖》 Dongyao (1927) Pursuits 《追求》 Zhuiqiu (1928) Three people walking , 《三人行》 Sanrenxing (1931) The Shop Of the Lin Family 《林家铺子》 Linjia Puzi (1932) Spring Silkworms , 《春蚕》 Chuncan (1932) Autumn Harvest 《秋收》 QiuShou Novels [ edit ] Rainbow 《虹》 Hong (1930) Midnight 《子夜》 Ziye (1933) Giving to the poet festival 《獻給詩人節》 Xian Gei Shi Ren Jie (1946) Theories [ edit ] The recent works of Mao Dun 《茅盾近作》 Mao Dun Jin Zuo (1980) Mao Dun's comment on creativity 《茅盾論創作》 Mao Dun Lun Chuang Zuo (1980) Essays [ edit ] "Travelling Diary of USSR" 《蘇聯見聞錄》 Su Lian Jian Wen Lu (1948) "Talks on USSR" 《雜談蘇聯》 Ji Tan Su Lian (1949) Drama script [ edit ] Front and rear Pure Brightness , 《清明前後》 QianMingQianHou (1945) Translation [ edit ] Modern drama Russian Question 話劇《俄羅斯問題》 (1946) Novelette Group's Son 中篇小說《團的兒子》 (1946) Others [ edit ] Works of Mao Dun 《茅盾全集》 Mao Dun Quanji (vol. 1–15, 1984–1987) Introduction to the books of Mao Dun 《茅盾書簡》 Mao Dun Shujian (1st edition, collection of letters, 1984) later changed the name into 《茅盾書信集》 Mao Dun Shuxinji (1988) Transition of female characters [ edit ] The 1930s is a turning point of the female characters' identity in Mao Dun's works. Between the 1920s and the 1930s, which was also the early period of Mao Dun's writing career, the female characters occurring in his works mostly were in identity of " New Woman ", for instance, Mrs. Gui (桂阿姨) and Qionghua (琼华) in Wild Rose (野蔷薇, 1929), Ms. Mei (梅小姐) in Rainbow (虹, 1930).

[ 10 ] However, from the 1930s, the "New Woman" characters in Mao Dun's works started to be replaced by the women who were living in traditional Chinese family. Furthermore, female characters even started to lose their own names. As in one of Mao Dun's short novels, which was released in the 1930s, Shui zaoxing (水藻行), the only female character did not even have an actual name but only be called as "Xiusheng (one of the two main male characters)'s wife (秀生妻)" [ 10 ] in the novel.

References [ edit ] ^ a b McDougall, Bonnie S. (December 1998).

"Disappearing women and disappearing men in may fourth narrative: a post‐feminist survey of short stories by Mao Dun, Bing Xin, Ling Shuhua and Shen Congwen" .

Asian Studies Review .

22 (4): 427– 458.

doi : 10.1080/10357829808713209 .

ISSN 1035-7823 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Chiu, Kang-Yen (2020).

"Walter Scott's First Chinese Critic – Mao Dun" .

Scottish Literary Review .

12 : 19– 34 – via Project Muse.

^ a b Chen, Yu-shinh (1989). "Report on the Biannual Scholarly Conference on Mao Dun Studies held at Xiamen University, The People's Republic of China, November 21–27, 1988".

Modern Chinese Literature .

5 (2): 357– 361.

^ a b c d Li, Ji-kai (1 November 2004). "A Study of Lu Xun's and Mao Fun's Friend-making, Love and Marriage".

Journal of Hainan Normal University .

17 : 33– 40 – via Social science.

^ a b Li, Ying (2024).

Red Ink: A History of Printing and Politics in China . Royal Collins Press.

ISBN 9781487812737 .

^ Qian, Liqun (1987).

中国现代文学三十年 [ Thirty Years of Modern Chinese Literature ] (in Chinese). Shanghai Literature and Art Publishing House. pp.

171– 186.

ISBN 978-7-5321-0299-0 .

^ "Mao Dun, 85, a Writer Who Was a Minister Of Culture in China" .

New York Times . 28 March 1981 . Retrieved 16 September 2021 .

^ Wu, Fangli (13 February 2012).

"茅盾：用文字推动国家和民族前进" .

China Youth Network . pp.

2– 1.

^ a b Wang, Xian (2025).

Gendered Memories: An Imaginary Museum for Ding Ling and Chinese Female Revolutionary Martyrs . China Understandings Today series. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .

ISBN 978-0-472-05719-1 .

^ a b Chen, Yu-shih (1993). "False Harmony: Mao Dun on Women and Family".

Modern Chinese Literature .

7 : 131– 152.

Sources [ edit ] Petri Liukkonen.

"Mao Dun" .

Books and Writers .

Bartleby.com article on Mao-Tun Encyclopedia.com article on Mao-Tun Yahoo Encyclopedia article on Mao-Tun Feng, Liping (April 1996). "Democracy and Elitism: The May Fourth Ideal of Literature". Modern China (Sage Publications, Inc.) 22 (2): 170–196.

ISSN 0097-7004 .

JSTOR 189342 .

Further reading [ edit ] Chen, Yu-shih.

Realism and Allegory in the Early Fiction of Mao Dun . (1986) Gálik, Marián.

Mao Tun and Modern Chinese Literary Criticism . (1969) Gálik, Marián.

The Genesis of Modern Chinese Literature Criticism . (1980) Hsia, C.T.

A History of Modern Chinese Fiction . (1961) Li Pin. ( 李頻 ) Bianji jia Mao Dun pingzhuan ( 編輯家茅盾評傳 ) Kaifeng ( 開封 ): Henan University press (河南大學出版社), 1995. Available in HKU FPS library.

Shao Bozhou, et al. ed.

Mao Dun de wenxue daolu . (1959) Wang, David Der-wei.

Fictional Realism in the Twentieth-Century China . (1992) Chinese Writers on Writing featuring Mao Dun. Ed.

Arthur Sze . ( Trinity University Press , 2010).

Williams, Philip F.

Village Echoes: The Fiction of Wu Zuxiang . (1993) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mao Dun .

Mao Dun, Master Craftsman of Modern Chinese Literature by Fan Jun The Sad End of Mao Dun Mao Dun. A Portrait by Kong Kai Ming at Portrait Gallery of Chinese Writers (Hong Kong Baptist University Library).

Political offices Preceded by none Minister of Culture 1949–1965 Succeeded by Lu Dingyi Cultural offices Preceded by none Chairman of the China Writers Association 1949–1981 Succeeded by Ba Jin v t e Ministers of culture and tourism (and its predecessors) of the People's Republic of China Minister of Culture Mao Dun Lu Dingyi Xiao Wangdong (acting) abolished Yu Huiyong Huang Zhen Zhou Weizhi (acting) Zhu Muzhi Wang Meng He Jingzhi Liu Zhongde Sun Jiazheng Cai Wu Luo Shugang Minister of Culture and Tourism Luo Shugang Hu Heping Sun Yeli v t e Vice chairpersons of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference 1st (1949–1954) Zhou Enlai Li Jishen Shen Junru Guo Moruo Chen Shutong 2nd (1954–1959) Soong Ching-ling Dong Biwu Li Jishen Zhang Lan Guo Moruo Peng Zhen Shen Junru Huang Yanpei He Xiangning Li Weihan Li Siguang Chen Shutong Zhang Bojun (removed 1956) Tan Kah Kee Choekyi Gyaltsen, Panchen Erdeni Burhan Shahidi (added 1958) 3rd (1959–1965) Peng Zhen Li Jishen Guo Moruo Shen Junru Huang Yanpei Li Weihan (removed 1964) Li Siguang Chen Shutong Tan Kah Kee Burhan Shahidi Chen Yi Kang Sheng Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme He Xiangning (added 1960) 4th (1965–1978) Peng Zhen Chen Yi Ye Jianying Huang Yanpei Chen Shutong Liu Lantao Song Renqiong Xu Bing Gao Chongmin Cai Tingkai Wei Guoqing Deng Zihui Li Siguang Fu Zuoyi Teng Daiyuan Xie Juezai Mao Dun Li Zhuchen Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai Xu Deheng Li Dequan Ma Xulun 5th (1978–1983) Ulanhu Wei Guoqing Peng Chong Zhao Ziyang Guo Moruo Song Renqiong Mao Dun Xu Deheng Ouyang Qin Shi Liang Zhu Yunshan Kang Keqing Ji Fang Wang Shoudao Yang Jingren Zhang Chong Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai Zhou Jianren Zhuang Xiquan Hu Zi'ang Rong Yiren Tong Dizhou Liu Lantao (added; secretary-general ) Lu Dingyi (added) Li Weihan (added) Hu Yuzhi (added) Wang Kunlun (added) Choekyi Gyaltsen, Panchen Erdeni (added) He Changgong (added) Xiao Ke (added) Cheng Zihua (added) Yang Xiufeng (added) Sha Qianli (added) Burhan Shahidi (added) Zhou Peiyuan (added) Qian Changzhao (added) Liu Fei (added) Dong Qiwu (added) 6th (1983–1988) Yang Jingren Liu Lantao Lu Dingyi Cheng Zihua Kang Keqing Ji Fang Zhuang Xiquan Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai Hu Zi'ang Wang Kunlun Qian Changzhao Dong Qiwu Tao Zhiyue Zhou Shutao Yang Chengwu Xiao Hua Chen Zaidao Lü Zhengcao Zhou Jianren Zhou Peiyuan Burhan Shahidi Miao Yuntai Wang Guangying Deng Zhaoxiang Fei Xiaotong Zhao Puchu Ye Shengtao Qu Wu Ba Jin Ma Wenrui (added) Mao Yisheng (added) Liu Jingji (added) Hua Luogeng (added) Wang Enmao (added) Qian Xuesen (added) Lei Jieqiong (added) Wang Feng (added) Qian Weichang (added) 7th (1988–1993) Wang Renzhong Yan Mingfu Fang Yi Gu Mu Yang Jingren Kang Keqing Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai Hu Zi'ang Qian Changzhao Zhou Peiyuan Miao Yuntai Wang Guangying Deng Zhaoxiang Zhao Puchu Qu Wu Ba Jin Ma Wenrui Liu Jingji Wang Enmao Qian Xuesen Qian Weichang Hu Sheng Sun Xiaocun Cheng Siyuan Lu Jiaxi Qian Zhengying Su Buqing Ismail Amat Hou Jingru (added) K. H. Ting (added) Hong Xuezhi (added) Ye Xuanping (added) 8th (1993–1998) Ye Xuanping Wu Xueqian Yang Rudai Wang Zhaoguo Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme Seypidin Azizi Hong Xuezhi Yang Jingren Zhou Peiyuan Deng Zhaoxiang Zhao Puchu Ba Jin Liu Jingji Qian Xuesen Qian Weichang Hu Sheng Qian Zhengying Su Buqing Hou Jingru K. H. Ting Dong Yinchu Sun Fuling Ann Tse-kai Henry Fok Ma Man-kei Zhu Guangya (added) Wan Guoquan (added) He Luli (added) 9th (1998–2003) Ye Xuanping Yang Rudai Wang Zhaoguo Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme Zhao Puchu Ba Jin Qian Weichang Lu Jiaxi Ren Jianxin Song Jian Li Guixian Chen Junsheng Zhang Siqing Qian Zhengying K. H. Ting Sun Fuling Ann Tse-kai Henry Fok Ma Man-kei Zhu Guangya Wan Guoquan Hu Qili Chen Jinhua Zhao Nanqi Mao Zhiyong Bai Lichen Jing Shuping Luo Haocai Zhang Kehui Zhou Tienong Wang Wenyuan 10th (2003–2008) Wang Zhongyu Liao Hui Liu Yandong Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme Ba Jin Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai Li Guixian Zhang Siqing K. H. Ting Henry Fok Ma Man-kei Bai Lichen Luo Haocai Zhang Kehui Zhou Tienong Hao Jianxiu Chen Kuiyuan Ablet Abdureshit Xu Kuangdi Li Zhaozhuo Huang Mengfu Wang Xuan Zhang Huaixi Li Meng Tung Chee-hwa (added 2005) Zhang Meiying (added 2005) Zhang Rongming (added 2005) 11th (2008–2013) Wang Gang Liao Hui Du Qinglin Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai Ma Man-kei Bai Lichen Chen Kuiyuan Ablet Abdureshit Li Zhaozhuo Huang Mengfu Tung Chee-hwa Zhang Meiying Zhang Rongming Qian Yunlu ( secretary-general ) Sun Jiazheng Li Jinhua Zheng Wantong Deng Pufang Wan Gang Lin Wenyi Li Wuwei Luo Fuhe Chen Zongxing Wang Zhizhen Edmund Ho (added 2010) 12th (2013–2018) Du Qinglin Ling Jihua (removed 2015) Han Qide Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai Tung Chee-hwa Wan Gang Lin Wenyi Luo Fuhe Edmund Ho Zhang Qingli ( secretary-general ) Li Haifeng Su Rong (removed 2014) Chen Yuan Lu Zhangong Zhou Xiaochuan Wang Jiarui Wang Zhengwei Ma Biao Qi Xuchun Chen Xiaoguang Ma Peihua Liu Xiaofeng Wang Qinmin Leung Chun-ying (added 2017) 13th (2018–2023) Zhang Qingli Liu Qibao Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai Tung Chee-hwa Wan Gang Edmund Ho Lu Zhangong Wang Zhengwei Ma Biao Chen Xiaoguang Leung Chun-ying Xia Baolong ( secretary-general ) Yang Chuantang Li Bin ( secretary-general ) Bagatur Wang Yongqing He Lifeng Su Hui Zheng Jianbang Gu Shengzu Liu Xincheng He Wei Shao Hong Gao Yunlong 14th (2023–present) Shi Taifeng Hu Chunhua Shen Yueyue Wang Yong Zhou Qiang Pagbalha Geleg Namgyai Edmund Ho Leung Chun-ying Bagatur Su Hui Shao Hong Gao Yunlong Chen Wu Mu Hong Xian Hui Wang Dongfeng ( secretary-general ) Jiang Xinzhi Jiang Zuojun He Baoxiang Wang Guangqian Qin Boyong Zhu Yongxin Yang Zhen Authority control databases International ISNI 2 3 4 5 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Taiwan Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Portals : China Biography Literature Journalism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mao_Dun&oldid=1291982918 " Categories : 1896 births 1981 deaths 20th-century Chinese short story writers 20th-century Chinese dramatists and playwrights Chinese communists Commercial Press people Chinese male novelists Chinese male short story writers National University of Peking alumni Marxist theorists Chinese Marxist writers Ministers of culture of the People's Republic of China 20th-century Chinese journalists People from Tongxiang 20th-century Chinese essayists 20th-century Chinese novelists Short story writers from Zhejiang Writers from Jiaxing Vice chairpersons of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference 20th-century pseudonymous writers Chinese male dramatists and playwrights Hidden categories: CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2015 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 15:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mao Dun 36 languages Add topic

