Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works and ideas Toggle Works and ideas subsection 2.1 Language and cultural theory 2.2 Historical philosophy and Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of Mankind 2.3 German nationalism and cultural identity 2.4 Political philosophy and the Enlightenment 2.5 Individual and cultural expression 2.6 Evolution 3 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 3.1 Works in English 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Johann Gottfried Herder 66 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar მარგალური مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Ποντιακά Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher, theologian, poet (1744–1803) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Johann Gottfried Herder" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Reverend Johann Gottfried Herder Herder, 1785 Born 25 August 1744 Mohrungen , Kingdom of Prussia (now Morąg, Poland) Died 18 December 1803 (1803-12-18) (aged 59) Weimar , Saxe-Weimar, Holy Roman Empire Education Alma mater University of Königsberg Academic advisors Immanuel Kant Philosophical work Era 18th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Enlightenment Counter-Enlightenment [ 1 ] Romantic nationalism [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Anticolonialist cosmopolitanism [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Sturm und Drang Weimar Classicism Historicism [ 6 ] Romantic hermeneutics [ 7 ] Classical liberalism [ 8 ] Teleological conception of history [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Cultural relativism [ 11 ] Volksgeist Cultural nationalism [ 12 ] Empirical approach to the investigation of languages and cultures [ 13 ] Johann Gottfried von Herder ( / ˈ h ɜːr d ər / HUR -dər ; German: [ˈjoːhan ˈɡɔtfʁiːt ˈhɛʁdɐ] ; [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] 25 August 1744 – 18 December 1803) was a Prussian philosopher , theologian, pastor , poet, and literary critic . Herder is associated with the Age of Enlightenment , Sturm und Drang , and Weimar Classicism .

[ 18 ] He was a Romantic philosopher and poet who argued that true German culture was to be discovered among the common people ( das Volk ). He also stated that it was through folk songs, folk poetry, and folk dances that the true spirit of the nation ( der Volksgeist ) was popularized. He is credited with establishing or advancing a number of important disciplines: hermeneutics , linguistics , anthropology , and "a secular philosophy of history." [ 19 ] Biography [ edit ] Memorial plaque at Herder's birthplace in Morąg Born in Mohrungen (now Morąg , Poland) in the Kingdom of Prussia , his parents were teacher Gottfried Herder (1706–1763) and his second wife Anna Elizabeth Herder, née Peltz (1717–1772). He grew up in a poor household, educating himself from his father's Bible and songbook . In 1762, as a youth of 17, he enrolled at the University of Königsberg , about 60 miles (100 km) north of Mohrungen, where he became a student of Immanuel Kant . At the same time, Herder became an intellectual protégé of Johann Georg Hamann , a Königsberg philosopher who disputed the claims of pure secular reason .

Hamann's influence led Herder to confess to his wife later in life that "I have too little reason and too much idiosyncrasy", [ 20 ] yet Herder can justly claim to have founded a new school of German political thought. Although himself an unsociable person, Herder influenced his contemporaries greatly. One friend wrote to him in 1785, hailing his works as "inspired by God." A varied field of theorists were later to find inspiration in Herder's tantalizingly incomplete ideas.

In 1764, now a Lutheran pastor , Herder went to Riga to teach. It was during this period that he produced his first major works, which were literary criticism . In 1769 Herder traveled by ship to the French port of Nantes and continued on to Paris. This resulted in both an account of his travels as well as a shift of his own self-conception as an author. By 1770 Herder went to Strasbourg , where he met the young Goethe . This event proved to be a key juncture in the history of German literature , as Goethe was inspired by Herder's literary criticism to develop his own style. This can be seen as the beginning of the Sturm und Drang movement. In 1771 Herder took a position as head pastor and court preacher at Bückeburg under William, Count of Schaumburg-Lippe .

By the mid-1770s, Goethe was a well-known author, and used his influence at the court of Weimar to secure Herder a position as General Superintendent. Herder moved there in 1776, where his outlook shifted again towards classicism .

On 2 May 1773 Herder married Maria Karoline Flachsland (1750–1809) in Darmstadt . They had seven children: Gottfried (1774–1806), born in Bückeburg ; August (1776–1838), also born in Bückeburg; Wilhelm Ludwig Ernst (1778); Karl Emil Adelbert (1779–1857), born in Weimar ; Luise (1781–1860) also born in Weimar; Emil Ernst Gottfried (1783–1855); and Rinaldo Gottfried (1790).

Towards the end of his career, Herder endorsed the French Revolution , which earned him the enmity of many of his colleagues. At the same time, he and Goethe experienced a personal split. His unpopular attacks on Kantian philosophy were another reason for his isolation in later years.

[ 21 ] In 1802 Herder was ennobled by the Elector-Prince of Bavaria , which added the prefix "von" to his last name. He died in Weimar in 1803 at age 59.

Works and ideas [ edit ] Herder was influenced by his academic advisor Immanuel Kant , as well as seventeenth-century philosophers Spinoza and Leibniz .

[ 22 ] In turn, he influenced Hegel , Nietzsche , Goethe , Samuel Taylor Coleridge , John Stuart Mill , Karl Wilhelm Friedrich Schlegel , Wilhelm von Humboldt , [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Franz Boas , [ 25 ] and Walter Rauschenbusch [ 26 ] among others.

Language and cultural theory [ edit ] In 1772, Herder published Treatise on the Origin of Language and went further in this promotion of language than his earlier anti-French injunction to "spew out the ugly slime of the Seine . Speak German, O You German". Herder now had established the foundations of comparative philology within the new currents of political outlook.

Herder wrote an important essay on Shakespeare and Auszug aus einem Briefwechsel über Ossian und die Lieder alter Völker (Extract from a correspondence about Ossian and the Songs of Ancient Peoples) published in 1773 in a manifesto along with contributions by Goethe and Justus Möser . Herder wrote that "A poet is the creator of the nation around him, he gives them a world to see and has their souls in his hand to lead them to that world." To him such poetry had its greatest purity and power in nations before they became civilised, as shown in the Old Testament , the Edda , and Homer , and he tried to find such virtues in ancient German folk songs and Norse poetry and mythology . Herder – most pronouncedly after Georg Forster 's 1791 translation of the Sanskrit play Shakuntala – was influenced by the religious imagery of Hinduism and Indian literature, which he saw in a positive light, writing several essays on the topic and the preface to the 1803 edition of Shakuntala .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Herder was one of the first to argue that language contributes to shaping the frameworks and the patterns with which each linguistic community thinks and feels. For Herder, language is "the organ of thought." This has often been misinterpreted, however. Neither Herder nor the great philosopher of language, Wilhelm von Humboldt , argue that language (written or oral) determines thought. Rather, language was the appropriation of the outer world within the human mind by means of distinguishing marks ( merkmale ). In positing his arguments, Herder reformulated an example from works by Moses Mendelssohn and Thomas Abbt . In his conjectural narrative of human origins, Herder argued that, although linguistic morphemes and logographs did not determine thought, the first humans perceived sheep and their bleating, or subjects and corresponding Merkmale , as one and the same. That is, for these conjectured ancestors, the sheep were the bleating, and vice-versa. Hence, prelinguistic thought did not figure largely in Herderian conjectural narratives. Herder even moved beyond his narrative of human origins to contend that if active reflection ( besonnenheit ) and language persisted in human consciousness, then human impulses to signify were immanent in the pasts, presents, and futures of humanity. Avi Lifschitz subsequently reframed Herder's "the organ of thought" quotation: "Herder's equation of word and idea, of language and cognition, prompted a further attack on any attribution of the first words to the imitation of natural sounds, to the physiology of the vocal organs, or to social convention… [Herder argued] for the linguistic character of our cognition but also for the cognitive nature of human language. One could not think without language, as various Enlightenment thinkers argued, but at the same time one could not properly speak without perceiving the world in a uniquely human way… man would not be himself without language and active reflection, while language deserved its name only as a cognitive aspect of the entire human being." In response to criticism of these contentions, Herder resisted descriptions of his findings as "conjectural" pasts, casting his arguments for a dearth of cognition in humans and "the problem of the origin of language as a synchronic issue rather than a diachronic one." [ 29 ] And in this sense, when Humboldt argues that all thinking is thinking in language, he is perpetuating the Herderian tradition. Herder's focus upon language and cultural traditions as the ties that create a "nation" [ 30 ] extended to include folklore , dance, music and art, and inspired Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm in their collection of German folk tales. Arguably, the greatest inheritor of Herder's linguistic philosophy was Wilhelm von Humboldt. Humboldt's great contribution lay in developing Herder's idea that language is "the organ of thought" into his own belief that languages were specific worldviews ( Weltansichten ), as Jürgen Trabant argues in the Wilhelm von Humboldt lectures on the Rouen Ethnolinguistics Project website.

Historical philosophy and Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of Mankind [ edit ] The Johann Gottfried Herder statue in Weimar in front of the church St. Peter und Paul After becoming General Superintendent in 1776, Herder's philosophy shifted again towards classicism , and he began developing his systematic approach to history and human development. This period culminated in his most ambitious work, the four-volume Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of Mankind ( Ideen zur Philosophie der Geschichte der Menschheit ), published between 1784 and 1791.

The Ideas represented Herder's mature synthesis of his earlier insights about language, culture, and human development into a unified philosophy of history. In this comprehensive treatise, he attempted to trace the development of human culture from its origins through various stages of civilization, combining natural philosophy with cultural theory. The work largely originated the modern school of historical thought and established many foundational concepts in anthropology and cultural studies. Herder's philosophy was of a deeply subjective turn, stressing influence by physical and historical circumstance upon human development, stressing that "one must go into the age, into the region, into the whole history, and feel one's way into everything". The historian should be the "regenerated contemporary" of the past, and history a science as "instrument of the most genuine patriotic spirit".

In what scholars consider the most philosophically significant section of the work, the 15th book, Herder articulated his belief that human progress follows natural laws toward greater reason and justice. He argued that "by the very nature of law, reason and justice must inevitably gain influence among mankind, advancing a more enduring humanity." [ 31 ] This optimistic view of historical development placed Herder firmly within the Enlightenment tradition while anticipating later German idealist philosophy.

German nationalism and cultural identity [ edit ] Germans did not have a nation-state until the nineteenth century. Those who spoke Germanic languages lived in politically unconnected lands and groups. Herder was among the first German intellectuals to craft a foundation for German cultural unification and German national consciousness based mostly on German language and literature. While rationality was the prime value of Enlightenment philosophers, Herder's appeal to sentiment places him within German Romanticism.

[ 32 ] He gave Germans new pride in their origins, modifying that dominance of regard allotted to Greek art ( Greek Revival ) extolled among others by Johann Joachim Winckelmann and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing .

[ citation needed ] He remarked that he would have wished to be born in the Middle Ages and mused whether "the times of the Swabian emperors" did not "deserve to be set forth in their true light in accordance with the German mode of thought?". Herder equated the German with the Gothic and favored Dürer and everything Gothic .

[ citation needed ] As with the sphere of art, he also proclaimed a national message within the sphere of language . He topped the line of German authors emanating from Martin Opitz , who had written his Aristarchus, sive de contemptu linguae Teutonicae in Latin in 1617, urging Germans to glory in their hitherto despised language. Herder's extensive collections of folk-poetry began a great craze in Germany for that neglected topic.

Herder attached exceptional importance to the concept of nationality and of patriotism – "he that has lost his patriotic spirit has lost himself and the whole worlds about himself", whilst teaching that "in a certain sense every human perfection is national". Herder carried folk theory to an extreme by maintaining that "there is only one class in the state, the Volk , (not the rabble), and the king belongs to this class as well as the peasant". Explanation that the Volk was not the rabble was a novel conception in this era, and with Herder can be seen the emergence of "the people" as the basis for the emergence of a classless but hierarchical national body.

The nation, however, was individual and separate, distinguished, to Herder, by climate, education, foreign intercourse, tradition and heredity.

[ 33 ] Providence he praised for having "wonderfully separated nationalities not only by woods and mountains, seas and deserts, rivers and climates, but more particularly by languages, inclinations and characters". Herder praised the tribal outlook writing that "the savage who loves himself, his wife and child with quiet joy and glows with limited activity of his tribe as for his own life is in my opinion a more real being than that cultivated shadow who is enraptured with the shadow of the whole species", isolated since "each nationality contains its centre of happiness within itself, as a bullet the centre of gravity". With no need for comparison since "every nation bears in itself the standard of its perfection, totally independent of all comparison with that of others" for "do not nationalities differ in everything, in poetry, in appearance, in tastes, in usages, customs and languages? Must not religion which partakes of these also differ among the nationalities?" Following a trip to Ukraine , Herder wrote a prediction in his diary ( Journal meiner Reise im Jahre 1769 ) that Slavic nations would one day play a significant role in Europe. He praised Ukraine's "beautiful skies, blithe temperament, musical talent, bountiful soil," and expressed hope that "someday will awaken there a cultured nation whose influence will spread throughout the world." [ 34 ] Herder also speculated that the Hungarian nation might assimilate into surrounding Slavic cultures, a prediction that sparked considerable debate in Hungary and continues to be referenced.

[ 35 ] Political philosophy and the Enlightenment [ edit ] Herder Herder further developed these ideas by lamenting that Martin Luther did not establish a national church, questioning whether Germany had paid too high a price for adopting Christianity at the expense of its true nationality. His patriotism at times bordered on national pantheism , as he advocated for German territorial unity, stating: "He is deserving of glory and gratitude who seeks to promote the unity of the territories of Germany through writings, manufacture, and institutions." He also warned against the loss of genuine folk traditions: But now! Again I cry, my German brethren! But now! The remains of all genuine folk-thought is rolling into the abyss of oblivion with a last and accelerated impetus. For the last century we have been ashamed of everything that concerns the fatherland.

In his Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of Mankind , Herder observed: "Compare England with Germany: the English are Germans, and even in the latest times the Germans have led the way for the English in the greatest things." [ 36 ] Herder, who opposed absolutism and Prussian nationalism, embodied the spirit of the German Volk . As a historical theorist, he distanced himself from the rationalist ideas of the eighteenth century, instead seeking a balance between sentiment and reasoning. He believed that knowledge is inherent in the soul, beginning with sensuous and intuitive perception that gradually develops into self-conscious rationality. To Herder, this evolution represented the harmonization of primitive and derivative truth, experience and intelligence, feeling and reasoning.

[ 36 ] Herder is the first in a long line of Germans preoccupied with this harmony. This search is itself the key to the understanding of many German theories of the time; however Herder understood and feared the extremes to which his folk-theory could tend, and so issued specific warnings. He argued that Jews in Germany should enjoy the full rights and obligations of Germans, and that the non-Jews of the world owed a debt to Jews for centuries of abuse, and that this debt could be discharged only by actively assisting those Jews who wished to do so to regain political sovereignty in their ancient homeland of Israel.

[ 37 ] Herder refused to adhere to a rigid racial theory , writing that "notwithstanding the varieties of the human form, there is but one and the same species of man throughout the whole earth".

He also announced that "national glory is a deceiving seducer. When it reaches a certain height, it clasps the head with an iron band. The enclosed sees nothing in the mist but his own picture; he is susceptible to no foreign impressions." The passage of time was to demonstrate that while many Germans were to find influence in Herder's convictions and influence, fewer were to note his qualifying stipulations.

Herder had emphasised that his conception of the nation encouraged democracy and the free self-expression of a people's identity. He proclaimed support for the French Revolution , a position which did not endear him to royalty. He also differed with Kant's philosophy for not placing reasoning within the context of language. Herder did not think that reason itself could be criticized, as it did not exist except as the process of reasoning. This process was dependent on language.

[ 38 ] He also turned away from the Sturm und Drang movement to go back to the poems of Shakespeare and Homer .

Individual and cultural expression [ edit ] Herder additionally advanced select notions of myriad "authentic" conceptions of Völk and the unity of the individual and natural law, which became fodder for his self-proclaimed twentieth-century disciples. Herderian ideas continue to influence thinkers, linguists and anthropologists, and they have often been considered central to the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis and Franz Boas' coalescence of comparative linguistics and historical particularism with a neo-Kantian/Herderian four-field approach to the study of all cultures, as well as, more recently, anthropological studies by Dell Hymes.

To promote his concept of the Volk , he published letters and collected folk songs. These latter were published in 1773 as Voices of the Peoples in Their Songs ( Stimmen der Völker in ihren Liedern ). The poets Achim von Arnim and Clemens von Brentano later used Stimmen der Völker as samples for The Boy's Magic Horn ( Des Knaben Wunderhorn ).

Herder also fostered the ideal of a person's individuality. Although he had from an early period championed the individuality of cultures – for example, in his This Too a Philosophy of History for the Formation of Humanity (1774), he also championed the individuality of persons within a culture; for example, in his On Thomas Abbt 's Writings (1768) and On the Cognition and Sensation of the Human Soul (1778).

In On Thomas Abbt's Writings , Herder stated that "a human soul is an
individual in the realm of minds: it senses in accordance with an individual formation, and thinks in accordance with the strength of its mental organs. ... My long allegory has succeeded if it achieves the representation of the mind of a human being as an individual phenomenon, as a rarity which deserves to occupy our eyes." [ 39 ] Evolution [ edit ] Herder has been described as a proto-evolutionary thinker by some science historians, although this has been disputed by others.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Concerning the history of life on earth, Herder proposed naturalistic and metaphysical (religious) ideas that are difficult to distinguish and interpret.

[ 41 ] He was known for proposing a great chain of being .

[ 42 ] In his book From the Greeks to Darwin , Henry Fairfield Osborn wrote that "in a general way he upholds the doctrine of the transformation of the lower and higher forms of life, of a continuous transformation from lower to higher types, and of the law of Perfectibility." [ 43 ] However, biographer Wulf Köpke disagreed, noting that "biological evolution from animals to the human species was outside of his thinking, which was still influenced by the idea of divine creation." [ 44 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Song to Cyrus, the Grandson of Astyages (1762) Essay on Being (1763–64) [ 45 ] On Diligence in Several Learned Languages (1764) Treatise on the Ode (1764) [ 46 ] How Philosophy can become more Universal and Useful for the Benefit of the People (1765) [ 47 ] Fragments on Recent German Literature (1767–68) [ 48 ] On Thomas Abbt's Writings (1768) Critical Forests, or Reflections on the Science and Art of the Beautiful (1769–) Gott – einige Gespräche über Spinoza 's System nebst Shaftesbury's Naturhymnus (Gotha: Karl Wilhelm Ettinger, 1787) Journal of my Voyage in the Year 1769 (first published 1846) Treatise on the Origin of Language (1772) [ 49 ] Selection from correspondence on Ossian and the songs of ancient peoples (1773) See also: James Macpherson (1736–1796).

Of German Character and Art (with Goethe, manifesto of the Sturm und Drang) (1773) This Too a Philosophy of History for the Formation of Humanity (1774) [ 47 ] Oldest Document of the Human Race (1774–76) "Essay on Ulrich von Hutten" ["Nachricht von Ulrich von Hutten"] (1776) [ 50 ] On the Resemblance of Medieval English and German Poetry (1777) Sculpture: Some Observations on Shape and Form from Pygmalion's Creative Dream (1778) On the Cognition and Sensation of the Human Soul (1778) On the Effect of Poetic Art on the Ethics of Peoples in Ancient and Modern Times (1778) Folk Songs (1778–79; second ed. of 1807 titled The Voices of Peoples in Songs ) On the Influence of the Government on the Sciences and the Sciences on the Government ( Dissertation on the Reciprocal Influence of Government and the Sciences ) (1780) Letters Concerning the Study of Theology (1780–81) On the Influence of the Beautiful in the Higher Sciences (1781) On the Spirit of Hebrew Poetry. An Instruction for Lovers of the Same and the Oldest History of the Human Spirit (1782–83) God. Some Conversations (1787) Oriental Dialogues 1787 Ideas on the Philosophy of the History of Mankind (1784–91) Scattered Leaves (1785–97) Letters for the Advancement of Humanity (1791–97 or 1793–97? (various drafts)) Thoughts on Some Brahmins (1792) [ 27 ] Zerstreute Blätter (1792) [ 27 ] Christian Writings (5 vols.) (1794–98) Terpsichore (1795–96) A translation and commentary of the Latin poet Jakob Balde .

On the Son of God and Saviour of the World, according to the Gospel of John (1797) Persepolisian Letters (1798). Fragments on Persian architecture, history and religion.

Luther's Catechism, with a catechetical instruction for the use of schools (1798) Understanding and Experience. A Metacritique of the Critique of Pure Reason. Part I. (Part II, Reason and Language.) (1799) Calligone (1800) Adrastea: Events and Characters of the 18th Century (6 vols.) (1801–03) [ 51 ] [ 52 ] The Cid (1805; a free translation of the Spanish epic Cantar de Mio Cid ) Works in English [ edit ] Herder's Essay on Being. A Translation and Critical Approaches . Edited and translated by John K. Noyes (Rochester: Camden House, 2018). Herder's early essay on metaphysics, translated with a series of critical commentaries.

Song Loves the Masses: Herder on Music and Nationalism . Edited and translated by Philip Vilas Bohlman (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2017). Collected writings on music, from Volkslieder to sacred song.

J. G. Herder on Social & Political Culture (Cambridge Studies in the History and Theory of Politics) , ed. F. M. Barnard (Cambridge University Press, 2010; original pub. 1969), ISBN 978-0-521-13381-4 . Selected texts: 1.

Journal of my voyage in the year 1769 ; 2.

Essay on the origin of language ; 3.

Yet another philosophy of history ; 4.

Dissertation on the reciprocal influence of government and the sciences ; 5.

Ideas for a philosophy of the history of mankind .

Selected Writings on Aesthetics . Edited and translated by Gregory Moore (Princeton University Press, 2006).

ISBN 978-0691115955 . Makes many of Herder's writings on aesthetics available in English for the first time.

Herder: Philosophical Writings , eds. Desmond M. Clarke and Michael N. Forster (Cambridge University Press, 2004), ISBN 978-0-521-79088-8 . The most important of Herder's philosophical works in English, including an unabridged version of the Treatise on the Origin of Language and This Too [...] .  Complete contents: Part I—General Philosophical Program: 1.

How philosophy can become more universal and useful for the benefit of the people (1765); Part II—Philosophy of Language: 2.

Fragments on recent German literature (1767–68); 3.

Treatise on the origin of language (1772); Part III—Philosophy of Mind: 4.

On Thomas Abbt's writings (1768); 5.

On cognition and sensation, the two main forces of the human soul [preface] (1775); 6.

On the cognition and sensation of the human soul (1778); Part IV—Philosophy of History: 7.

On the change of taste (1766); 8.

Older critical Forestlet (1767/8); 9.

This too a philosophy of history for the formation of humanity (1774); Part V—Political Philosophy: 10.

Letters concerning the progress of humanity (1792); 11.

Letters for the advancement of humanity (1793–97).

Another Philosophy of History and Selected Political Writings , eds.

Ioannis D. Evrigenis and Daniel Pellerin (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2004). A translation of Auch eine Philosophie and other works.

Herder on Nationality, Humanity, and History , F. M. Barnard (Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2003), ISBN 978-0-7735-2519-1 .

Sculpture: Some Observations on Shape and Form from Pygmalion's Creative Dream , ed. Jason Gaiger (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002). Translation of Herder's Plastik .

On World History , eds. Hans Adler and Ernest A. Menze (Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe, 1997). Short excerpts on history from various texts.

Selected Early Works , eds. Ernest A. Menze and Karl Menges (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1992). Partial translation of the important text Über die neuere deutsche Litteratur .

Herder's Social and Political Thought: From Enlightenment to Nationalism , F. M. Barnard (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967).

See also [ edit ] Herder Prize Notes [ edit ] ^ Isaiah Berlin , Three Critics of the Enlightenment: Vico, Hamann, Herder , London and Princeton, 2000.

^ Kerrigan, William Thomas (1997), "Young America": Romantic Nationalism in Literature and Politics, 1843–1861 , University of Michigan, 1997, p. 150.

^ Royal J. Schmidt, "Cultural Nationalism in Herder," Journal of the History of Ideas 17 (3) (June 1956), pp. 407–417.

^ Gregory Claeys (ed.), Encyclopedia of Modern Political Thought , Routledge, 2004, "Herder, Johann Gottfried": "Herder is an anticolonialist cosmopolitan precisely because he is a nationalist".

^ Forster 2010, p. 43.

^ Frederick C. Beiser , The German Historicist Tradition , Oxford University Press, 2011, p. 98.

^ Christopher John Murray (ed.), Encyclopedia of the Romantic Era, 1760–1850 , Routledge, 2013, p. 491: "Herder expressed a view fundamental to Romantic hermeneutics..."; Forster 2010, p. 9.

^ Forster 2010, p. 42.

^ This thesis is prominent in This Too a Philosophy of History for the Formation of Humanity (1774) and Ideas on the Philosophy of the History of Mankind (1784–91).

^ Forster 2010, p. 36.

^ Forster 2010, p. 41.

^ Barnard, F. M. (2005). In Herder on nationality, humanity and history (pp. 38–39). essay, McGill-Queen's University Press.

^ Forster 2010, p. 25.

^ Forster 2010, pp. 16 and 50 n. 6: "This thesis is already prominent in On Diligence in Several Learned Languages (1764)".

^ "Duden | Johann | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition" .

Duden (in German) . Retrieved 20 October 2018 .

J o hann ^ "Duden | Gottfried | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition" .

Duden (in German) . Retrieved 20 October 2018 .

Gọttfried ^ "Duden | Herder | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition" .

Duden (in German) . Retrieved 20 October 2018 .

Hẹrder ^ Beiser, Frederick C. (1993).

The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte . Harvard University Press. p. 102.

ISBN 9780674295032 .

^ Jacob, Margaret C.

The Secular Enlightenment . Princeton: Princeton University Press 2019, 192 ^ Columbia studies in the social sciences , Issue 341, 1966, p. 74.

^ Copleston, Frederick Charles .

The Enlightenment: Voltaire to Kant . 2003. p. 146.

^ Jacob, Margaret C.

The Secular Enlightenment . Princeton: Princeton University Press 2019, 193 ^ Forster 2010, p. 9.

^ Jürgen Georg Backhaus (ed.), The University According to Humboldt: History, Policy, and Future Possibilities , Springer, 2015, p. 58.

^ Michael Forster (2007).

"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Johann Gottfried von Herder" . Retrieved 20 May 2016 .

^ McNab, John (1972).

Towards a Theology of Social Concern: A Comparative Study of the Elements for Social Concern in the Writings of Frederick D. Maurice and Walter Rauschenbusch (PhD thesis). Montreal: McGill University. p. 201 . Retrieved 6 February 2019 .

^ a b c Willson, A. Leslie. "Rogerius' "Open Deure": A Herder Source." Monatshefte 48, no. 1 (1956): 17–24. Accessed 3 October 2020.

JSTOR 30166121 .

^ Willson, A. Leslie. "Herder and India: The Genesis of a Mythical Image." PMLA 70, no. 5 (1955): 1049–058. Accessed 3 October 2020.

doi : 10.2307/459885 .

^ Lifschitz, Avi (2012).

Language & Enlightenment: The Berlin Debates of the Eighteenth Century . Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. pp.

185– 86.

ISBN 978-0-19966166-4 .

^ Votruba, Martin.

"Herder on Language" (PDF) .

Slovak Studies Program . University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved 30 June 2010 .

^ Herder, Johann Gottfried.

Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of Mankind, The seminal 15th book . Translated by Bastian Terhorst. Berlin: Epubli, 2025.

ISBN 9783819082313 . p. 39.

^ Peleg, Yaron.

Orientalism and the Hebrew Imagination . United States: Cornell University Press. p. 6.

^ Herder, Johann Gottfried.

Ideas for a Philosophy of the History of Mankind, The seminal 15th book . Translated by Bastian Terhorst. Berlin: Epubli, 2025.

ISBN 9783819082313 .

^ "Ukraine will become a new Greece" .

Goodreads . Retrieved 2 March 2025 .

^ "Hungarian history" . Archived from the original on 20 April 2008 . Retrieved 9 July 2008 .

^ a b "Johann Gottfried von Herder" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica . Retrieved 2 March 2025 .

^ Barnard, F. M., "The Hebrews and Herder's Political Creed," Modern Language Review," vol. 54, no. 4, October 1959, pp. 533–546.

^ Copleston, Frederick Charles.

The Enlightenment: Voltaire to Kant , 2003, p. 145.

^ Herder: Philosophical Writings , ed. M. N. Forster. Cambridge: 2002, p. 167 ^ Headstrom, Birger R. (1929).

Herder and the Theory of Evolution Archived 20 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

The Open Court 10 (2): 596–601.

^ a b Nisbet, H. B. (1970).

Herder and the Philosophy and History of Science . Modern Humanities Research Association. pp. 210–212.

ISBN 978-0900547065 ^ a b Zimmerli, W. Ch.

Evolution or Development? Questions Concerning the Systematic and Historical Position of Herder . In Kurt Mueller-Vollmer. (1990).

Herder Today: Contributions from the International Herder Conference: 5–8 November 1987 Stanford, California . pp. 1–16.

ISBN 0-89925-495-0 ^ Osborn, Henry Fairfield. (1908).

From the Greeks to Darwin: An Outline of the Development of the Evolution Idea . New York: Macmillan. p. 103 ^ Köpke, Wulf (1987).

Johann Gottfried Herder . Twayne Publishers, p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-80576634-9 ^ Mueller-Vollmer, Kurt (1990).

Herder Today: Contributions from the International Herder Conference, Nov. 5–8, 1987, Stanford, California . Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 9783110117394 – via Google Books.

^ Menze, Ernest A.; Menges, Karl (2010).

Johann Gottfried Herder: Selected Early Works, 1764–1767: Addresses, Essays, and Drafts; Fragments on Recent German Literature . Penn State Press.

ISBN 978-0271044972 – via Google Books.

^ a b Forster, Michael N.; Herder, Johann Gottfried (2002). Forster, Michael N (ed.).

Herder: Philosophical Writings .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139164634 .

ISBN 9780521790888 .

^ Herder, Johann Gottfried (1985).

Über die neuere deutsche Literatur: Fragmente . Aufbau-Verlag.

ISBN 9783351001308 – via Google Books.

^ "Treatise on the Origin of Language by Johann Gottfried Herder 1772" .

www.marxists.org .

^ "Universitätsbibliothek Bielefeld – digitale Medien" .

www.ub.uni-bielefeld.de .

^ "Adrastea" .

-: Adrastea, -: – - .

^ Clark, Robert Thomas (1955).

Herder: His Life and Thought . University of California Press. p.

426 – via Internet Archive.

herder adrastea.

References [ edit ] Michael N. Forster, After Herder: Philosophy of Language in the German Tradition , Oxford University Press, 2010.

Further reading [ edit ] Adler, Hans. "Johann Gottfried Herder's Concept of Humanity," Studies in Eighteenth-Century Culture 23 (1994): 55–74 Adler, Hans and Wolf Koepke eds., A Companion to the Works of Johann Gottfried Herder . Rochester: Camden House 2009.

Azurmendi, J.

2008.

Volksgeist. Herri gogoa , Donostia, Elkar, ISBN 978-84-9783-404-9 .

Barnard, Frederick Mechner (1965).

Herder's Social and Political Thought . Oxford, Oxfordshire: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-827151-4 .

Berman, Antoine .

L'épreuve de l'étranger. Culture et traduction dans l'Allemagne romantique: Herder, Goethe, Schlegel, Novalis, Humboldt, Schleiermacher, Hölderlin .

, Paris, Gallimard, Essais, 1984.

ISBN 978-2-07-070076-9 Berlin, Isaiah , Vico and Herder. Two Studies in the History of Ideas , London, 1976.

Berlin, Isaiah Three Critics of the Enlightenment: Vico, Hamann, Herder , London and Princeton, 2000, ISBN 0-691-05726-5 Herder today . Contributions from the International Herder Conference, 5–8 November 1987, Stanford, California. Edited by Mueller-Vollmer Kurt. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter 1990, including Baum, Manfred, "Herder's Essay on Being," pp. 126–137.

Simon Josef, "Herder and the Problematization of Metaphysics," pp. 108–125.

DeSouza, Nigel and Anik Waldow eds., Herder. Philosophy and Anthropology . Oxford University Press 2017.

Hayes, Carlton J. H. (1927). " Contributions of Herder to the Doctrine of Nationalism ".

The American Historical Review .

32 (4): 719–736.

Iggers, Georg, The German Conception of History: The National Tradition of Historical Thought from Herder to the Present (2nd ed.; Wesleyan University Press, 1983).

Noyes, John K., Herder. Aesthetics against Imperialism . University of Toronto Press 2015.

Noyes, John K. ed., Herder's Essay on Being. A Translation and Critical Approaches . Rochester: Camden House 2018.

Sikka, Sonia, Herder on Humanity and Cultural Difference. Enlightened Relativism . Cambridge University Press 2011.

Taylor, Charles, The importance of Herder . In Isaiah Berlin: A celebration edited by Margalit Edna and Margalit Avishai. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1991. pp. 40–63; reprinted in: C. Taylor, Philosophical Arguments , Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1995, pp. 79–99.

Zammito, John H.

Kant, Herder, the Birth of Anthropology . Chicago University Press 2002.

Zammito, John H., Karl Menges and Ernest A. Menze. "Johann Gottfried Herder Revisited: The Revolution in Scholarship in the Last Quarter Century," Journal of the History of Ideas, Volume 71, Number 4, October 2010, pp. 661–684, in Project MUSE External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Johann Gottfried Herder .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Johann Gottfried Herder .

Works by or about Johann Gottfried Herder at the Internet Archive Works by Johann Gottfried Herder at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Johann Gottfried von Herder" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Herder bibliography and more " Essay on the Origin of Language Archived 18 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine ," 1772. Online in English translation.

International Herder Society Selected works from Project Gutenberg (in German) Texts on Wikisource: " Herder, Johann Gottfried von ".

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

" Herder ".

The Nuttall Encyclopædia . 1907.

" Herder, Johann Gottfried von ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

" Herder, Johann Gottfried von ".

The New Student's Reference Work . 1914.

" Herder, Johann Gottfried von ".

Encyclopedia Americana . 1920.

The Jürgen Trabant Wilhelm von Humboldt Lectures Links to related articles v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Order of the Illuminati History Age of Enlightenment Liberalism ( Liberalism in Germany ) Rationalism Freemasonry ( Freemasonry in Germany ) Anti-clericalism Secularism French Revolution ( Jacobinism ) Congress of Wilhelmsbad Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria Members Full list of members A–F Jacob Friedrich von Abel Franz von Albini August von Sachsen-Gotha-Altenburg Jens Baggesen Karl Friedrich Bahrdt Aloys Basselet von La Rosée August Batsch Rudolph Zacharias Becker Johann Joachim Bellermann Johann Erich Biester Aloys Blumauer Johann von Böber Johann Joachim Christoph Bode Johann Michael Böck Ignaz von Born Karl Böttiger Joachim Heinrich Campe Christian Cannabich Karl August, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach Philipp von Cobenzl Hieronymus von Colloredo Ignaz Cornova Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg Anton Dereser Johann Georg von Dillis Christian Wilhelm von Dohm Karl von Eckartshausen Rudolf Eickemeyer Ernest II, Duke of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg Johann Georg Heinrich Feder Ferdinand, Prince of Brunswick-Lüneburg Junius Frey Frederick Christian II, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg Frederick V, Landgrave of Hesse-Homburg Friedrich Ferdinand Constantin von Sachsen-Weimar-Eisenach G–M Christian Garve Friedrich Gedike Otto Heinrich von Gemmingen-Hornberg Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Leopold Friedrich Günther von Goeckingk Johann Casimir Häffelin Karl August von Hardenberg Lorenz Leopold Haschka August Adolph von Hennings Johann Gottfried Herder Andreas Joseph Hofmann Christoph Wilhelm Hufeland Gottlieb Hufeland Isaak Iselin Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi Karl von Hesse-Kassel Wenzel Anton, Prince of Kaunitz-Rietberg Martin Gottlieb Klauer Johann Friedrich Kleuker Adolph Knigge Christian Gottfried Körner Karl Heinrich Lang Franz Michael Leuchsenring Justus Christian Loder Ludwig I, Grand Duke of Hesse Jakob Mauvillon Beda Mayr Christoph Meiners August Gottlieb Meißner Ludwig August Mellin Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau Daniel Gotthilf Moldenhawer Maximilian von Montgelas Johannes von Müller Friedrich Münter Johann Karl August Musäus N–Z Christian Gottlob Neefe Christoph Friedrich Nicolai Franz Oberthür Dietrich Heinrich Ludwig von Ompteda Christian Adolph Overbeck Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi Karl Leonhard Reinhold Franz Anton Ries Christian Gotthilf Salzmann Friedrich Schlichtegroll Johann Georg Schlosser Ernst Friedrich von Schlotheim Nikolaus Simrock Samuel Thomas von Sömmerring Joseph von Sonnenfels Ludwig Timotheus Spittler Anton Matthias Sprickmann Johan Philip Stadion von Warthausen Maximilian Stoll Gottfried van Swieten Johann Nepomuk von Triva François-Charles de Velbrück Franz Michael Vierthaler Wilderich of Walderdorf Adam Weishaupt Lorenz von Westenrieder Franz Xaver von Zach See also Owl of Minerva Rite of Strict Observance Josephinism Enlightened absolutism Weimar Classicism Sturm und Drang Anti-Catholicism New World Order (conspiracy theory) Augustin Barruel 's Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism John Robison Illuminati in popular culture Category Society portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia 2 Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz ADK FID People BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johann_Gottfried_Herder&oldid=1306485313 " Categories : Johann Gottfried Herder 1744 births 1803 deaths People from Morąg People from East Prussia Bavarian nobility German Lutheran theologians 18th-century German philosophers 18th-century German Protestant theologians 18th-century German writers 18th-century German male writers 18th-century German Lutheran clergy 19th-century German philosophers 19th-century German Protestant theologians 19th-century German writers 19th-century German male writers 19th-century German Lutheran clergy Age of Enlightenment German idealists Enlightenment philosophers German ethicists German-language poets German male non-fiction writers German nationalists German translation scholars Lutheran philosophers German philosophers of art German philosophers of culture German philosophers of education German philosophers of history German philosophers of language Philosophers of literature German philosophers of mind German philosophers of science German political philosophers Proto-evolutionary biologists Sturm und Drang German Freemasons Theoretical historians University of Königsberg alumni Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2024 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from February 2024 Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Commons link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 00:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Johann Gottfried Herder 66 languages Add topic

