Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Legacy 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Rolf Maximilian Sievert 37 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swedish medical physicist (1896–1966) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rolf Maximilian Sievert" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rolf Maximilian Sievert Born ( 1896-05-06 ) 6 May 1896 Stockholm , Sweden Died 3 October 1966 (1966-10-03) (aged 70) Stockholm, Sweden Nationality Swedish Alma mater Uppsala University ( B.S.

) Stockholm University ( M.S.

) Occupation Medical physicist Rolf Maximilian Sievert ( Swedish: [ˈrɔlf maksɪˈmǐːlɪan ˈsǐːvɛʈ] ; 6 May 1896 – 3 October 1966) was a Swedish medical physicist whose major contribution was in the study of the biological effects of ionizing radiation .

The sievert (Sv), the SI unit representing the stochastic health risk of ionizing radiation, is named for him. He has been called the "Father of Radiation Protection".

Biography [ edit ] Sievert  was born in Stockholm , Sweden. His parents were Max Sievert and Sofia Carolina Sievert, née Panchéen.

[ 1 ] In 1881, his father founded the Max Sievert Company in Stockholm.

[ 1 ] Sievert served as head of the physics laboratory at Sweden's Radiumhemmet from 1924 to '37, after which he was appointed head of the department of radiation physics at the Karolinska Institute . He played a pioneering role in the measurement of doses of radiation especially in its use in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer . In later years, he focused his research on the biological effects of repeated exposure to low doses of radiation.

He was a founder of the International X-ray and Radium Protection Committee (IXRPC) in 1928, and served as it first chairman; this later became the ICRP . He also chaired the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR).

[ 2 ] Sievert invented a number of instruments for measuring radiation doses, the most widely known being the Sievert chamber .

Legacy [ edit ] In 1979, at the Conférence Générale des Poids et Mesures (General Conference on Weights and Measures or CGPM), the SI unit for ionizing radiation dose equivalent was named after him and given the name sievert (Sv).

Sievert had an extensive insect collection and his specimens can be found in the Entomological Museum of Lund University in Sweden.

Sievert in 1924 See also [ edit ] Sievert integral Sievert chamber Rolf M. Sievert Award References [ edit ] ^ a b Sekiya, M., Yamasaki, M., " Rolf Maximilian Sievert (1896–1966): father of radiation protection ", Radiological Physics and Technology , 9, 1–5 (2016). Retrieved 2 July 2021.

^ Clarke, R.H.; J. Valentin (2009).

"The History of ICRP and the Evolution of its Policies" (PDF) .

Annals of the ICRP . ICRP Publication 109.

39 (1): 75– 110.

doi : 10.1016/j.icrp.2009.07.009 .

S2CID 71278114 . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Rolf Sievert at Wikimedia Commons Rolf Sievert, the man and the unit Rolf Maximilian Sievert (1896–1966): father of radiation protection v t e Scientists whose names are used as units SI base units André-Marie Ampère ( ampere ) Lord Kelvin ( kelvin ) SI derived units Henri Becquerel ( becquerel ) Anders Celsius (degree Celsius ) Charles-Augustin de Coulomb ( coulomb ) Michael Faraday ( farad ) Louis Harold Gray ( gray ) Joseph Henry ( henry ) Heinrich Hertz ( hertz ) James Prescott Joule ( joule ) Isaac Newton ( newton ) Georg Ohm ( ohm ) Blaise Pascal ( pascal ) Werner von Siemens ( siemens ) Rolf Maximilian Sievert ( sievert ) Nikola Tesla ( tesla ) Alessandro Volta ( volt ) James Watt ( watt ) Wilhelm Eduard Weber ( weber ) Non-SI metric ( cgs ) units Anders Jonas Ångström ( angstrom ) Peter Debye ( debye ) Loránd Eötvös ( eotvos ) Galileo Galilei ( gal ) Carl Friedrich Gauss ( gauss ) William Gilbert ( gilbert ) Heinrich Kayser ( kayser ) Johann Heinrich Lambert ( lambert ) Samuel Langley ( langley ) James Clerk Maxwell ( maxwell ) Hans Christian Ørsted ( oersted ) Jean Léonard Marie Poiseuille ( poise ) Sir George Stokes, 1st Baronet ( stokes ) John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh ( rayl ) Imperial and US customary units Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit (degree Fahrenheit ) Johann Heinrich Lambert ( foot-lambert ) William John Macquorn Rankine ( degree Rankine ) Non-systematic units Alexander Graham Bell ( bel/decibel ) Marie Curie & Pierre Curie ( curie ) John Dalton ( dalton ) Michael Faraday ( faraday ) Heinrich Mache ( mache ) John Napier ( neper ) René Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur ( degree Réaumur ) Wilhelm Röntgen ( roentgen ) J. J. Thomson ( thomson ) Evangelista Torricelli ( torr ) List of scientists whose names are used as units · Scientists whose names are used in physical constants · People whose names are used in chemical element names Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Sweden Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rolf_Maximilian_Sievert&oldid=1277487012 " Categories : Swedish physicists 1896 births 1966 deaths Uppsala University alumni Academic staff of the Karolinska Institute Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences Medical physicists Units of radiation dose Radiation protection Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2021 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from January 2021 Articles with hCards Pages with Swedish IPA Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 February 2025, at 23:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rolf Maximilian Sievert 37 languages Add topic

