Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Travels 1.3 Political offices 1.4 The Stoic school on Rhodes 2 Partial scope of writings 3 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 3.1 Ethics 3.2 Physics 3.3 Mathematics 3.4 Astronomy and meteorology 3.5 Geography, ethnology, and geology 3.5.1 Earth's circumference 3.6 History and tactics 4 Reputation and influence 5 See also 6 References 7 Editions and translations 8 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Posidonius 51 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek Stoic philosopher (c.135 – c.51 BC) For other people with the same name, see Posidonius (disambiguation) .

Posidonius Bust of Posidonius from the Naples National Archaeological Museum Born c.

135 BC Apamea (present-day Syria ) Died c.

51 BC (aged 83–84) Rhodes or Rome Philosophical work Era Hellenistic philosophy Region Western philosophy School Stoicism Main interests Astronomy, geography, history, mathematics, meteorology, philosophy, physics Posidonius ( / ˌ p ɒ s ɪ ˈ d oʊ n i ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Ποσειδώνιος Poseidṓnios , "of Poseidon ") "of Apameia" (ὁ Ἀπαμεύς) or "of Rhodes " (ὁ Ῥόδιος) ( c.

135 – c.

51 BC ), was a Greek politician , astronomer , astrologer , [ 1 ] geographer , historian , mathematician , and teacher native to Apamea , Syria .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] He was considered the most learned man of his time and, possibly, of the entire Stoic school .

[ 7 ] After a period learning Stoic philosophy from Panaetius in Athens , he spent many years in travel and scientific researches in Spain , Africa , Italy , Gaul , Liguria , Sicily and on the eastern shores of the Adriatic. He settled as a teacher at Rhodes where his fame attracted numerous scholars. Next to Panaetius he did most, by writings and personal lectures, to spread Stoicism to the Roman world, and he became well known to many leading men, including Pompey and Cicero .

His works are now lost, but they proved a mine of information to later writers. The titles and subjects of more than twenty of them are known. In common with other Stoics of the middle period, he displayed syncretic tendencies, following not just the earlier Stoics, but making use of the works of Plato and Aristotle . A polymath as well as a philosopher , he took genuine interest in natural science, geography, natural history, mathematics and astronomy . He sought to determine the distance and magnitude of the Sun, to calculate the diameter of the Earth and the influence of the Moon on the tides.

Life [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Posidonius, nicknamed "the Athlete" (Ἀθλητής), [ 8 ] [ 9 ] was born around 135 BC.

[ 10 ] He was born into a Greek family in Apamea , [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] a Hellenistic city on the river Orontes in northern Syria.

[ 14 ] As historian Philip Freeman puts it: "Posidonius was Greek to the core".

[ 12 ] Posidonius expressed no love for his native city, Apamea, in his writings and he mocked its inhabitants.

[ 12 ] As a young man he moved to Athens and studied under Panaetius , the leading Stoic philosopher of the age, and the last undisputed head ( scholarch ) of the Stoic school in Athens.

[ 10 ] When Panaetius died in 110 BC, Posidonius would have been around 25 years old.

[ 10 ] Rather than remain in Athens, he instead settled in Rhodes , and gained citizenship.

[ 14 ] In Rhodes, Posidonius maintained his own school which would become the leading institution of the time.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Travels [ edit ] Around the 90s BC Posidonius embarked on a series of voyages around the Mediterranean gathering scientific data and observing the customs and people of the places he visited.

[ 10 ] He traveled in Greece, Hispania , Italy, Sicily , Dalmatia , Gaul , Liguria , North Africa , and on the eastern shores of the Adriatic .

[ 2 ] In Hispania , on the Atlantic coast at Gades (the modern Cadiz ), Posidonius could observe tides much higher than in his native Mediterranean.

[ 17 ] He wrote that daily tides are related to the Moon's orbit, while tidal heights vary with the cycles of the Moon, and he hypothesized about yearly tidal cycles synchronized with the equinoxes and solstices.

[ 18 ] In Gaul , he studied the Celts .

[ 15 ] He left descriptions of customs such as nailing skulls to doorways as trophies, which he witnessed, [ 19 ] and vivid legends told to him by the Celts, such as a story that in the past, men were paid to allow their throats to be slit for public amusement.

[ 20 ] But he noted that the Celts honored the Druids , whom Posidonius saw as philosophers, and concluded that, even among the barbaric, "pride and passion give way to wisdom, and Ares stands in awe of the Muses." Posidonius wrote a geographic treatise on the lands of the Celts which has since been lost, but which is referred to extensively (both directly and otherwise) in the works of Diodorus of Sicily , Strabo , Caesar and Tacitus ' Germania .

Political offices [ edit ] In Rhodes , Posidonius actively took part in political life, and he attained high office when he was appointed as one of the Prytaneis .

[ 15 ] This was the most important political office in Rhodes, combining presidential and executive functions, of which there were five (or possibly six) men holding the office for a six-month period.

[ 21 ] He was chosen for at least one embassy to Rome in 87/86, during the Marian and Sullan era.

[ 15 ] Although the purpose of the embassy is unknown, this was at the time of the First Mithridatic War when Roman rule over the Greek cities was being challenged by Mithridates VI of Pontus and the political situation was delicate.

[ 22 ] The Stoic school on Rhodes [ edit ] Under Posidonius, Rhodes eclipsed Athens to become the new centre for Stoic philosophy in the 1st century BC.

[ 23 ] This process may have already have begun under Panaetius , who was a native of Rhodes, and may have fostered a school there.

[ 24 ] Ian Kidd remarks that Rhodes "was attractive, not only as an independent city, commercially prosperous, go-ahead and with easy links of movement in all directions, but because it was welcoming to intellectuals, for it already had a strong reputation particularly for scientific research from men like Hipparchus ." [ 15 ] Although little is known of the organization of his school, it is clear that Posidonius had a steady stream of Greek and Roman students, as demonstrated by the eminent Romans who visited it.

[ 15 ] Pompey sat in on a lecture in 66 and did so again in 62 on return from campaigning in the East.

[ 15 ] On this latter occasion the subject of the lecture was "There is no good but moral good".

[ 25 ] Posidonius was probably in his seventies at this time and was suffering from gout . He illustrated the theme of his lecture by pointing to his painful leg and declaring "It is no good, pain; bothersome you may be, but you will never persuade me that you are an evil." [ 25 ] When Cicero was in his late twenties, he attended a course of Posidonius' lectures, and later invited Posidonius to write a monograph on Cicero's own consulship (Posidonius politely refused).

[ 25 ] In his later writings Cicero repeatedly refers to Posidonius as "my teacher" and "my dear friend".

[ 26 ] Posidonius died in his eighties in 51 BC; his grandson, Jason of Nysa , succeeded him as head of the school on Rhodes .

[ 23 ] Partial scope of writings [ edit ] Posidonius was celebrated as a polymath throughout the Graeco-Roman world because he came near to mastering all the knowledge of his time, similar to Aristotle and Eratosthenes . He attempted to create a unified system for understanding the human intellect and the universe which would provide an explanation of and a guide for human behavior.

Posidonius wrote on physics (including meteorology and physical geography ), astronomy , astrology and divination , seismology , geology and mineralogy , hydrology , botany , ethics, logic , mathematics, history, natural history , anthropology , and tactics . His studies were major investigations into their subjects, although not without errors.

None of his works survives intact. All that have been found are fragments, although the titles and subjects of many of his books are known.

[ 27 ] Writers such as Strabo and Seneca provide most of the information about his life and works.

Philosophy [ edit ] For Posidonius, philosophy was the dominant master art and all the individual sciences were subordinate to philosophy, which alone could explain the cosmos. All his works, from scientific to historical, were inseparably philosophical.

He accepted the Stoic categorization of philosophy into physics (natural philosophy, including metaphysics and theology), logic (including dialectic), and ethics.

[ 28 ] These three categories for him were, in Stoic fashion, inseparable and interdependent parts of an organic, natural whole. He compared them to a living being, with physics the flesh and blood, logic the bones and tendons holding the organism together, and finally ethics—the most important part—corresponding to the soul.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Although a firm Stoic, Posidonius was syncretic like Panaetius and other Stoics of the middle period.

[ 30 ] He followed not only the earlier Stoics, but made use of the writings of Plato and Aristotle .

[ 30 ] Posidonius studied Plato's Timaeus , and seems to have written a commentary on it emphasizing its Pythagorean features.

[ 31 ] As a creative philosopher, Posidonius would however be expected to create innovations within the tradition of the philosophical school to which he belonged.

[ 32 ] David Sedley remarks: [ 33 ] On the vast majority of philosophical issues, what we know of both Panaetius and Posidonius places them firmly within the main current of Stoic debate. Their innovatively hospitable attitude to Plato and Aristotle enables them to enrich and, to a limited extent, reorientate their inherited Stoicism, but, for all that, they remain palpably Stoics, working within the established tradition.

Ethics [ edit ] Ethics, Posidonius taught, is about practice not just theory.

[ 34 ] It involves knowledge of both the human and the divine, and a knowledge of the universe to which human reason is related.

[ 34 ] It was once the general view that Posidonius departed from the monistic psychology of the earlier Stoics.

[ 10 ] Chrysippus had written a work called On Passions in which he affirmed that reason and emotion were not separate and distinct faculties, and that destructive passions were instead rational impulses which were out-of-control. According to the testimony of Galen (an adherent of Plato), Posidonius wrote his own On Passions in which he instead adopted Plato's tripartition of the soul which taught that in addition to the rational faculties, the human soul had faculties that were spirited (anger, desires for power, possessions, etc.) and desiderative (desires for sex and food).

[ 10 ] Although Galen's testimony is still accepted by some, more recent scholarship argues that Galen may have exaggerated Posidonius' views for polemical effect, and that Posidonius may have been trying to clarify and expand on Chrysippus rather than oppose him.

[ 10 ] [ 35 ] Other writers who knew the ethical works of Posidonius, including Cicero and Seneca , grouped Chrysippus and Posidonius together and saw no opposition between them.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Physics [ edit ] The philosophical grand vision of Posidonius was that the universe itself was interconnected as an organic whole, providential and organised in all respects, from the development of the physical world to the behaviour of living creatures.

[ 36 ] Panaetius had doubted both the reality of divination and the Stoic doctrine of the future conflagration ( ekpyrosis ), but Posidonius wrote in favour of these ideas.

[ 33 ] As a Stoic, Posidonius was an advocate of cosmic "sympathy" (συμπάθεια, sympatheia )—the organic interrelation of all appearances in the world, from the sky to the Earth, as part of a rational design uniting humanity and all things in the universe. He believed valid predictions could be made from signs in nature—whether through astrology or prophetic dreams—as a kind of scientific prediction.

[ 37 ] Mathematics [ edit ] Posidonius was one of the first to attempt to prove Euclid's fifth postulate of geometry . He suggested changing the definition of parallel straight lines to an equivalent statement that would allow him to prove the fifth postulate. From there, Euclidean geometry could be restructured, placing the fifth postulate among the theorems instead.

[ 38 ] In addition to his writings on geometry, Posidonius was credited for creating some mathematical definitions, or for articulating views on technical terms, for example 'theorem' and 'problem'.

Astronomy and meteorology [ edit ] Some fragments of his writings on astronomy survive through the treatise by Cleomedes , On the Circular Motions of the Celestial Bodies , the first chapter of the second book appearing to have been mostly copied from Posidonius.

Posidonius advanced the theory that the Sun emanated a vital force that permeated the world.

He attempted to measure the distance and size of the Sun . In about 90 BC, Posidonius estimated the distance from the Earth to the Sun (see astronomical unit ) to be 9,893 times the Earth's radius. This was still too small by half. In measuring the size of the Sun, however, he reached a figure larger and more accurate than those proposed by other Greek astronomers and Aristarchus of Samos .

[ 39 ] Posidonius also calculated the size and distance of the Moon .

Posidonius constructed an orrery , possibly similar to the Antikythera mechanism . Posidonius's orrery, according to Cicero , exhibited the diurnal motions of the Sun, Moon, and the five known planets.

[ 40 ] Posidonius in his writings on meteorology followed Aristotle. He theorized on the causes of clouds, mist, wind, and rain as well as frost, hail, lightning, and rainbows. He also estimated that the boundary between the clouds and the heavens lies about 40 stadia above the Earth.

Geography, ethnology, and geology [ edit ] World map according to ideas by Posidonius (150–130 BC), drawn in 1628 by cartographers Petrus Bertius and Melchior Tavernier . Many of the details could not have been known to Posidonius; rather, Bertius and Tavernier show Posidonius's ideas about the positions of the continents.

Posidonius's fame beyond specialized philosophical circles had begun, at the latest, in the eighties with the publication of the work " About the ocean and the adjacent areas ". This work was not only an overall representation of geographical questions according to current scientific knowledge, but it served to popularize his theories about the internal connections of the world, to show how all the forces had an effect on each other and how the interconnectedness applied also to human life, to the political just as to the personal spheres.

In this work, Posidonius detailed his theory of the effect on a people's character by the climate, which included his representation of the "geography of the races". This theory was not solely scientific, but also had political implications—his Roman readers were informed that the climatic central position of Italy was an essential condition of the Roman destiny to dominate the world. As a Stoic, he did not, however, make a fundamental distinction between the civilized Romans as masters of the world and the less civilized peoples. Posidonius's writings on the Jews were probably the source of Diodorus Siculus 's account of the siege of Jerusalem and possibly also for Strabo 's.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Some of Posidonius's arguments are contested by Josephus in Against Apion .

Like Pytheas , Posidonius believed the tide is caused by the Moon. Posidonius was, however, wrong about the cause. Thinking that the Moon was a mixture of air and fire, he attributed the cause of the tides to the heat of the Moon, hot enough to cause the water to swell but not hot enough to evaporate it.

He recorded observations on both earthquakes and volcanoes, including accounts of the eruptions of the volcanoes in the Aeolian Islands , north of Sicily .

Earth's circumference [ edit ] Posidonius calculated the Earth's circumference by the arc measurement method, by reference to the position of the star Canopus .

[ 44 ] As explained by Cleomedes, Posidonius observed Canopus on but never above the horizon at Rhodes, while at Alexandria he saw it ascend as far as 7½ degrees above the horizon (the meridian arc between the latitude of the two locales is actually 5 degrees 14 minutes). Since he thought Rhodes was 5,000 stadia due north of Alexandria, and the difference in the star's elevation indicated the distance between the two locales was 1/48 of the circle, he multiplied 5,000 stadia by 48 to arrive at a figure of 240,000 stadia for the circumference of the Earth.

[ 45 ] His estimate of the latitude difference of these two points, 360 degrees/48=7.5 degrees, is rather erroneous. (The modern value is approximately 5 degrees.) In addition, they are not quite on the same meridian as they were assumed to be. The longitude difference of the points, slightly less than 2 degrees, is not negligible compared with the latitude difference.

Translating stadia into modern units of distance can be problematic, but it is generally thought that the stadion used by Posidonius was almost exactly 1/10 of a modern statute mile. Thus Posidonius's measure of 240,000 stadia translates to 24,000 mi (39,000 km) compared to the actual circumference of 24,901 mi (40,074 km).

[ 45 ] Posidonius's method for calculating the circumference of the Earth, relied on the altitude of the star Canopus Posidonius was informed in his approach to finding the Earth's circumference by Eratosthenes , who a century earlier arrived at a figure of 252,000 stadia; both men's figures for the Earth's circumference were uncannily accurate.

Strabo noted that the distance between Rhodes and Alexandria is 3,750 stadia, and reported Posidonius's estimate of the Earth's circumference to be 180,000 stadia or 18,000 mi (29,000 km).

[ 46 ] Pliny the Elder mentions Posidonius among his sources and without naming him reported his method for estimating the Earth's circumference. He noted, however, that Hipparchus had added some 26,000 stadia to Eratosthenes's estimate. The smaller value offered by Strabo and the different lengths of Greek and Roman stadia have created a persistent confusion around Posidonius's result.

Ptolemy used Posidonius's lower value of 180,000 stades (about 33% too low) for the Earth's circumference in his Geography . This was the number used by Christopher Columbus to underestimate the distance to India as 70,000 stades.

[ 47 ] History and tactics [ edit ] In his Histories , Posidonius continued the World History of Polybius . His history of the period 146–88 BC is said to have filled 52 volumes.

[ 48 ] His Histories continue the account of the rise and expansion of Roman dominance, which he appears to have supported. Posidonius did not follow Polybius's more detached and factual style, for Posidonius saw events as caused by human psychology; while he understood human passions and follies, he did not pardon or excuse them in his historical writing, using his narrative skill in fact to enlist the readers' approval or condemnation.

For Posidonius "history" extended beyond the earth into the sky; humanity was not isolated each in its own political history, but was a part of the cosmos. His Histories were not, therefore, concerned with isolated political history of peoples and individuals, but they included discussions of all forces and factors (geographical factors, mineral resources, climate, nutrition), which let humans act and be a part of their environment. For example, Posidonius considered the climate of Arabia and the life-giving strength of the sun, tides (taken from his book on the oceans), and climatic theory to explain people's ethnic or national characters.

Of Posidonius's work on tactics, The Art of War , the Greek historian Arrian complained that it was written 'for experts', which suggests that Posidonius may have had first hand experience of military leadership or, perhaps, used knowledge he gained from his acquaintance with Pompey .

Reputation and influence [ edit ] Posidonius, depicted as a medieval scholar in the Nuremberg Chronicle .

In his own era, his writings on almost all the principal divisions of philosophy made Posidonius a renowned international figure throughout the Graeco-Roman world and he was widely cited by writers of his era, including Cicero , Livy , Plutarch , Strabo (who called Posidonius "the most learned of all philosophers of my time"), Cleomedes, Seneca the Younger , Diodorus Siculus (who used Posidonius as a source for his Bibliotheca Historia ["Historical Library"]), and others. Although his ornate and rhetorical style of writing passed out of fashion soon after his death, Posidonius was acclaimed during his life for his literary ability and as a stylist.

Posidonius was the major source of materials on the Celts of Gaul and was profusely quoted by Timagenes , Julius Caesar , the Sicilian Greek Diodorus Siculus , and the Greek geographer Strabo .

[ 49 ] Posidonius appears to have moved with ease among the upper echelons of Roman society as an ambassador from Rhodes. He associated with some of the leading figures of late republican Rome, including Cicero and Pompey, both of whom visited him in Rhodes. In his twenties, Cicero attended his lectures (77 BC) and they continued to correspond. Cicero in his De Finibus closely followed Posidonius's presentation of Panaetius's ethical teachings.

Posidonius met Pompey when he was Rhodes's ambassador in Rome and Pompey visited him in Rhodes twice, once in 66 BC during his campaign against the pirates and again in 62 BC during his eastern campaigns, and asked Posidonius to write his biography. As a gesture of respect and great honor, Pompey lowered his fasces before Posidonius's door. Other Romans who visited Posidonius in Rhodes were Velleius, Cotta, and Lucilius .

Ptolemy was impressed by the sophistication of Posidonius's methods, which included correcting for the refraction of light passing through denser air near the horizon. Ptolemy's approval of Posidonius's result, rather than Eratosthenes's earlier and more correct figure, caused it to become the accepted value for the Earth's circumference for the next 1,500 years.

Posidonius fortified the Stoicism of the middle period with contemporary learning. Next to his teacher Panaetius, he did most, by writings and personal contacts, to spread Stoicism in the Roman world. A century later, Seneca referred to Posidonius as one of those who had made the largest contribution to philosophy.

His influence on Greek philosophical thinking lasted until the Middle Ages , as is demonstrated by the large number of times he is cited as a source in the Suda (a 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia).

Wilhelm Capelle traced most of the doctrines of the popular philosophic treatise De Mundo to Posidonius.

[ 50 ] Today, Posidonius seems to be recognized as having had an inquiring and wide-ranging mind, not entirely original, but with a breadth of view that connected, in accordance with his underlying Stoic philosophy, all things and their causes and all knowledge into an overarching, unified world view.

The crater Posidonius on the Moon is named after him.

See also [ edit ] Historic recurrence Twin study References [ edit ] ^ Augustine of Hippo , The City of God Book V, Chapter 2, "Posidonius the Stoic, who was much given to astrology" ^ a b Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Posidonius" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 22 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 172.

^ Magill, Frank Northen; Aves, Alison (1998).

Dictionary of World Biography . Taylor & Francis. pp.

904– 910.

ISBN 978-1579580407 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 .

^ Sarton, George (1936). "The Unity and Diversity of the Mediterranean World".

Osiris .

2 : 406–463 [430].

doi : 10.1086/368462 .

S2CID 143379839 .

^ Kidd, I. G. (7 March 2016).

"Posidonius (2), Stoic philosopher, c. 135–c. 51 BCE" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Classics .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.5275 .

ISBN 978-0199381135 . Retrieved 14 January 2021 .

^ Kidd, Ian Gray (2005), "Posidonius" , The Oxford Classical Dictionary , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780198606413.013.5275 (inactive 12 July 2025), ISBN 978-0198606413 , retrieved 14 January 2021 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ "Poseidonius | Greek philosopher" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 3 October 2021 .

^ Kidd 1988 , p. 3 ^ "SOL Search" .

www.cs.uky.edu .

^ a b c d e f g Sellars 2006 , p. 10 ^ Durham, Ian T. (2007). "Posidonius". In Tremble, Virginia; Williams, Thomas; Bracher, Katherine; Jarrell, Richard; Marché, Jordan D.; Ragep, F. Jamil (eds.).

Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 927.

ISBN 978-0387304007 .

^ a b c Freeman, Philip (2006).

The Philosopher and the Druids: A Journey Among the Ancient Celts . Simon and Schuster. p. 10.

ISBN 978-0743289061 .

^ "Apamea had a strong hellenic element of population including Macedonian colonists. ... Posidonius had a Greek name, wrote in Greek, had his higher education in Greece, and lived his whole adult life in Athens and Rhodes, where he clearly felt at home." – Kidd 1988 , p. 7 ^ a b Kidd 1988 , p. 7 ^ a b c d e f g Kidd 1999 , p. 4 ^ Sedley 2003 , pp. 26–27 ^ Russell, Bertrand (1946). "28".

A History of Western Philosophy . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4165-9915-9 . Retrieved 4 November 2023 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Kidd 1999 , p. 13 ^ Posidonius, fragment 55 (quoted by Strabo, Book 4 ).

^ Posidonius, fragment 16 (quoted by Athenaeus, Book 4 ) ^ Kidd 1988 , p. 22 ^ Kidd 1988 , p. 23 ^ a b Sedley 2003 , p. 27 ^ Sedley 2003 , p. 26 ^ a b c Kidd 1999 , p. 5 ^ Graver 2002 , p. 215 ^ Kidd, I. G.

Posidonius: The Translation of the Fragments , Volume III ^ a b Diogenes Laërtius, The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers , 7.39–40 .

^ Sextus Empiricus, Against the Professors , 7.19.

^ a b Sedley 2003 , p. 22 ^ Sedley 2003 , p. 21 ^ Sellars 2006 , p. 11 ^ a b Sedley 2003 , p. 24 ^ a b c Kidd 1988 , p. 69 ^ a b Graver 2002 , p. 216 ^ Kidd 1999 , pp. 9–10 ^ Cicero. On Divination, i. 130; ii. 42 ^ Trudeau, Richard.

The Non-Euclidean Revolution , Boston: Birkhauser, 1987, pp. 119–120.

^ Posidonius.

Fragment 215.K from Cleomedes ^ Cicero.

De Natura Deorum (On the Nature of the Gods) , ii-34, p. 287.

^ Safrai, Shemuel; Stern, M. (1988), The Jewish people in the first century: Historical Geography , p. 1124, Most scholars hold that Diodorus, from Book 33 of his work onwards, depended on Posidonius ^ Gmirkin, Russell E.

Berossus and Genesis, Manetho and Exodus: Hellenistic histories , 2006, p. 54. "Jewish misanthropy was also a feature in Posidonius's account of the Jews, though in a less extreme form. 126 Diodorus Siculus, Library 40.3.4b likely derived from Posidonius, whose history may have been consulted by Pompey ..." ^ Bar-Kochva, Bezalel.

The Image of the Jews in Greek Literature: The Hellenistic Period , 2009, p. 440. "Posidonius of apamea (d) The Anti-Jewish Libels and Accusations in Diodorus and Apion We have seen in chapters 11–12 that Posidonius used Moses and Mosaic Judaism to portray his own religious, social, and political ideals." ^ Torge, W.; Müller, J. (2012).

Geodesy . De Gruyter Textbook. De Gruyter. p. 5.

ISBN 978-3110250008 . Retrieved 2 May 2021 .

^ a b Posidonius, fragment 202 ^ Cleomedes ( in Fragment 202 ) stated that if the distance is measured by some other number the result will be different, and using 3,750 instead of 5,000 produces this estimation: 3,750 x 48 = 180,000; see Fischer I., (1975), Another Look at Eratosthenes' and Posidonius' Determinations of the Earth's Circumference , Ql. J. of the Royal Astron. Soc., Vol. 16, p. 152.

^ John Freely , Before Galileo: The Birth of Modern Science in Medieval Europe (2013), ISBN 978-1468308501 ^ "Poseidonius (Posidonius): translation of fragments" .

www.attalus.org .

^ Berresford Ellis, Peter (1998).

The Celts: A History . Caroll & Graf. pp.

49– 50.

ISBN 0786712112 .

^ Aristotle; Forster, E. S. (Edward Seymour); Dobson, J. F. (John Frederic) (1914).

De Mundo . p.

[1] .

Editions and translations [ edit ] Kidd, I. G.; Edelstein, Ludwig (1972).

Posidonius. I. The Fragments . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521080460 .

Kidd, I. G. (1988).

Posidonius. II. The Commentary . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521200628 .

Kidd, I. G. (1999).

Posidonius. III. The Translation of the Fragments . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521622581 .

Sources [ edit ] Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Posidonius" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 22 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 172.

Bevan, Edwyn .

Stoics and Skeptics , 1913.

ISBN 0890053642 Graver, Margaret (2002). "Appendix D: Posidonius".

Cicero on the Emotions. Tusculan Disputations 3 and 4 . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0226305783 .

Harley, J. B.

& Woodward, David .

The History of Cartography, Volume 1: Cartography in Prehistoric, Ancient, and Medieval Europe and the Mediterranean , 1987, pp. 168–170.

ISBN 0226316335 (v. 1) Juergen Malitz , Poseidonios from Grosse Gestalten der griechischen Antike. 58 historische Portraits von Homer bis Kleopatra . Hrsg. von Kai Brodersen. München: Verlag C.H. Beck. S. 426–432.

Sedley, David (2003). "The School, from Zeno to Arius Didymus". In Inwood, Brad (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to the Stoics . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521779855 .

Sellars, John (2006).

Stoicism . Acumen.

ISBN 978-1844650521 .

Magill, Frank Northen; Aves, Alison (1998).

Dictionary of World Biography . Taylor & Francis. pp.

904– 910.

ISBN 978-1579580407 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Freeman, Phillip, The Philosopher and the Druids: A Journey Among The Ancient Celts , Simon and Schuster, 2006.

[ ISBN missing ] Hall, J.J. (2023).

The meteorology of Posidonius . London; New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780367023720 .

Holiday, Ryan ; Hanselman, Stephen (2020). "Posidonius the Genius".

Lives of the Stoics . New York: Portfolio/Penguin. pp.

98– 107.

ISBN 978-0525541875 .

Irvine, William B. (2008) A Guide to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy , Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195374612 – Discussion of his work and influence [ ISBN missing ] External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Posidonius .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Posidonius .

Posidonius of Rhodes (MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive) Poseidonius: English translations of fragments about history and geography v t e Stoicism Philosophers Greek Scholarchs of the Stoa Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Zeno of Tarsus Diogenes of Babylon Antipater of Tarsus Panaetius Aristo of Chios Sphaerus Persaeus Herillus Dioscorides Crates of Mallus Zenodotus Apollodorus of Seleucia Boethus of Sidon Dardanus Mnesarchus Dionysius of Cyrene Hecato of Rhodes Diotimus the Stoic Posidonius Geminus Diodotus Antipater of Tyre Apollonides Athenodorus Cananites Roman Publius Rutilius Rufus Quintus Lucilius Balbus Cato the Younger Quintus Sextius Attalus Papirius Fabianus Seneca Cornutus Chaeremon of Alexandria Paconius Agrippinus Persius Helvidius Priscus Arulenus Rusticus Musonius Rufus Thrasea Paetus Rubellius Plautus Barea Soranus Publius Egnatius Celer Mara bar Serapion Euphrates Epictetus Hierocles Claudius Maximus Basilides Apollonius of Chalcedon Junius Rusticus Marcus Aurelius ( Philosophy ) Philosophical concepts Logic Logos Adiaphora Katalepsis Diairesis Physics Physis Fire Pneuma Ethics Pathos Apatheia Eudaimonia Kathekon Negative visualization Oikeiôsis Prohairesis Sophos Works On Passions (Chrysippus) Paradoxa Stoicorum Letters to Lucilius (Seneca) Seneca's Essays De Providentia De Brevitate Vitae De Vita Beata De Beneficiis De Clementia De Tranquillitate Animi De Ira De Otio De Constantia Sapientis Seneca's Consolations Lectures (Musonius Rufus) Discourses of Epictetus Enchiridion of Epictetus Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta Related articles Stoa Poikile Stoic Opposition Neostoicism v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican 2 Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Posidonius&oldid=1300119591 " Categories : 130s BC births 50s BC deaths 2nd-century BC Rhodians 1st-century BC astronomers 1st-century BC geographers 1st-century BC Greek philosophers 1st-century BC historians 1st-century BC mathematicians 1st-century BC Rhodians Ancient Greek astronomers Ancient Greek educators Ancient Greek geographers Ancient Greek mathematicians Ancient Rhodian scientists Apamea, Syria Geodesists Hellenistic-era historians Hellenistic-era philosophers from Syria Stoic philosophers Syrian astronomers Syrian mathematicians Syrian philosophers Philosophers in ancient Rhodes Roman-era students in Athens Roman-era Rhodians Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2020 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with missing ISBNs Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 11:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Posidonius 51 languages Add topic

