Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aristotle's conception 2 Interpretations 3 In Islamic philosophy 4 Hegel 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Passive intellect 3 languages Español Esperanto Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The passive intellect ( Latin : intellectus possibilis ; also translated as potential intellect or material intellect ), is a term used in philosophy alongside the notion of the active intellect in order to give an account of the operation of the intellect ( nous ), in accordance with the theory of hylomorphism , as most famously put forward by Aristotle .

Aristotle's conception [ edit ] Aristotle gives his most substantial account of the passive intellect ( nous pathetikos ) in De Anima ( On the Soul ), Book III, chapter 4. In Aristotle's philosophy of mind , the passive intellect "is what it is by becoming all things." [ 1 ] By this Aristotle means that the passive intellect can potentially become anything by receiving that thing's intelligible form . The active intellect ( nous poietikos ) is then required to illuminate the passive intellect to make the potential knowledge into knowledge in actuality, in the same way that light makes potential colors into actual colors. The analysis of this distinction is very brief, which has led to dispute as to what it means.

Interpretations [ edit ] Greek thought While Greek commentators such as Alexander of Aphrodisias and Themistius were broadly silent on the active intellect (debate over this would only become heated in the thirteenth-century Christian West in the context of debates over whether Avicenna or Averroes provided the account of the working of the intellect that best cohered with Christian doctrine), they provided a great deal of commentary on the nature of the passive intellect. For instance, to Alexander of Aphrodisias (who coined for this power the term 'material intellect', a name later taken up by Averroes ) the passive intellect was a separate intellect from the active.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Averroes and Aquinas Later philosophers, including Averroes and St. Thomas Aquinas , proposed mutually exclusive interpretations of Aristotle's distinction between the active and passive intellect.  Other terms used are "material intellect" and "potential intellect", the point being that the active intellect works on the passive intellect to produce knowledge (acquired intellect), in the same way that actuality works on potentiality or form on matter.

[ citation needed ] Averroes held that the passive intellect, being analogous to unformed matter, is a single substance common to all minds, and that the differences between individual minds are rooted in their phantasms as the product of the differences in the history of their sense perceptions.

[ citation needed ] Aquinas argues against this position in Disputed Questions on the Soul ( Quaestiones disputatae de Anima ) , asserting that, while the passive intellect is one specifically, numerically it is many, as each individual person has their own passive intellect.

[ citation needed ] In Islamic philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Aql bi al-Quwwah Passive intellect is identical with Aql bi al-Quwwah in Islamic philosophy . Aql bi-al-Quwwah, defined as reason, could abstract the forms of entities with which it is finally identified.

[ 4 ] For Farabi, the potential intellect becomes actual by receiving the form of matter. In other words, Aql al-Hayulani tries to separate the forms of existents from their matter. The form become identical with Aql.

[ 5 ] Farabi also recognised the potential intellect as part of soul.

[ citation needed ] Hegel [ edit ] The soul is no separate immaterial entity. Wherever there is Nature, the soul is its universal immaterialism , its simple 'ideal' life. Soul is the substance or 'absolute' basis of all the particularizing and individualizing of mind : it is in the soul that mind finds the material on which its character is wrought, and the soul remains the pervading, identical ideality of it all. But as it is still conceived thus abstractly, the soul is only the sleep of mind - the passive nous of Aristotle, which is potentially all things.

— G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophy of Mind/Spirit , Part Three of The Encyclopaedia of Philosophical Sciences (1830), § 389 , trans.

William Wallace (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971), p.29 [ 6 ] Recalling the tradition inaugurated by Al-Farabi and then by Averroes' monopsychism , Hegel also stated that passive intellect is the universal soul, the universal substance , immaterial, separate from the individual and formless ("is potentially all things") that is able to particularise and realise the Spirit in any individual subject. While this individuation is taking place, it always remains itself, that is to say immaterial and universal, without any mixture with body's matter : in other words, according to Moses Narboni , the unique intellect "is with the body, but not in the body." [ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Aristotle, De Anima , Bk. III, Ch. 5 (430 a 10-25).

^ Nicolas, S., Andrieu, B., Croizet, J.-C., Sanitioso, R. B., & Burman, J. T. (2013).

Sick? Or slow? On the origins of intelligence as a psychological object.

Intelligence, 41 (5), 699–711. doi:10.1016/j.intell.2013.08.006 (This is an open access article, made freely available by Elsevier .) ^ Kaufman, Alan S.

(2009).

IQ Testing 101 . New York: Springer Publishing. p.

112 .

ISBN 978-0-8261-0629-2 .

Sattler, Jerome M. (2008).

Assessment of Children: Cognitive Foundations . La Mesa, CA: Jerome M. Sattler, Publisher. inside back cover.

ISBN 978-0-9702671-4-6 .

^ ( Craig 1998 , p. 556).

^ ( Chase 2008 , p. 28).

^ As (partially) quoted in "The Dialectic of 'Soul' in Ford Madox Ford's The Soul of London" .

The Literary London Society .

Archived from the original on March 27, 2025.

^ Antonio Lombardi ( University of Bari ) (2023).

"Trascendenza del pensiero, impersonalità della coscienza. Hegel, Th. H. Green e la critica di A. Seth Pringle-Pattison" [Transcendence of thought, impersonality of consciousness. Hegel, Th. H. Green and the critique of A. Seth Pringle-Pattison] (PDF) .

Rosmini Studies (in Italian).

10 .

University of Trento : 359– 370.

doi : 10.15168/2385-216X/2536 .

ISSN 2385-216X .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2024.

(under CC-BY-NC-ND license) ( ivi : pp. 364-365) Sources [ edit ] Chase, Michael (2008). "Thomas Aquinas and alFäräbï". In Newton, Lloyd A. (ed.).

Medieval Commentaries on Aristotle's Categories . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-16752-0 .

Craig, Edward (1998).

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9780415169172 . GGKEY:63C446DRRDG.

Commentarium magnum in Aristotelis De anima libros , ed. Crawford, Cambridge (Mass.) 1953: Latin translation of Averroes' long commentary on the De Anima Averroes (tr. Alain de Libera), L'intelligence et la pensée , Paris 1998: French translation of Averroes' long commentary on book 3 of the De Anima External links [ edit ] Catholic Encyclopedia article Aquinas, De Unitate Intellectus Contra Averroistas (Latin) Aquinas, On the Unity of the Intellect, against the Averroists (English) Barrionuevo, "La capacidad productiva del nous ( DA , 3.5)" Archived 2012-03-26 at the Wayback Machine (Spanish) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Passive_intellect&oldid=1305463736 " Categories : Concepts in ancient Greek philosophy of mind Aristotelianism Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 05:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Passive intellect 3 languages Add topic

