Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Corporate law Toggle Corporate law subsection 1.1 United Kingdom 1.2 United States 1.3 Other jurisdictions 2 Constitutional law 3 Administrative law Toggle Administrative law subsection 3.1 United Kingdom 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Ultra vires 19 languages Azərbaycanca বাংলা Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal concept meaning powers are exceeded Wilmington, Delaware is the incorporation capital of the United States.

[ 1 ] Delaware has largely abolished ultra vires in relation to corporations under the Delaware General Corporation Law .

[ 2 ] Ultra vires [ a ] is a Latin phrase used in law to describe an act that requires legal authority but is done without it. Its opposite, an act done under proper authority, is intra vires .

[ b ] Acts that are intra vires may equivalently be termed "valid", and those that are ultra vires termed "invalid".

Legal issues relating to ultra vires can arise in a variety of contexts: Companies and other legal persons sometimes have limited legal capacity to act , and attempts to engage in activities beyond their legal capacities may be ultra vires .

[ 5 ] Most countries have restricted the doctrine of ultra vires in relation to companies by statute.

Similarly, statutory and governmental bodies may have limits upon the acts and activities which they legally engage in.

[ 6 ] Subordinate legislation which is purported passed without the proper legal authority may be invalid as beyond the powers of the authority which issued it.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Corporate law [ edit ] See also: Corporate law This article is part of a series on Corporate law By jurisdiction Anguilla Australia BVI Canada Cayman Islands India South Africa UK United States Vietnam European Union France Germany General corporate forms Company Conglomerate Cooperative Corporation Holding company Joint-stock Partnership General Limited Limited liability Private limited Shell corporation Shelf corporation Sole proprietorship Corporate forms by jurisdiction European Union Societas (SE) Societas cooperativa (SCE) Societas privata (SPE) Societas unius personae (SUP) Economic interest grouping (EEIG) UK / Ireland / Commonwealth Charitable incorporated organisation (England and Wales) (CIO) Scottish charitable incorporated organisation (SCIO) Community interest company (CIC) Industrial and provident society (IPS) Limited company (Ltd.) by guarantee by shares proprietary public Unlimited company United States Benefit corporation C corporation Limited liability company (LLC) Low-profit LLC Series LLC Limited liability limited partnership (LLLP) S corporation Delaware corporation / statutory trust Massachusetts business trust Nevada corporation Others Aktiebolag (AB) Aktiengesellschaft (AG) Ansvarlig selskap (ANS) Aktieselskab (A/S) Aksjeselskap (AS) Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung (GmbH) Kabushiki gaisha (K.K.) Naamloze vennootschap (N.V.) Osakeyhtiö (Oy) S.A.

Sociedad de responsabilidad limitada (S.R.L.) Société à responsabilité limitée (SARL) more...

Doctrines Business judgment rule Corporate governance De facto and estoppel corporations Internal affairs doctrine Limited liability Tag-along right Drag-along right Piercing the corporate veil Rochdale Principles Ultra vires Related areas Beneficial ownership Civil procedure Contract Corporate registers Registered agent Company portal Law portal v t e In corporate law, ultra vires describes acts attempted by a corporation that are beyond the scope of powers granted by the corporation's objects clause , its articles of incorporation , its by-laws , similar founding documents, or laws authorizing a corporation's formation. Acts attempted by a corporation that are beyond the scope of its charter are void or voidable .

An ultra vires transaction cannot be ratified by shareholders, even if they wish it to be ratified.

The doctrine of estoppel usually precluded reliance on the defense of ultra vires where the transaction was fully performed by one party.

A fortiori , a transaction fully performed by both parties could not be attacked.

If the contract was fully executory, the defense of ultra vires might be raised by either party.

If the contract was partially performed, and the performance was held insufficient to bring the doctrine of estoppel into play, a suit for quasi-contract for recovery of benefits conferred was available.

If an agent of the corporation committed a tort within the scope of their employment, the corporation could not defend on the ground the act was ultra vires .

Several modern developments relating to corporate formation have limited the probability that ultra vires acts will occur. Except in the case of non-profit corporations (including municipal corporations ), this legal doctrine is obsolescent ; within recent years, almost all business corporations have been chartered to allow them to transact any lawful business. The Model Business Corporation Act of the United States states that: "The validity of corporate action may not be challenged on the ground that the corporation lacks or lacked power to act." The doctrine still lives among non-profit corporations or state-created corporate bodies established for a specific public purpose, such as universities or charities.

United Kingdom [ edit ] See also: United Kingdom company law Historically all companies in the United Kingdom were subject to the doctrine of ultra vires and any act which was outside of the objects specified in a company's memorandum of association would be ultra vires and void .

[ 5 ] That result was commercially unpalatable. It led to companies being formed with extremely wide and generic objects clauses permitting a company to engage in all manner of commercial activities.

[ 9 ] The position was changed by statute by the Companies Act 1985 , which essentially abolished the doctrine concerning commercial companies. The position is now regulated by the Companies Act 2006 , sections 31 and 39, which similarly significantly reduces the applicability of ultra vires in corporate law. However, it can still apply to charities, and a shareholder may apply for an injunction , in advance only, to prevent an act which is claimed to be ultra vires .

United States [ edit ] According to American laws, the concept of ultra vires can still arise in the following kinds of activities in some states: Charitable or political contributions Guaranty of indebtedness of another Loans to officers or directors Pensions, bonuses, stock option plans, job severance payments, and other fringe benefits The power to acquire shares of other corporations The power to enter into a partnership Other jurisdictions [ edit ] In many jurisdictions, such as Australia, legislation provides that a corporation has all the powers of a natural person [ 10 ] plus others; also, the validity of acts which are made ultra vires is preserved.

[ 11 ] Constitutional law [ edit ] Judicial interpretation Forms Constitutional review Judicial opinion In Catholic canon law In Islamic jurisprudence Kritarchy Statutory interpretation Judicial misconduct Activism Chilling effect Discretion Immunity Restraint Ultra vires General rules of interpretation Accountability Adversarial system Appeal Conflict of laws Forum shopping Jurisdictional arbitrage Lex loci Golden rule Inquisitorial system Interpretation Act Jury nullification Justiciability Letter and spirit of the law Mischief rule Nondelegation doctrine Plain meaning rule Polycentric law Precedent Reasonableness Rule according to higher law Separation of powers Judicial independence Parliamentary sovereignty General theories of interpretation Common good constitutionalism Court administration Judicial reform Jurisprudence Indeterminacy debate Legal realism Legal process Legal formalism Legitimacy Living Constitution / Living tree / Living instrument Opinio juris sive necessitatis Originalism ( original meaning ) Original intent ( legislative intent , legislative history ) Purposive approach Strict constructionism Textualism International Anarchy Hard law International litigation International legal theories Monism and dualism Peremptory norm Soft law Universal jurisdiction v t e Under constitutional law , particularly in Canada and the United States , constitutions give federal and provincial or state governments various powers. To go outside those powers would be ultra vires ; for example, although the court did not use the term in striking down a federal law in United States v. Lopez because it exceeded the constitutional authority of Congress, the Supreme Court still declared the law to be ultra vires .

[ 12 ] According to Article 15.2 of the Irish constitution , the Oireachtas (parliament) is the sole lawmaking body in the Republic of Ireland . In the case of CityView Press v AnCo , however, the Supreme Court of Ireland held that the Oireachtas may delegate certain powers to subordinate bodies through primary legislation, so long as these delegated powers allow the delegatee only to further the principles and policies laid down by the Oireachtas in primary legislation and not craft new principles or policies themselves. Any piece of primary legislation that grants the power to make public policy to a body other than the Oireachtas is unconstitutional; however, as there is a presumption in Irish constitutional law that the Oireachtas acts within the confines of the constitution, any legislation passed by the Oireachtas must be interpreted in such a way as to be constitutionally valid where possible.

Thus, in several cases where bodies other than the Oireachtas were found to have used powers granted to them by primary legislation to make public policy, the impugned primary legislation was read in such a way that it would not have the effect of allowing a subordinate body to make public policy. In these cases, the primary legislation was held to be constitutional. Still, the subordinate or secondary legislation, which amounted to creating public policy, was held to be ultra vires the primary legislation and was struck down.

In UK constitutional law , ultra vires describes patents, ordinances, and the like enacted under the prerogative powers of the Crown that contradict statutes enacted by the Crown-in-Parliament . Almost unheard of in modern times, ultra vires acts by the Crown or its servants were previously a major threat to the rule of law .

[ citation needed ] Boddington v British Transport Police is an example of an appeal heard by the House of Lords that contested that a by-law was beyond the powers conferred to it under section 67 of the Transport Act 1962 .

[ 8 ] Administrative law [ edit ] In administrative law , an act may be judicially reviewable for ultra vires in a narrow or broad sense. Narrow ultra vires applies if an administrator did not have the substantive power to make a decision or it was wrought with procedural defects. Broad ultra vires applies if there is an abuse of power (e.g., Wednesbury unreasonableness or bad faith) or a failure to exercise an administrative discretion (e.g., acting at the behest of another or unlawfully applying a government policy) or application of discretionary powers in an irrational and wrong way.

[ 13 ] Either doctrine may entitle a claimant to various prerogative writs, equitable remedies or statutory orders if they are satisfied.

United Kingdom [ edit ] In the seminal case of Anisminic v Foreign Compensation Commission , [ 14 ] Lord Reid is credited with formulating the doctrine of ultra vires . However, ultra vires , together with unreasonableness, was mentioned much earlier by Lord Russell in the well-known case, Kruse v Johnson , [ 15 ] regarding challenging by-laws and other rules.

Anisminic is better known for not depriving courts of their jurisdiction to declare a decision a nullity, even if a statute expressly prevents it from being subject to judicial review. Further cases such as Bromley LBC v Greater London Council [ 16 ] and Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service [ 17 ] have sought to refine the doctrine.

In Hammersmith and Fulham London Borough Council v Hazell , [ 18 ] the House of Lords held that interest rate swaps entered into by local authorities (a popular method of circumventing statutory restrictions on local authorities borrowing money at that time) were all ultra vires and void , sparking a raft of satellite litigation .

Mark Elliott ( St Catharine's College, Cambridge ) proposes a modified ultra vires doctrine for administrative law, placing it firmly in the correct constitutional setting.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Judicial activism Judicial Review in English Law Precedent Notes [ edit ] ^ / ˌ ʌ l t r ə ˈ v aɪ r iː z / UL -trə VY -reez , lit.

' beyond the powers ' [ 3 ] ^ / ˌ ɪ n t r ə ˈ v aɪ r iː z / IN -trə VY -reez , lit.

' within the powers ' [ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ Evelina Munteanu (25 November 2014).

"Top 5 US States For Company Formations" . Inc Plan (USA).

Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 7 November 2017 .

^ Francis Pileggi (4 September 2012).

"Abolishment of Ultra Vires Doctrine with Exceptions" .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 November 2017 .

^ "ULTRA VIRES Definition & Meaning" .

Merriam-Webster.com .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2025 . Retrieved 6 August 2025 .

^ "INTRA VIRES Definition & Meaning" .

Merriam-Webster.com .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 6 August 2025 .

^ a b Ashbury Railway Carriage and Iron Co Ltd v Riche (1875) LR 7 HL 653 ^ Hazell v Hammersmith and Fulham LBC [1992] 2 AC 1 ^ Woolwich Equitable Building Society v IRC [1993] AC 70 ^ a b Boddington v British Transport Police [1998] UKHL 13 ^ Rolled Steel Products (Holdings) Ltd v British Steel Corp [1986] Ch 246 ^ Sn 124 Legal capacity and powers of a Company Archived 2006-05-15 at the Wayback Machine , Corporations Act 2001 , Commonwealth Consolidated Acts ^ Sn 125 Constitution may limit powers and set out objectives Archived 2006-05-15 at the Wayback Machine , Corporations Act 2001 , Commonwealth Consolidated Acts ^ United States v. Lopez , 514 U.S.

549, 567 (1995).

^ Örücü Esin, The Liability of administration in England and main principles applied in judicial review, in Onar Armagani, Fakulteler Matbaasi, Istanbul 1977, p.660 ^ Anisminic v Foreign Compensation Commission [1969] 2 WLR 163 ^ Kruse v Johnson [1898] 2 QB 91 ^ Bromley LBC v Greater London Council [1983] AC 768 (see Lord Wilberforce's judgment) ^ Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service [1985] AC 374 (see Lord Diplock's judgment) ^ Hammersmith and Fulham London Borough Council v Hazell [1992] 2 AC 1 ^ Elliott, M., The Ultra Vires Doctrine in a Constitutional Setting: Still the Central Principle of Administrative Law [1999] Cambridge Law Journal Vol. 58 129 Robert W. Hamilton.

The Law of Corporation 4th Edition, 1996 West Group v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐nt78g
Cached time: 20250814222449
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.524 seconds
Real time usage: 0.665 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3080/1000000
Revision size: 14425/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 100471/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6110/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 60124/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.310/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17682229/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  531.895      1 -total
 21.29%  113.228      2 Template:Reflist
 19.57%  104.066      1 Template:Corporate_law
 19.29%  102.613      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.91%  100.555     31 Template:Lang
 15.08%   80.206      4 Template:Cite_web
 11.39%   60.596      2 Template:Sidebar
  8.80%   46.821      1 Template:Law
  8.59%   45.670      1 Template:Navbox
  8.10%   43.093      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1161827:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222449 and revision id 1304440680. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ultra_vires&oldid=1304440680 " Categories : Administrative law Latin legal terminology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from January 2019 Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 02:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ultra vires 19 languages Add topic

