Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Textual history 2 Calendar 3 Editions 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Vedanga Jyotisha 13 languages বাংলা Català Español हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu नेपाली Polski Русский संस्कृतम् Татарча / tatarça Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hindu text on astrology Vedanga Jyotisha ( IAST : Vedāṅga Jyotiṣa ), or Jyotishavedanga ( Jyotiṣavedāṅga ), is one of earliest known Indian texts on astrology ( Jyotisha ).

[ 1 ] The extant text is dated to the final centuries BCE, [ 2 ] but it may be based on a tradition reaching back to about 700-600 BCE.

[ 3 ] The text is foundational to Jyotisha , one of the six Vedanga disciplines.

[ 4 ] Its author is traditionally named as Lagadha.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Textual history [ edit ] The dating of the Vedanga Jyotisha is relevant for the dating of the Vedic texts .

[ 2 ] The Vedanga Jyotisha describes the winter solstice for the period of ca. 1400 BCE. This description has been used to date the Vedanga Jyotisha .

[ 2 ] According to Michael Witzel , the question is "whether the description as given in the Jyotisha is also the date of the text in which it is transmitted. It is written in two recensions – Rigveda recensions and Yajurveda recensions. Rigveda recensions and Yajurveda recensions have same verses except for eight additional verses in the Yajurveda's one".

[ 2 ] T. K. S. Sastry and R. Kochhar suppose that the Vedanga Jyotisha was written in the period that it describes, and therefore propose an early date, between 1370 and 1150 BCE.

[ 2 ] David Pingree dates the described solstice as about 1180 BCE, but notes that the relevance of this computation to the date of the Vedanga Jyotisha is not evident.

[ 8 ] The estimation of 1400-1200 BCE has been followed by others, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] with Subbarayappa adding that the extant form can possibly be from 700-600 BCE.

[ 10 ] Other authors propose a later composition. Santanu Chakraverti writes that it has been composed after 700 BCE, [ 7 ] while Michael Witzel dates it to the last centuries BCE, based on the style of composing.

[ 2 ] According to Chakraverti, its description of the winter solstice is correct for ca. 1400 BCE, but not for the time of its composition after 700 BCE.

[ 7 ] This may be due to the incorporation of late Harappan astronomical knowledge into the Vedic fold, [ 7 ] an idea also proposed by Subbarayappa.

[ 11 ] Michael Witzel notes: [O]nly if one is convinced that Lagadha intended the solstice to be exactly at alpha Delphini of Dhanishta , one can date his observations back to the late second millennium. Since that cannot be shown beyond doubt, since the composition of the text is in Late Epic language, and since its contents have clear resemblances to Babylonian works, the text must belong to a late period, to the last centuries BCE.

[ 2 ] Calendar [ edit ] The calendar described by the Vedāṅga Jyotiṣa is based on the average motion of the Sun and Moon, but does not describe their precise movements. The calendar has a 5 year cyclical period called a yuga. The yuga begins on the 1st day of the month of Māgha when the Sun and Moon return together (a new moon day) at the Dhaniṣṭhā star ( Beta Delphini ) on the day of uttarāyaṇa (winter solstice). The starting conditions of a yuga were accurate when the calendar was first implemented, however in the following centuries corrections would have to be made in order for each yuga to maintain them. A yuga consists of 62 months of which 2 are intercalary (adhika māsa), with the intercalary months being added after every 30 months in the 3rd and 5th years in the form of an extra month before Śrāvaṇa and an extra month at the end of a year, respectively. A tithi is defined as being ⁠ 1 / 30 ⁠ of a lunar month, and each day was reckoned to have a tithi. However since there are more tithis in a yuga than civil days, a tithi is omitted every 61 days (kṣaya tithi). Also since the period of a tithi is slightly less than a civil day, and extra tithi would be added at the end of a yuga. Each day was also considered to belong at a nakṣatra (asterism) which the Moon occupied. However, the period of a nakṣatra is shorter than a civil day, thus an extra nakṣatra is added every 3,279 days. The months of the year are called Māgha, Phālguna, Caitra, Vaiśākha, Jyaiṣṭha, Āṣāḍha, (Śrāvaṇa Adhika, if needed), Śrāvaṇa, Bhādrapadā, Āśvina, Kārtika, Mārgaśīrṣa, Pauṣa, (Pauṣa or Māgha Adhika, if needed). The calendar follows the amānta system in which months end with amāvasyā (new moon) and being on śukla pratipada.

[ 12 ] Editions [ edit ] Yajus recension, Rk variants and commentary of Somākara Śeṣanāga, edited: Albrecht Weber, Über den Vedakalender Namens Jyotisham , Berlin 1862 Yajus recension, non-Yajus verses of Rk recension, edited: G. Thibaut, "Contributions to the Explanation of the Jyotisha-Vedánga", Journal of the Asiatic Society Bengal Vol 46 (1877), p. 411-437 Hindi translation: Girja Shankar Shashtri, Jyotisha Karmkanda and Adhyatma Shodh Sansthan, 455 Vasuki Khurd, Daraganj, Allahabad-6.

Sanskrit Commentary with Hindi Translation: Vedā̄ṅgajyotiṣam: Yajurvedināṃ paramparayāgatam vistr̥tasaṃskr̥tabhūmikayā. On Vedic astrology and astronomy; critical edited text with Hindi and Sanskrit commentaries. With appendies including Vedic calendar as described by Lagadha for his time. By Lagadha, Ācārya-Śivarāja Kauṇḍinnyāyana, Pramodavardhana Kaundinnyayana, Sammodavardhana  Kauṇḍinnyāyana, Somākara [ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ N. P. Subramania Iyer (1991).

Kalaprakasika .

Asian Educational Services . p. 3.

^ a b c d e f g Witzel 2001 .

^ Subbarayappa 1989 , pp. 25–40.

^ Hart Defouw (1996).

Light on Life: An Introduction to the Astrology of India . Penguin. p.

3 .

ISBN 978-0-14-019507-1 .

^ Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya , History of Science and Technology in Ancient India , Firma K.L Mukhopadhyaya (1986), pp. 486–494 ^ Helaine Selin , Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures , Kluwer Academic Publishers (1997), p. 977 ^ a b c d Chakraverti 2007 , p. 33.

^ Pingree, David (1973), "The Mesopotamian Origin of Early Indian Mathematical Astronomy", Journal for the History of Astronomy , 4 : 1– 12, Bibcode : 1973JHA.....4....1P , doi : 10.1177/002182867300400102 , S2CID 125228353 ^ Klostermaier 2010 , p. 977.

^ a b Subbarayappa 1989 , p. 29.

^ Subbarayappa 1989 , pp. 47–48.

^ Chatterjee, S.K.; Chakravarty, A.K. (2000). "Indian Calendar from Post-Vedic Period to AD 1900". In Sen, S.N.; Shukla, K.S. (eds.).

History of Astronomy in India (2nd revised ed.). New Delhi: Indian National Science Academy. pp.

278– 281.

^ Lagadha (2005).

"Vedā̄ṅgajyotiṣam: Yajurvedināṃ paramparayāgatam vistr̥tasaṃskr̥tabhūmikayā Somākarabhāṣyeṇa Kauṇḍinnyāyanavyākhyānena ca sahitam : Saṅkṣiptahindībhūmikā-Hindyānuvādādiyutaṃ vividhapariśiṣṭavibhūṣitaṃ ca" .

Sources [ edit ] Chakraverti, Santanu (2007), Science in History. In: Jyoti Bhusan Das Gupta (ed.), "Science, Technology, Imperialism, and War" , Pearson Education India Klostermaier, Klaus (2010), A Survey of Hinduism (Third ed.), SUNY, ISBN 978-0-7914-8011-3 Subbarayappa, B.V. (1989).

"Indian astronomy: a historical perspective" . In Biswas, S. K.; Mallik, D. C. V.; Vishveshwara, C. V.

(eds.).

Cosmic Perspectives . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-34354-1 .

Witzel, Michael (25 May 2001).

"Autochthonous Aryans? The Evidence from Old Indian and Iranian Texts" .

Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies .

7 (3).

External links [ edit ] Vedāṅga jyotiṣa of Lagadha , translated by TSK Sastry, edited by KV Sarma Portals : India History Astronomy Stars Outer space Solar System Science v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vedanga_Jyotisha&oldid=1302207104 " Categories : Hindu astrological texts Astronomy books Vedangas Indian astronomy texts Ancient Indian astronomical works Sanskrit texts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2014 Use Indian English from November 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 01:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vedanga Jyotisha 13 languages Add topic

