Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publishing Toggle Publishing subsection 1.1 Open access 2 History 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Manchester University Press 7 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British university press Manchester University Press Logo Parent company University of Manchester Founded 1904 Founder James Tait Headquarters location Manchester, England Distribution NBN International (UK books) Oxford University Press (Americas books) Footprint Books (Australia books) [ 1 ] Turpin Distribution (Worldwide journals) [ 2 ] Publication types Books, academic journals Official website manchesteruniversitypress .co .uk Manchester University Press is the university press of the University of Manchester , England , and a publisher of academic books and journals. Manchester University Press has developed into an international publisher. It maintains its links with the University.

Publishing [ edit ] Old Medical School on Coupland Street (photographed in 1908), one of the buildings which have housed the Press Manchester University Press publishes monographs and textbooks for academic teaching in higher education. In 2012 it was producing about 145 new books annually and managed a number of journals.

[ 3 ] [ needs update ] Areas of expertise are history, politics and international law, literature and theatre studies, and visual culture.

MUP books are marketed and distributed by Oxford University Press in the United States and Canada, and in Australia by Footprint Books; all other global territories are covered from Manchester itself. Some of the press's books were formerly published in the US by Barnes & Noble, Inc.

, New York.

[ 4 ] Later the press established an American office in Dover, New Hampshire .

[ 5 ] Open access [ edit ] Manchester University Press has been actively involved in open access .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] It is one of thirteen publishers to participate in the Knowledge Unlatched pilot, a global library consortium approach to funding open access books .

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] Oxford Road frontage of the Manchester Museum (the Baroque style building in the foreground is the former Dental Hospital) MUP was founded in 1904 (as the Publications Committee of the University), initially to publish academic research being undertaken at the Victoria University of Manchester . The office was accommodated in a house in Lime Grove.

[ 9 ] Distribution was then in the hands of Sherratt & Hughes of Manchester; from 1913 the distributors were Longmans, Green & Co.

though this arrangement came to an end in the 1930s. (Only 17 publications had been issued under its imprint in the first year.) [ 10 ] MUP was founded by James Tait. His successor was Thomas Tout and between them they were in charge for the first 20 years of the Press's existence. H. M. McKechnie was secretary to the press from 1912 to 1949.

The MUP offices moved several times to make way for other developments within the university. Since 1951 these have been Grove House , Oxford Road, [ 11 ] then the former University Dental Hospital of Manchester ( illustrated ) and until the present time the Manchester Medical School in Coupland Street.

References [ edit ] ^ Booksellers ^ Librarians ^ "About US" . Manchester University Press. Archived from the original on 29 April 2015 . Retrieved 18 October 2013 .

^ Knoop, Douglas & Jones, G. P. (1967).

The Mediæval Mason ; pp. iii-iv ^ Messinger, Gary S. (1985).

Manchester in the Victorian Age: the Half-known City . Manchester University Press. p. iv.

ISBN 0719018439 .

^ "Open Access Books" . Manchester University Press. 2021. Archived from the original on 15 February 2021.

^ "Open Access Journals" . Manchester University Press. 2021. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021.

^ "Good for publishers" .

knowledgeunlatched.org .

^ Victoria University of Manchester; Calendar 1933–1934 via the Internet Archive ^ "This week next week"; autumn 2004 ^ Charlton, H. B. (1951).

Portrait of a University . Manchester: Manchester University Press. pp. 94–95, 169.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Manchester University Press .

Official website v t e University of Manchester Faculties and Schools Standalone Architecture Science and Engineering Engineering Chemical and Analytical Science Computer Science Electrical and Electronic Mechanical, Aerospace and Civil Natural Sciences Chemistry Earth and Environmental Materials Mathematics Physics and Astronomy Humanities Anthropology Business Biology, Medicine and Heath Medicine Psychology Biological Sciences Research Academic Health Science Centre Brooks World Poverty Institute Centre for the Advanced Study of the Arab World Henry Royce Institute Institute for Science, Ethics and Innovation Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics Joule Centre Lincoln Theological Institute Centre for Integrative Systems Biology Centre for New Writing Masood Entrepreneurship Centre Manchester Institute of Biotechnology (MIB) National Graphene Institute Manchester Institute of Innovation Research Research Computing Services Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research Buildings Alan Turing Building Arthur Lewis Building Barnes Wallis Building Beyer Building Faraday Building Grove House Kilburn Building Mathematics Tower, Manchester (1968–2005) Maths and Social Sciences Building Nancy Rothwell Building Renold Building Sackville Street Building Schuster Laboratory Stephen Joseph Studio Stopford Building Whitworth Building Facilities Computing Machine Laboratory Contact Theatre Firs Botanical Grounds Godlee Observatory Jodrell Bank Observatory John Rylands Library Manchester Academy Manchester Aquatics Centre Manchester Conference Centre Manchester Museum Tabley House UMIST linear system University of Manchester Library Whitworth Art Gallery Student life Christie Cup Fuse FM Students' Union The Mancunion Halls of residence City Whitworth Park Victoria Park Dalton-Ellis Hall Greygarth Hall Hulme Hall St Anselm Hall Fallowfield Ashburne Hall Owens Park (Closed) Uttley House History University of Manchester UMIST Victoria University of Manchester Victoria University Mechanics' Institute, Manchester People Chancellor: Nazir Afzal President and vice-chancellor: Duncan Ivison People associated with the University of Manchester List of University of Manchester alumni Other 2020 protests 2023 protests Academic dress Manchester University Press Toller Lecture Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manchester_University_Press&oldid=1290101708 " Categories : 1904 establishments in England Book publishing companies of the United Kingdom British companies established in 1904 Manchester University Press books Publishing companies established in 1904 Culture of the University of Manchester University presses of the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2022 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 20:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Manchester University Press 7 languages Add topic

