Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Microtexture 2 Macrotexture 3 Megatexture 4 Measurement Toggle Measurement subsection 4.1 Profilograph 4.2 Road profilometery 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Road texture 1 language Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Profilograph ) Road surface term This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Road texture" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Road surface textures are deviations from a planar and smooth surface, affecting the vehicle/tyre interaction. Pavement texture is divided into: microtexture with wavelengths from 0 mm to 0.5 millimetres (0.020 in), macrotexture with wavelengths from 0.5 millimetres (0.020 in) to 50 millimetres (2.0 in) and megatexture with wavelengths from 50 millimetres (2.0 in) to 500 millimetres (20 in).

Microtexture [ edit ] Microtexture (MiTx) is the collaborative term for a material's crystallographic parameters and other aspects of microstructure: such as morphology , including size and shape distributions; chemical composition; and crystal orientation and relationships [ 1 ] While vehicle suspension deflection and dynamic tire loads are affected by longer wavelength ( roughness ), road texture affects the interaction between the road surface and the tire footprint. Microtexture has wavelengths shorter than 0.5 mm. It relates to the surface of the binder, of the aggregate , and of contaminants such as rubber deposits from tires.

The mix of the road material contributes to dry road surface friction. Typically, road agencies do not monitor mix directly, but indirectly by brake friction tests. However, friction also depends on other surface properties, such as macro-texture.

Macrotexture [ edit ] Macrotexture (MaTx) is partly a desired property and partly an undesired property. Short MaTx waves, about 5 mm, act as acoustical pores and reduce tyre/road noise. On the other hand, long wave MaTx increase noise. MaTx provide wet road friction, especially at high speeds. Excessive MaTx increases rolling resistance and thus fuel consumption and CO 2 emission, contributing to global warming . Proper roads have MaTx of about 1 mm Mean Profile Depth.

Macrotexture is a family of wave-shaped road surface characteristics. While vehicle suspension deflection and dynamic tyre loads are affected by longer waves (roughness), road texture affects the interaction between the road surface and the tyre footprint. Macrotexture has wavelengths from 0.5 mm up to 50 mm.

Road agencies monitor macrotexture using measurements taken with highway speed laser or inertial profilometers.

ELAtextur Macrotexture Measuring Device Megatexture [ edit ] Megatexture (MeTx) is a result of pavement wear and distress, causing noise and vibration. Megatexture has wavelengths from 50 mm up to 500 mm. Some examples of road damages with much MeTx are potholes, washboards (common on dirt roads) and uneven frost heaves. MeTx below 0.2 mm Root-Mean-Square is considered normal on proper roads.

Measurement [ edit ] MaTx and MeTx are measured with laser/inertial profilographs . Since MiTx has so short waves, it is preferably measured by dry friction brake tests rather than by profiling. Profilographs that record texture in both left and right wheel paths can be used to identify road sections with hazardous split friction .

Profilograph [ edit ] The profilograph is a device used to measure pavement surface roughness.  In the early 20th century, profilographs were low speed rolling devices (for example rolling straight-edges ). Today, many profilographs are advanced high speed systems with a laser based height sensor in combination with an inertial system that creates a large scale reference plane. It is used by construction crews or certified consultants to measure the roughness of in-service road networks, as well as before and after milling off ridges and paving overlays.  Modern profilographs are fully computerized instruments.

The data collected by a profilograph is used to calculate the International Roughness Index (IRI), which is expressed in units of inches/mile or mm/m. IRI values range from 0 (equivalent to driving on a plate of glass) upwards to several hundred in/mile (a very rough road). The IRI value is used for road management to monitor road safety and quality issues.

[ 2 ] Many road profilographs are also measuring the pavements cross slope , curvature , longitudinal gradient and rutting . Some profilographs take digital photos or videos while profiling the road. Most profilographs also record the position, using GPS technology. Yet another common measurement option is cracks . Some profilograph systems include a ground penetrating radar , used to record asphalt layer thickness.

[ 3 ] Another type of profilograph system is for measuring the surface texture of a road and how it relates to the coefficient of friction and thus to skid resistance . Pavement texture is divided into three categories; megatexture, macrotexture, and microtexture. Microtexture cannot currently be measured directly, except in a laboratory. Megatexture is measured using a similar profiling method as when obtaining IRI values, while macrotexture is the measurement of the individual variations of the road within a small interval of a few centimeters. For example, a road which has gravel spread on top followed by an asphalt seal coat will have a high macrotexture, and a road built with concrete slabs will have low macrotexture. For this reason, concrete is often grooved or roughed up immediately after it is laid on the road bed to increase the friction between the tire and road.

Equipment to measure macrotexture currently consists of a distance measuring laser with an extremely small spot size (< 1 mm) and data acquisition systems capable of recording elevations spaced at 1 mm or less. The sample rate is generally over 32 kHz. Macrotexture data can be used to calculate the speed-dependent part of friction between typical car tires and the road surface in both dry and wet conditions. Microtexture affects friction as well.

Lateral friction and cross slope are the key reaction forces acting to keep a cornering vehicle in steady lateral position, while it is subject to exiting forces arising from speed and curvature. Cross slope and curvature can be measured with a road profilograph, and in combination with friction-related measurements can be used to identify improperly banked curves , which can increase the risk of motor vehicle accidents.

Road profilometery [ edit ] A van pulling a road profilometer (undated, before 1969).

Road pavement profilometers (aka profilographs , as used in the famous 1958-1960 AASHO Road Test ) use a distance measuring laser (suspended approximately 30 cm from the pavement) in combination with an odometer and an inertial unit (normally an accelerometer to detect vehicle movement in the vertical plane) that establishes a moving reference plane to which the laser distances are integrated. The inertial compensation makes the profile data more or less independent of what speed the profilometer vehicle had during the measurements, with the assumption that the vehicle does not make large speed variations and the speed is kept above 25 km/h or 15 mph. The profilometer system collects data at normal highway speeds, sampling the surface elevations at intervals of 2–15 cm (1–6 in), and requires a high speed data acquisition system capable of obtaining measurements in the kilohertz range.

The data collected by a profilometer is used to calculate the International Roughness Index (IRI) which is expressed in units of inches/mile or mm/m. IRI values range from 0 (equivalent to driving on a plate of glass) upwards to several hundred in/mi (a very rough road). The IRI value is used for road management to monitor road safety and quality issues.

Many road profilers also measure the pavement's cross slope , curvature , longitudinal gradient and rutting . Some profilers take digital photos or videos while profiling the road. Most profilers also record the position, using GPS technology. Another quite common measurement option  is cracks . Some profilometer systems include a ground penetrating radar , used to record asphalt layer thickness.

Another type of profilometer is for measuring the surface texture of a road and how it relates to the coefficient of friction and thus to skid resistance .  Pavement texture is divided into three categories: megatexture, macrotexture, and microtexture. Microtexture cannot currently be measured directly, except in a laboratory. Megatexture is measured using a similar profiling method as when obtaining IRI values, while macrotexture is the measurement of the individual variations of the road within a small interval of a few centimeters.  For example, a road which has gravel spread on top followed by an asphalt seal coat will have a high macrotexture, and a road built with concrete slabs will have low macrotexture. For this reason, concrete is often grooved or roughed up immediately after it is laid on the road bed to increase the friction between the tire and road.

Equipment to measure macrotexture currently consists of a distance measuring laser with an extremely small spot size (< 1 mm) and data acquisition systems capable of recording elevations spaced at a mm or less apart.  The sample rate is generally over 32 kHz. Macrotexture data can be used to calculate the speed-depending part of the friction number between typical car tires and the road surface. The macrotexture also give information on the difference between dry and wet road friction. However, macrotexture cannot be used to calculate a relevant friction number, since also microtexture affects the friction.

Lateral friction and cross slope are the key reaction forces acting to keep a cornering vehicle in steady lateral position, while exposed to exciting forces from speed and curvature. Since friction is strongly dependent on macrotexture and texture, cross slope as well as curvature can be measured with a road profiler, so road profilers are very useful to identify improperly banked curves that may pose a risk to motor vehicles.

See also [ edit ] Road Roughness Rut (roads) Superelevation Profilometer Ride quality References [ edit ] ^ Micro-texture Determination and its Applications (Second edition), V Randell, 2003 ^ "Chapter 2 - Achieving A High Level of Smoothness in Concrete Pavements Without Sacrificing Long-Term Performance, October 2005 - FHWA-HRT-05-068" .

Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) . Retrieved 2022-06-23 .

^ "Inertial Road Profilers FAQ" . Retrieved 2022-06-23 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Road_texture&oldid=1302441486#Profilograph " Categories : Road infrastructure Pavement engineering Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from January 2013 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from September 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2016 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 12:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Road texture 1 language Add topic

