Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods Toggle Methods subsection 1.1 Innovation & problem solving 1.2 Response to novelty 1.3 Habit reversal & inhibition 1.4 Social learning 2 g in non-human mammals Toggle g in non-human mammals subsection 2.1 Primates 2.2 Rodents 3 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 3.1 Genetic research 3.2 Neuroscience 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents g factor in non-humans Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The g factor , or general factor, of intelligence is a psychometric construct that summarizes observed correlations between an individual’s scores on various measures of cognitive abilities . First described in humans , a g factor has since been identified in a number of non-human species.

[ 1 ] Non-human models of g have been used in genetic [ 2 ] and neurological [ 3 ] research on intelligence to help understand the mechanisms behind variation in g .

Methods [ edit ] Most measures of g in humans, including most IQ tests, rely heavily on language and verbal ability, and so they cannot be directly applied to non-human animals. Several alternative measures have been developed to study intelligence in animals, relying on the observation of animals in natural situations or on behavioral tasks in experimental settings. The tasks focus on such things as innovation and problem solving, response to novelty, habit reversal and inhibition, and social learning and culture. A comprehensive assessment often includes a battery of tests involving several sorts of behavior.

[ 4 ] Innovation & problem solving [ edit ] Innovation and problem solving tasks are the most widely used experimental measures of non-human intelligence. The same assessment often uses several tasks, which may involve memory , spatial reasoning , visual and auditory discrimination,  and object manipulation.

[ 5 ] Innovation has often been observed in animals, typically involving novel solutions to everyday problems or the use of tools to achieve a goal. Instances include termite fishing in chimpanzees or nut cracking in robust capuchins . Such observations provide ecologically valid measures without the need for experimentation.

[ 1 ] Response to novelty [ edit ] Response to novelty is often used in intelligence measures in human infants, [ 6 ] for the amount of interest in novel objects and the time spent exploring a novel environment correlate with intelligence later in life. Responses to novelty in non-humans are thought to correlate similarly, though it can often be difficult to quantify this measure appropriately.

[ 7 ] Habit reversal & inhibition [ edit ] Habit reversal and inhibition are commonly used to test primate intelligence. These tasks require the animal to suppress a learned response or instinctive action in order to receive a reward. For example, in the detour problem, a food reward behind an obstacle must be retrieved by following an indirect route.

[ 8 ] To do this, the subject must inhibit its tendency to move straight towards the goal.

Social learning [ edit ] A number of intelligence tests for animals include social learning . The more an individual participates in and gains from social learning, the higher its intelligence is judged to be. Such data are most widely available for primates in social situations, often in wild populations, rather than experimental set-ups [ 1 ] Such observations are more ecologically valid than some other measures.

[ 9 ] One basis for their inclusion in IQ studies centers around the theory of cultural intelligence .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] g in non-human mammals [ edit ] A large portion of the research into non-human g factors has focused on mammals. Being mammals themselves, humans have a great deal in common with other mammals, sharing similarities in aspects such as physiology and neurochemistry .

Social learning and culture may have played a large role in the evolution of intelligence in humans [ 10 ] [ 11 ] (including its factor structure) and as such it follows that other animals may have similar single-factor models of intelligence.

Primates [ edit ] Due to their close taxonomic proximity to humans, primates ( great apes in particular) have been the focus of a large part of the research into the prevalence of a g factor in non-human animals.

A meta-analysis of 4,000 primate behaviour academic papers searching for instances of innovation , social learning , tool use , and extractive foraging was conducted to investigate the components of these behaviours in 62 species of primates.

[ 1 ] A principal component analysis of these cognitive measures (as well as three socio-ecological variables, (diet breadth, percentage fruit in diet, and group size) revealed a single factor explaining 47% of the variance onto which the cognitive measures and diet breadth (somewhat) loaded. This would suggest that non-human primates, as a whole, have a g factor similar to that observed in humans.

Rodents [ edit ] Mice and rats have been used as model organisms in research for hundreds of years [ 12 ] and have been a staple of experimental psychology for decades.  Both have been proposed as easily accessible models for studying g .

[ 2 ] [ 13 ] The g factor loadings in Long-Evans rats has been shown to range from .43 to as high as .70 in cognitive ability tasks.

[ 14 ] In mice, about 55–60% of the individual variance in tests of cognitive ability can be explained by g .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Applications [ edit ] Genetic research [ edit ] Non-human models of intelligence can be used in individual differences research for study designs that are difficult or unethical to perform using human subjects. Examples of this include experimental drug testing and multi-generational studies that would take a very long time in humans.

One such aspect of intelligence well suited for a non-human model is the experimental study of genetic aspects of g .

Mice are currently being considered as a potential model due to their widespread availability, detailed knowledge of their genome , and the ease with which strains can be bred to exhibit individual differences in cognitive ability .

[ 2 ] Neuroscience [ edit ] Non-human models can also be used in neuroscience for neuroanatomical studies investigating intelligence and the influence of g on the neurological level. Rats have been used in experimental manipulations of intelligence using chemicals administered prenatally .

[ 3 ] These effects are partially reversed by stimulation of neurological development and suggest that neuronal and synaptic numbers have an effect on g .

Criticism [ edit ] A 2012 study identifying individual chimpanzees that consistently performed highly on cognitive tasks found clusters of abilities instead of a general factor of intelligence.

[ 17 ] This study used individual-based data and claim that their results are not directly comparable to previous studies using group data that have found evidence for g . The authors propose a future research should test multiple individuals of multiple species on a variety of tasks to investigate this discrepancy.

A 2020 review and meta-analysis of g in non-humans found that the average correlation between cognitive tasks was 0.18, suggesting weak support for general intelligence.

[ 18 ] This study also highlighted limitations of factor-analytic procedures used to extract a single 'general' factor of intelligence and found that previous studies often failed to test critical assumptions of their methods. The authors suggest that future research should focus on patterns of (co)variance among cognitive abilities .

See also [ edit ] g factor Intelligence Animal cognition Primate cognition References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Reader, S. M., Hager, Y., & Laland, K. N. (2011). The evolution of primate general and cultural intelligence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 366(1567), 1017-1027.

^ a b c Plomin, R. (2001). The genetics of g in human and mouse. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2(2), 136-141.

^ a b Anderson, B. (2000). The g factor in non-human animals. The nature of intelligence, (285), 79.

^ Tomasello, M., & Call, J. (1997). Primate cognition. Oxford University Press.

^ Banerjee, K., Chabris, C. F., Johnson, V. E., Lee, J. J., Tsao, F., & Hauser, M. D. (2009). General intelligence in another primate: individual differences across cognitive task performance in a New World monkey (Saguinus oedipus). PLoS One, 4(6), e5883.

^ Berg, C. A., & Sternberg, R. J. (1985). "Response to novelty: Continuity versus discontinuity in the developmental course of intelligence." Advances in Child Development and Behavior , 19, 1–47.

^ Day, R. L., Coe, R. L., Kendal, J. R., & Laland, K. N. (2003). "Neophilia, innovation and social learning: a study of intergeneric differences in callitrichid monkeys." Animal Behaviour , 65(3), 559–571.

^ Kohler, W. (1927). The mentality of apes (rev. edn). New York: Harcourt ^ Reader, S. M., & Biro, D. (2010). Experimental identification of social learning in wild animals. Learning & Behavior, 38(3), 265-283.

^ a b van Schaik, C. P., & Burkart, J. M. (2011). Social learning and evolution: the cultural intelligence hypothesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 366(1567), 1008-1016.

^ a b Herrmann, E., Call, J., Hernández-Lloreda, M. V., Hare, B., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Humans have evolved specialized skills of social cognition: the cultural intelligence hypothesis. science, 317(5843), 1360-1366.

^ Fox, J. G., Barthold, S., Davisson, M., Newcomer, C. E., Quimby, F. W., & Smith, A. (2006).

The Mouse in Biomedical Research: Normative Biology, Husbandry, and Models (Vol. 3). Academic Press.

^ Matzel, L. D., Han, Y. R., Grossman, H., Karnik, M. S., Patel, D., Scott, N., ... & Gandhi, C. C. (2003). "Individual differences in the expression of a 'general' learning ability in mice." The Journal of Neuroscience , 23(16), 6423–6433.

^ Jensen, A. R.

The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability (Praeger, Westport, Connecticut, 1998).

^ Locurto, C., & Durkin, E. "Problem-solving and individual differences in mice (Mus musculus) using water reinforcement." Journal of Comparative Psychology .

^ Locurto, C. & Scanlon, C. "Individual differences and a spatial learning factor in two strains of mice (Mus musculus)." Journal of Comparative Psychology . 112, 344–352 (1998).

^ Herrmann, E., & Call, J. (2012). Are there geniuses among the apes?.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,367(1603), 2753-2761.

^ Poirier, Marc-Antoine; Kozlovsky, Dovid Y.; Morand-Ferron, Julie; Careau, Vincent (2020-12-09).

"How general is cognitive ability in non-human animals? A meta-analytical and multi-level reanalysis approach" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

287 (1940): 20201853.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2020.1853 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 7739923 .

PMID 33290683 .

v t e Animal cognition Cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Great ape language Talking animal Talking bird Animal-made art Animal navigation Cognitive bias Cognitive ethology Comparative cognition Emotion Insect Mirror test Neuroethology Number sense Observational learning Primate archaeology Theory of mind Tool use sea otters Vocal learning Intelligence Bird Pigeon Cat Cephalopod Cetacean Dog Elephant Fish g factor in non-humans Primate Hominid Swarm Pain Pain in amphibians Pain in animals Pain in cephalopods Pain in crustaceans Pain in fish Pain in invertebrates Relation to brain Brain size Brain-to-body mass ratio Encephalization quotient Neuroscience and intelligence Number of neurons Category v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=G_factor_in_non-humans&oldid=1303624156 " Categories : Animal intelligence Psychometrics This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 02:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents g factor in non-humans Add languages Add topic

