Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gruber Prizes 2 Gruber Science Fellowships 3 Gruber Program for Global Justice and Women's Rights 4 References Toggle the table of contents Gruber Foundation 6 languages العربية Español Français עברית Português தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philanthropic foundation This article reads like a press release or a news article and may be largely based on routine coverage .

Please help improve it by adding independent secondary sources.

( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Gruber Foundation Founded 1993 Focus Cosmology Genetics Neuroscience Justice Women's Rights Location Yale University Office of Development, New Haven , Connecticut Origins The Peter and Patricia Gruber Foundation Key people Patricia and Peter Gruber (co-founders) Revenue $4,681,748 [ 1 ] (2016) Expenses $3,291,482 [ 1 ] (2016) Website gruber .yale .edu The Gruber Foundation is a philanthropic foundation established by Peter and Patricia Gruber and is based at Yale University in New Haven , Connecticut .

[ 2 ] Its mission is to honor and encourage excellence in the fields of cosmology , genetics , neuroscience , justice , and women's rights , which encompasses three major programmatic initiatives: the Gruber Prizes and the Young Scientists Awards; the Gruber Science Fellowship Program; and the Gruber Program for Global Justice and Women's Rights at Yale Law School .

[ 3 ] Gruber Prizes [ edit ] The International Prize Program awards the annual Gruber Prizes: Gruber Prize in Cosmology first awarded in 2000 [ 4 ] Gruber Prize in Genetics first awarded in 2001 [ 5 ] Gruber Prize in Neuroscience first awarded in 2004 [ 6 ] Gruber Prize for Justice awarded from 2001 to 2011 Gruber Prize for Women's Rights awarded from 2003 to 2011 The prizes, which are awarded to prominent scientists, social scientists, and jurists in these subjects, provide a gold medal and a cash award of US$500,000.

[ 7 ] The Young Scientist Awards recognize brilliant early career international scientists and are selected in partnership with major scientific organizations: International Astronomical Union Fellowships [ 4 ] Rosalind Franklin Young Investigator Award, in partnership with the Genetics Society of America and the American Society for Human Genetics [ 8 ] Peter and Patricia Gruber International Research Award in Neuroscience, in partnership with the Society for Neuroscience [ 6 ] Peter and Patricia Gruber Awards at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel [ 9 ] Gruber Science Fellowships [ edit ] Established in 2011, the Gruber Science Fellowships are the most prestigious awards offered by the Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Annually, only approximately 20 are awarded to the most highly ranked applicants to Yale PhD programs in the life sciences, cosmology, and astrophysics, in recognition of their outstanding accomplishments and exceptional promise.

[ 12 ] In April 2024, the foundation announced its third Early Career Fellowship administered by the International Astronomical Union.

[ 13 ] Gruber Program for Global Justice and Women's Rights [ edit ] Administered by Yale Law School , the Gruber Program for Global Justice and Women's Rights continues and expands upon the missions of the previous Justice and Women's Rights Prizes, from which it evolved.

[ 14 ] Currently, the program consists of four core components: Global Constitutionalism Seminar [ 15 ] Gruber Distinguished Lectures in Global Justice and Women's Rights [ 16 ] Gruber Global Justice and Women's Rights Fellowships [ 17 ] Gruber Project in Global Justice and Women’s Rights References [ edit ] ^ a b "The Peter and Patricia Gruber Foundation" (PDF) .

Foundation Center . 2 August 2017 . Retrieved 23 January 2018 .

^ "Yale and Patricia and Peter Gruber Announce Establishment of the Gruber Foundation at Yale" . The Gruber Foundation . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "The Gruber Foundation" . The Gruber Foundation . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ a b "IAU and the Gruber Foundation" .

International Astronomical Union . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "2001 Gruber Genetics Prize Press Release Rudolf Jaenisch, Gene Transfer Pioneer, Receives First-Ever International Genetics Prize" .

Gruber Foundation . 2001 . Retrieved 4 August 2015 .

^ a b "The Gruber Foundation Neuroscience Prize" .

Society for Neuroscience . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "Gruber Prizes" . The Gruber Foundation . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "Rosalind Franklin Young Investigator Award" .

Genetics Society of America . Archived from the original on 2019-05-30 . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "The Gruber Award" .

Weizmann Institute of Science . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "Gruber Science Fellowship" . The Gruber Foundation . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "Grad school to increase science admits" .

Yale Daily News . 10 January 2012 . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "Gruber Science Fellowships: Moving research forward through education" .

Yale University . 21 April 2014 . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ SpaceRef (2020-10-02).

"Gruber Foundation to Support Third Early Career Fellowship" .

SpaceNews . Retrieved 2025-05-16 .

^ "Gruber Program for Global Justice and Women's Rights" .

Yale Law School . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "Global Constitutionalism Seminar" .

Yale Law School . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "Gruber Lectures" .

Yale Law School . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

^ "Gruber Fellowships" .

Yale Law School . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

v t e Yale University Located in : New Haven, Connecticut People Leadership President Maurie McInnis ( predecessors ) Provost Scott Strobel Yale Corporation Dean of Yale Law School Faculty Sterling Professors People list Elihu Yale Schools Faculty of Arts and Sciences Undergraduate College Graduate Graduate Arts and Sciences Professional Architecture Art Divinity Andover Newton Berkeley Drama Engineering Environment Global Affairs Law Management Medicine Music Nursing Public Health Defunct Sheffield Scientific School Campus Connecticut Hall Evans Hall Harkness Tower Hewitt Quadrangle Hillhouse Avenue Horchow Hall Memorial Quadrangle Old Campus Rudolph Hall Science Hill Steinbach Hall Sterling Law Building Yale-Myers Forest Residential Benjamin Franklin Berkeley Branford Davenport Timothy Dwight Jonathan Edwards Grace Hopper (formerly Calhoun) Morse Pauli Murray Pierson Saybrook Silliman Ezra Stiles Trumbull Library and museums Library Bass Rare Book & Manuscript Medical Law Sterling Memorial Walpole Library Museum of Natural History Art Gallery Center for British Art Collection of Musical Instruments Research Child Study Center Cowles Foundation Haskins Laboratories Human Relations Area Files MacMillan Center Rudd Center Yale Cancer Center Yale Program for the Study of Antisemitism Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse Rugby Sailing Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Swimming and diving Venues Yale Bowl (football) Bush Field Ingalls Rink (hockey) Gilder Boathouse Golf Course Payne Whitney Gymnasium Reese Stadium Culture Handsome Dan Harvard-Yale football rivalry Harvard-Yale rowing rivalry Artistic A cappella The Alley Cats The Spizzwinks The Whiffenpoofs The Society of Orpheus and Bacchus Dramatic Association Precision Marching Band Symphony Orchestra Traditions Coat of arms Yale Blue Bright College Years Publications Alumni Magazine Yale Daily News The Yale Herald Yale Law Journal Yale Literary Magazine The Yale Record Rumpus Student Life Bladderball Manuscript Society Skull and Bones Political Union Programs Gruber Foundation Silliman Lectures Sustainable Food Program World Fellows Yale-NUS College Terry Lectures Open Yale Courses Category Commons Wikinews Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gruber_Foundation&oldid=1290757872 " Categories : Yale University Foundations based in the United States Fellowships Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 21:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gruber Foundation 6 languages Add topic

