Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Physiology 3 Psychology 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Blushing 32 languages العربية Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa עברית Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Українська اردو Walon Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reddening of a person's face due to emotion "Erythrophobia" redirects here. For fear of the color red, see Chromophobia .

A woman blushing and covering her face.

Blushing or erubescence is the reddening of a person's face due to psychological reasons.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is normally involuntary and triggered by emotional stress associated with passion , embarrassment , shyness , fear , anger , or romantic stimulation .

Severe blushing is also common in people who have social anxiety , in which the person experiences extreme and persistent anxiety in social and performance situations.

[ 4 ] Description [ edit ] Blushing is generally distinguished, despite a close physiological relation, from flushing , which is more intensive and extends over more of the body and seldom has a mental source.

Idiopathic craniofacial erythema is a medical condition where a person blushes strongly with little or no provocation. People who have social phobia are particularly prone to idiopathic craniofacial erythema.

[ 5 ] Physiology [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Blushing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A blush is a reddening of the cheeks and forehead brought about by increased capillary blood flow in the skin. It can also extend to the ears, neck and upper chest, an area termed the 'blush region'.

[ 6 ] There is evidence that the blushing region is anatomically different in structure. The facial skin, for example, has more capillary loops per unit area and generally more vessels per unit volume than other skin areas. In addition, blood vessels of the cheek are wider in diameter, are nearer the surface, and visibility is less diminished by tissue fluid. These specific characteristics of the architecture of the facial vessels led Wilkin in an overview of possible causes of facial flushing to the following conclusion: "[...] Increased capacity and greater visibility can account for the limited distribution of flushing".

[ 7 ] Evidence for special vasodilation mechanisms was reported by Mellander and his colleagues (Mellander, Andersson, Afzelius, & Hellstrand, 1982).

[ 8 ] They studied buccal segments of the human facial veins in vitro . Unlike veins from other areas of the skin, facial veins responded with an active myogenic contraction to passive stretch and, therefore, were able to develop an intrinsic basal tone. Additionally Mellander et al. showed that the veins in this specific area were also supplied with beta- adrenoceptors in addition to the common alpha-adrenoceptors. These beta-adrenoceptors could exert a dilator mechanism on the above-described basal tone of the facial cutaneous venous plexus . Mellander and his colleagues propose that this mechanism is involved in emotional blushing.

Drummond has partially confirmed this effect by pharmacological blocking experiments (Drummond. 1997).

[ 9 ] In a number of trials, he blocked both alpha- adrenergic receptors (with phentolamine) and beta-adrenergic receptors (with propranolol introduced transcutaneously by iontophoresis). Blushing was measured at the forehead using a dual channel laser Doppler flowmeter. Subjects were undergraduate students divided into frequent and infrequent blushers according to self-report. Their mean age was 22.9 years, which is especially favorable for assessing blushing since young subjects are more likely to blush and blush more intensively. The subjects underwent several procedures, one of which was designed to produce blushing.

Alpha-adrenergic blockade with phentolamine did not influence the amount of blushing in frequent or infrequent blushers, indicating that the release of sympathetic vasoconstrictor tone does not substantially influence blushing. This result was expected since vasoconstrictor tone in the facial area is known to be generally low (van der Meer. 1985).

[ 10 ] Beta-adrenergic blockade with propranolol, on the other hand, decreased blushing in both frequent and infrequent blushers. However, despite complete blockade, blood flow still increased substantially during the embarrassment and blushing inducing procedure. Additional vasodilator mechanisms must, therefore, be involved.

Psychology [ edit ] Charles Darwin devoted Chapter 13 of his 1872 The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals to complex emotional states including self-attention, shame, shyness, modesty and blushing. He described blushing as "... the most peculiar and most human of all expressions." Several different psychological and psycho-physiological mechanisms for blushing have been hypothesized by Crozier (2010): "An explanation that emphasizes the blush's visibility proposes that when we feel shame, we communicate our emotion to others, and in doing so we send an important signal to them. It tells them something about us. It shows that we are ashamed or embarrassed, that we recognise that something is out of place. It shows that we are sorry about this. It shows that we want to put things right. To blush at innuendo is to show awareness of its implications and to display modesty that conveys that you are not brazen or shameless. The blush makes a particularly effective signal because it is involuntary and uncontrollable. Of course, a blush can be unwanted [but the] costs to the blusher on specific occasions are outweighed by the long-term benefits of being seen as adhering to the group and by the general advantages the blush provides: indeed the costs may enhance the signal's perceived value." [ 11 ] A number of techniques may be used to help prevent or reduce blushing.

[ 12 ] The most extreme of these interventions is a surgical technique known as endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy .

[ 13 ] In this procedure Salzen (2010) suggested that blushing and flushing were manifestations of the physiological impact of the instinctual fight/flight mechanism when neither confrontation nor retreat is possible.

[ 14 ] Blushing has been linked to activation in the cerebellum and the left paracentral lobe.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy References [ edit ] ^ "Blushing" .

nhs.uk . 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 2 June 2021 .

^ "Blushing" .

Inspire Students . Archived from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 2 June 2021 .

^ "Meanings & Definitions of English Words" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 23 December 2023 .

^ "Blushing: A Symptom of Social Anxiety | Social Anxiety Institute" .

socialanxietyinstitute.org . Retrieved 17 August 2025 .

^ admin (2 January 2020).

"What Causes Excessive Blushing? | The Center for Hyperhidrosis" . Retrieved 17 August 2025 .

^ "The puzzle of blushing" .

thepsychologist.bps.org.uk . Retrieved 25 May 2019 .

^ Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology , Wilkin. 1988 ^ Mellander, Stefan; Andersson, Per-Olof; Afzelius, Lars-Erik; Hellstrand, Per (1982).

"Neural beta-adrenergic dilatation of the facial vein in man Possible mechanism in emotional blushing" .

Acta Physiologica Scandinavica .

114 (3): 393– 399.

doi : 10.1111/j.1748-1716.1982.tb07000.x .

ISSN 1365-201X .

^ "Blushing" .

www.bionity.com . Retrieved 17 August 2025 .

^ "Blushing" .

www.bionity.com . Retrieved 17 August 2025 .

^ Crozier, R. (2010), "The Puzzle of Blushing" , The Psychologist , Vol 23. No 5, May 2010, pp. 390–393.] ^ "How Can People Stop Blushing Forever" . Archived from the original on 1 April 2017.

^ Park, Jae Kil; Hyun, Kwanyong; Moon, Mi Hyoung; Lee, Jungsun (8 July 2022).

"Surgical treatment of facial blushing: Patient selection and operative technique (retrospective observational study)" .

Medicine .

101 (27): e29808.

doi : 10.1097/MD.0000000000029808 .

PMC 9259148 .

^ Salzen, E. (2010), "Flushing and blushing" letter in The Psychologist , Vol 23, No 7, July 2010, p. 539.

^ Nikolić, Milica; di Plinio, Simone; Sauter, Disa; Keysers, Christian; Gazzola, Valeria (17 July 2024).

"The blushing brain: neural substrates of cheek temperature increase in response to self-observation" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

291 (2027). The Royal Society.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2024.0958 .

hdl : 20.500.11755/c2d7e660-5628-4c77-aa7b-340039915a70 .

ISSN 1471-2954 .

PMC 11251765 .

Further reading [ edit ] Vickers, S., MyBlushingCure.com: Free Information from a former blusher , Australian Publisher, 2012 Crozier, W. R., Blushing and the Social Emotions: The Self Unmasked , Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.

ISBN 1-4039-4675-2 Miller, R. S., Embarrassment: Poise and Peril in Everyday Life , Guilford Press, 1997.

ISBN 1-57230-247-X Jadresic, E., When Blushing Hurts: Overcoming Abnormal Facial Blushing (2nd edition, expanded and revised), iUniverse, 2014.

ISBN 978-1491750285 .

Daniels B. W Understanding Uncontrollable Facial Blushing , Neptune, Elizabeth Stewart, 2010.

ESFB Channel Archived 18 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine - The online community for people suffering from facial blushing, excessive sweating, rosacea and social phobia [1] - Blushing in Plato Wikimedia Commons has media related to Blushing .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Blushing .

Look up blushing in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Psychophysiology Appetite Arousal Biofeedback Blushing Consciousness Cerebral dominance Habituation Lie detection Orientation Reaction time Reflex Satiation Self stimulation Sensation Sleep Psychological stress Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blushing&oldid=1306303995 " Categories : Emotion Reflexes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 Articles needing additional references from May 2024 All articles needing additional references Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 02:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Blushing 32 languages Add topic

