Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins and structure 2 Dehiscence 3 Specialised capsules 4 Nuts 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Capsule (fruit) 41 languages العربية Беларуская Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of simple, dehiscent fruit A line art drawing of a pyxidium In botany , a capsule is a type of simple , dry , though rarely fleshy dehiscent fruit produced by many species of angiosperms ( flowering plants ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Origins and structure [ edit ] The capsule ( Latin : capsula , small box) is derived from a compound (multicarpellary) ovary .

[ 2 ] A capsule is a structure composed of two or more carpels . In (flowering plants), the term locule (or cell) is used to refer to a chamber within the fruit . Depending on the number of locules in the ovary, fruit can be classified as uni-locular (unilocular), bi-locular , tri-locular or multi-locular . The number of locules present in a gynoecium may be equal to or less than the number of carpels. The locules contain the ovules or seeds and are separated by septa .

Dehiscence [ edit ] Main article: Dehiscence (botany) In most cases the capsule is dehiscent , i.e. at maturity, it splits apart (dehisces) to release the seeds within. A few capsules are indehiscent , for example those of Adansonia digitata , Alphitonia , and Merciera . Capsules are often classified into four types, depending on the type and location of dehiscence (see Simpson Fig 9.41 [ 2 ] and Hickey & King [ 3 ] ).

Lilium candidum dehiscing Loculicidal capsules possess longitudinal lines of dehiscence radially aligned with the locules , i.e.

not at the septa, along the midrib or dorsal suture (seam) of the locules. If septa are absent, the dehiscence lines lie between the placentae . This type is common among many members of the Liliaceae such as Lilium (see illustration).

Septicidal capsules have dehiscence lines aligned with the sutures of the ovary septa or placentae, that is between the carpels.

Both loculicidal and septicidal capsules split into distinguishable segments called valves . The valves are a part of the pericarp (fruit wall) that has split away, without enclosing the seed or seeds. The borders of the valves may or may not coincide with the borders of carpels. These valves may remain attached to the fruit or fall off. In septicidal capsules the valves remain in place. In some capsules, the split occurs between carpels, and in others each carpel splits open.

Circumscissile capsules ( pyxide , pyxis , pyxidium or lid capsule ) have a transverse, rather than longitudinal, dehiscence line, so that the upper part of the capsule dehisces, usually forming a terminal lid ( operculum ) that opens (see illustration). An example is Plantago . A variant is the Septifragal capsule ( valvular capsule ) in which the outer walls  break away from the septa and (usually axile) placentae as valves.

Poricidal capsules dehisce through pores (openings) in the capsule, as in Papaver , the seeds escaping through these pores.

Flowers and developing fruit capsules of the ground orchid Spathoglottis plicata Examples of other plants that produce capsules include nigella , orchid , willow , cotton , and jimson weed .

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Specialised capsules [ edit ] Dehiscence of the follicular capsule of Asclepias syriaca Some dry dehiscent fruits form specialised capsule-like structures. A follicle is derived from a single carpel that splits along a suture, as in Magnolia , while a legume splits along two sutures, and are a defining feature of the Fabaceae . Some variants of legumes that have retained vestigial sutures include loments that split transversely into segments, each with a single seed, and indehiscent legumes, such as Arachis hypogaea (peanuts). Capsules derived from two carpels include silicles and siliques that dehisce along two suture lines but retain a partition called the replum, which is a septum with attached seeds. While both are characteristic of Brassicaceae , silicles have a ratio of length to width of no more than 3:1.

[ 5 ] A schizocarp is derived from a compound ovary with two or more locules which then separate radially as one of the above types, such as a schizocarp of follicles, as in Asclepias ( Asclepiadoideae ) (see illustration).

A mericarp is a portion of the fruit that separates from the ovary to form a distinct locule unit which encloses the seed, usually-nut-like, as in Apiaceae in which the mericarps are joined by a stalk (carpophore). Thus a schizocarp of mericarps is a structure in which the carpels of a single ovary split to form mericarps. A schizocarp of nutlets is derived from a carpel that becomes lobed, and the lobes become nutlets that split apart. Examples include Boraginaceae and most Lamiaceae , where the styles are attached between the ovary lobes.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Nuts [ edit ] Capsules are sometimes mislabeled as nuts , as in the example of the Brazil nut or the Horse-chestnut .  A capsule is not a nut because it releases its seeds and it splits apart.  Nuts, on  the other hand, do not release seeds as they are a compound ovary containing both a single seed and the fruit.  Nuts also do not split. In the Brazil nut, a lid on the capsule opens, but is too small to release the dozen or so seeds (the actual "Brazil nut" of commerce) within. These germinate inside the capsule after it falls to the ground.

See also [ edit ] Fruit References [ edit ] ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Capsule" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ a b c d e Simpson 2011 , Simple fruit types pp.384–386 ^ Hickey & King 2000 , Capsule dehiscence p. 136 ^ a b Dahlgren, Clifford & Yeo 1985 , Fruit p. 15.

^ Schmid, Rudolf; Graham, Linda E.; Graham, James M.; Wilcox, Lee W. (Warren); Stern, Kingsley R. (Rowland); Bidlack, James E.; Jansky, Shelley H.; Uno, Gordon E. (1 May 2005).

"Plant Biology" .

Taxon .

54 (2): 573.

doi : 10.2307/25065406 .

ISSN 0040-0262 .

JSTOR 25065406 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Simpson, Michael G. (2011).

Plant Systematics . Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-08-051404-8 .

Dahlgren, R.M.

; Clifford, H.T.; Yeo, P.F. (1985).

The families of the monocotyledons . Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-642-64903-5 . Retrieved 10 February 2014 .

Hickey, Michael; King, Clive (2000).

The Cambridge illustrated glossary of botanical terms . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-79401-5 .

Encyclopædia Britannica online The seed site Wikimedia Commons has media related to Capsule (fruit) .

v t e Types of fruits Types of fruits Achene Berry Hesperidium Pepo Capsule Caryopsis Drupe Follicle Legume Loment Nut Pome Samara Schizocarp Silique Syconium Categories of fruits Accessory fruit Simple fruit Compound fruit Aggregate fruit Multiple fruit Dehiscent fruit Function Diaspore Drift fruit v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Capsule_(fruit)&oldid=1292081416 " Categories : Fruit morphology Orchid morphology Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2017 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 03:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Capsule (fruit) 41 languages Add topic

