Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 See also 3 Publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Alan MacEachren Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American geographer and researcher Alan M. MacEachren (born 1952) is an American geographer , Professor of Geography and Director, GeoVISTA Center, Department of Geography, The Pennsylvania State University . He is known for his cross-disciplinary work in the fields of human-centered geographic visualization , scientific and information visualization , and in statistics .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Alan MacEachren received a B.A. in geography in 1974 at the Ohio University , an M.A. in geography in 1976 from the University of Kansas and a Ph.D. in geography 1979 from University of Kansas.

From 1979 to 1983, he was Assistant Professor of Geography at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University and Director of the Department of Geography Cartography Laboratory. From 1980 to 1983, he was Director of the Department of Geography Spatial Analysis Laboratory, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. In 1983, he became Assistant Professor of Geography at the University of Colorado-Boulder and in 1985 switched to Associate Professor of Geography and Director of the Deasy GeoGraphics Laboratory at the Pennsylvania State University , where he worked until 1992. From 1992, he was Professor of Geography, and since 1998 Director, GeoVISTA Center, Department of Geography, Penn State University. In Fall 2007, he was Visiting Professor, Department of Computer Science, Stanford University , and since 2007 also Affiliate Professor of Information Sciences and Technology, Penn State University.

Awards for Alan MacEachren in 2004-2007 include the E. Willard and Ruby S. Miller Professor of Geography, College of Earth and Mineral Science, Penn State University. He became an Honorary Fellow of the International Cartographic Association in 2005, making him only the sixth Fellow from the U.S. since 1974. In 2004, he was also recognized for Exceptional Scholarly Contributions to the Practice of Cartography, by the Canadian Cartographic Association.

See also [ edit ] 2.5D Animated mapping Figure-ground in map design History of cartography Spatial analysis Theresa-Marie Rhyne Publications [ edit ] Alan MacEachren has written several books and articles. A selection: [ 2 ] 1994.

Visualization in modern cartography . With D.R. Fraser (ed.). Taylor.

1995.

How maps work : representation, visualization, and design How maps work : representation, 1994.

Some truth with maps : a primer on symbolization and design 1997.

Rediscovering Geography: New Relevance for the New Century . With 13 other authors. Washington, D. C.: National Academy of Science Press.

2005.

Exploring Geovisualization . With Jason Dykes and M.J. Kraak . International Cartographic Association.

2005.

Illuminating the Path: The Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics . With 25 other authors. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and Department of Homeland Security.

References [ edit ] ^ MacEachren, Alan at www.infovis-wiki.net.

^ Alan M. MacEachren List of publications from the DBLP Bibliography Server.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Alan MacEachren .

Alan M. MacEachren . Director, GeoVISTA Center. The Pennsylvania State University.

List of Influences: Alan MacEachren by Robert Kosara, 2007-04-03.

v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Israel Academics ORCID DBLP Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alan_MacEachren&oldid=1270906231 " Categories : 1952 births American geographers Historians of cartography Living people Data and information visualization experts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 January 2025, at 20:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alan MacEachren Add languages Add topic

