Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Method selection Toggle Method selection subsection 2.1 Typical leakage rates 2.2 Sensitivity of methods 3 Applications 4 Standards 5 References Toggle the table of contents Tracer-gas leak testing 5 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Tracer gas ) Nondestructive testing method for detecting gas leaks A tracer-gas leak testing method is a nondestructive testing method that detects gas leaks . A variety of methods with different sensitivities exist. Tracer-gas leak testing is used in the petrochemical industry , the automotive industry , the construction industry [ 1 ] and in the manufacture of semiconductors , among other uses.

Types [ edit ] Several tracer-gas leak testing methods exist, including: Detection of leaks using helium mass spectrometer , which provides high sensitivity Hydrogen leak testing , which provides the best mobility Refrigerant gas leak detection, for refrigeration applications Method selection [ edit ] Typical leakage rates [ edit ] The nature of the product or the process and the process gases will set the leak rate requirement: System Allowed leak rate ( mbar L /s) Chemical process equipment 10 −1 –1 Beverage can 10 −5 –10 −6 Vacuum pumped system 10 −5 –10 −7 IC-package 10 −7 –10 −8 Airbag cartridge 10 −8 Pacemaker 10 −9 Closed vacuum system 10 −9 Sensitivity of methods [ edit ] Based on the target leak rate, the table below will help to choose the most suitable method.

[ 2 ] Method Sensitivity (leak rate in mbar l/s) Ultrasonics 10 −1 Bubble test in water 10 −2 Pressure decay 10 −2 Vacuum decay 10 −2 Acoustic emission detectors 10 −3 Bubble test in soapy water 10 −4 Gas-specific thermal conductivity detector 10 −5 Halogen detector 10 −5 Photoacoustic spectroscopy 10 −6 Hydrogen sniffer 10 −6 Residual gas analyser 10 −7 Dye penetrant 10 −8 Radioactive tracer 10 −10 Helium mass spectrometry vacuum testing 10 −11 Applications [ edit ] Typical applications of tracer-gas leak testing include: In petrochemical plants , hydrocracking , vapocracking, catalytic reforming , and steam reforming are all hydrogen -based processes, in which were hydrogen leak testing is required.

When manufacturing semiconductors , all processes taking place in a process chamber at atmospheric pressure or under vacuum – diffusion, oxidation, LPCVD , PECVD , PVD and ion implantation – require helium or hydrogen leak testing.

In vehicles, airbags have to be tested for leaks so they remain functional for a long time. As well as airbags, the air conditioning system, fuel system, and exhaust system require testing for leaks.

Pacemakers and catheters have to be tested for efficacy and longevity.

On planes, tracer-gas leak testing is used to quickly and safely locate fuel leaks, [ 3 ] as well as to check oxygen distribution devices and cabin pressurization systems.

Refrigeration and air conditioning must have the lowest possible rate of loss of refrigerant gases (contributing to ozone depletion ).

Sewage and drinking water networks, to reduce loss of water and make sure drinking water is not contaminated by sewage.

Standards [ edit ] See also: Leak detection § Rules and regulations Several standards apply to leak testing and more specifically to tracer-gas leak testing methods, for example: BS EN 1779:1999; leak tightness by indication or measurement of gas leakage, BS EN 13185:2001 Non-destructive testing. Leak testing. Tracer gas method, BS EN 13192:2002 Non-destructive testing. Leak testing. Calibration of reference leaks for gases.

References [ edit ] ^ Batajtis, Damian.

"Tracer Gas as a Method for Water Leak Detection" (PDF) .

Wizard Leak Detection .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 November 2023 . Retrieved 12 November 2023 .

^ "Leak Detection Sensitivity Guide - VIC Leak Detection" .

VIC Leak Detection . Retrieved 2017-06-15 .

^ Townsend, Mark; correspondent, defence (2007-11-11).

"MoD accused over spy plane deaths" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2017-06-15 .

{{ cite news }} : |last2= has generic name ( help ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tracer-gas_leak_testing&oldid=1275701379 " Categories : Tests Nondestructive testing Hydrogen technologies Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 February 2025, at 15:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tracer-gas leak testing 5 languages Add topic

