Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Religious life 3 Reformer 4 Philosophy 5 Papal envoy and cardinal 6 Milan 7 Later career 8 Veneration 9 Works Toggle Works subsection 9.1 Modern editions 9.2 Translations 10 See also 11 Footnotes 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Peter Damian 38 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 11th-century Benedictine monk Saint Peter Damian OSB Bust of Peter Damian.

Santa Maria degli Angeli, Florence .

Bishop, Confessor and Doctor of the Church Born c.

1007 Ravenna , Papal States Died 22 February 1072 or 1073 [ 1 ] Faenza , Papal States Venerated in Catholic Church Feast 21 February earlier 23 February (General Roman Calendar, 1823–1969) Attributes represented as an Italian cardinal bearing a knotted rope in his hand; also as a pilgrim holding a papal Bull ; Cardinal's hat , Benedictine monk's habit Peter Damian OSB ( Latin : Petrus Damianus ; Italian : Pietro or Pier Damiani ; c.

1007 – 21 or 22 February 1072 or 1073) [ 1 ] was an Italian reforming Benedictine monk and cardinal in the circle of Pope Leo IX .

Dante placed him in one of the highest circles of Paradiso as a great predecessor of Francis of Assisi and he was declared a Doctor of the Church on 27 September 1828. His feast day is 21 February.

Early life [ edit ] Peter was born in Ravenna around 1007, [ 2 ] the youngest of a large but poor noble family. Orphaned early, he was at first adopted by an elder brother who ill-treated and under-fed him while employing him as a swineherd. After some years, another brother, Damianus, who was archpriest at Ravenna, had pity on him and took him away to be educated. Adding his brother's name to his own, Peter made such rapid progress in his studies of theology and canon law , first at Ravenna, then at Faenza , and finally at the University of Parma , that, around the age of 25, he was already a famous teacher at Parma and Ravenna.

[ 3 ] Religious life [ edit ] Peter Damian (far right), depicted with Augustine , Anne , and Elizabeth About 1035, however, he gave up his secular calling and, avoiding the compromised luxury of Cluniac monasteries , entered the isolated hermitage of Fonte Avellana , near Gubbio . Both as a novice and as a monk, his fervour was remarkable but led him to such extremes of self-mortification in penance that his health was affected, and he developed severe insomnia.

[ 3 ] On his recovery, he was appointed to lecture to his fellow monks. Then, at the request of Guy of Pomposa (Guido d'Arezzo) and other heads of neighbouring monasteries, for two or three years he lectured to their brethren also, and (about 1042) wrote the life of Romuald for the monks of Pietrapertosa . Soon after his return to Fonte Avellana, he was appointed economus (manager or housekeeper) of the house by the prior , who designated him as his successor. In 1043 he became prior of Fonte Avellana and remained so until his death in February 1072.

[ 3 ] Subject-hermitages were founded at San Severino , Gamogna, Acerreta, Murciana, San Salvatore, Sitria and Ocri. A zealot for monastic and clerical reform, he introduced a more severe discipline, including the practice of flagellation ("the disciplina ") into the house, which, under his rule, quickly attained celebrity, and became a model for other foundations, even the great abbey of Monte Cassino . There was much opposition outside his own circle to such extreme forms of penitence, but Peter's persistent advocacy ensured its acceptance, to such an extent that he was obliged later to moderate the imprudent zeal of some of his own hermits.

[ 2 ] Another innovation was that of the daily siesta , to make up for the fatigue of the night office. During his tenure of the priorate, a cloister was built, silver chalices and a silver processional cross were purchased, and many books were added to the library.

[ 2 ] Reformer [ edit ] Sancti Petri Damiani Opera Omnia (1743) Although living in the seclusion of the cloister, Peter Damian closely watched the fortunes of the church, and like his friend Hildebrand, the future Pope Gregory VII , he strove for reforms in a deplorable time. After almost two centuries of political and social upheaval, doctrinal ignorance and petty venality among the clergy had reached intolerable levels. When the scandalous Benedict IX resigned the pontificate into the hands of the archpriest John Gratian ( Gregory VI ) in 1045, Peter hailed the change with joy and wrote to the new pope, urging him to deal with the scandals of the church in Italy, singling out the wicked bishops of Pesaro , of Città di Castello and of Fano .

[ 2 ] Extending the area of his activities, he entered into communication with the Emperor Henry III . He was present in Rome when Clement II crowned Henry III and his consort Agnes , and he also attended a synod held at the Lateran in the first days of 1047, in which decrees were passed against simony .

[ 4 ] After this, he returned to his hermitage. Damian published a constant stream of open letters on a variety of theological and disciplinary controversies. About 1050, he wrote Liber Gomorrhianus addressed to Pope Leo IX , containing a scathing indictment of the practice of simony, as threatening the integrity of the clergy. Meanwhile, the question arose as to the validity of the ordinations of simoniacal clerics. Peter Damian wrote (about 1053) a treatise, the Liber Gratissimus , in favour of their validity, a work which, though much combatted at the time, was potent in deciding the question in their favour before the end of the 12th century.

Pope Benedict XVI described him as "one of the most significant figures of the 11th century, ... a lover of solitude and at the same time a fearless man of the Church, committed personally to the task of reform." [ 5 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Damian was not so much hostile to philosophy as insistent "that the liberal arts, including philosophy, must remain subservient to religion".

[ 6 ] He argued that monks should not have to study philosophy, because Jesus did not choose philosophers as disciples, and so philosophy is not necessary for salvation. But the idea (later attributed to Thomas Aquinas ) that philosophy should serve theology as a servant serves her mistress originated with him.

[ 7 ] However, this apparent animosity may reflect his view that logic is only concerned with the validity of the argument, rather than the nature of reality. Similar views are found in Al-Ghazali and Wittgenstein .

Damian's tract De divina omnipotentia is frequently misunderstood. Damian's purpose is to defend the "doctrine of omnipotence", which he defines as the ability of God to do anything that is good, e.g., God cannot lie. Toivo J. Holopainen identifies De divina omnipotentia as "an interesting document related to the early developments of medieval discussion concerning modalities and divine omnipotence".

[ 3 ] Peter also recognized that God can act outside time, as Gregory of Rimini later argued.

[ 8 ] Papal envoy and cardinal [ edit ] During his illness the pope died, and Frédéric, abbot of Monte Cassino , was elected pope as Stephen IX . In the autumn of 1057, Stephen IX determined to make Damian a cardinal . For a long time, Damian resisted the offer, for he was more at ease as an itinerant hermit-preacher than as a reformer from within the Curia , but was finally forced to accept, and was consecrated Cardinal Bishop of Ostia on 30 November 1057.

[ 9 ] In addition, he was appointed administrator of the Diocese of Gubbio . The new cardinal was impressed with the great responsibilities of his office and wrote a stirring letter to his brother-cardinals, exhorting them to shine by their example before all. Four months later Pope Stephen died in Florence, and the church was once more distracted by schism . Peter was vigorous in his opposition to the antipope Benedict X , but the force was on the side of the intruder and Damian retired temporarily to Fonte Avallana.

[ citation needed ] Milan [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Peter Damian" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2017 ) Around the end of 1059, Peter was sent as legate to Milan by Pope Nicholas II . So bad was the state of things at Milan, that benefices (a reward received in exchange for services rendered and as a retainer for future services) were openly bought and sold, and the clergy publicly married the women with whom they lived. The resistance of the clergy of Milan to the reform of Ariald the Deacon and Anselm of Lucca rendered a contest so bitter that an appeal was made to the Holy See .

Nicholas II sent Damian and the Bishop of Lucca as his legates. The party of the irregular clerics took alarm and raised the cry that Rome had no authority over Milan. Peter boldly confronted the rioters in the cathedral and proved to them the authority of the Holy See with such effect that all parties submitted to his decision.

[ 5 ] He exacted first a solemn oath from the archbishop and all his clergy that for the future no preferment should be paid for; then, imposing a penance on all who had been guilty, he reinstated in their benefices all who undertook to live in celibacy. The prudent decision was attacked by some of the rigorists at Rome but was not reversed. Unfortunately, on the death of Nicholas II, the same disputes broke out, and they were not finally settled till after the martyrdom of Arialdo in 1066. Meanwhile, Peter was pleading in vain to be released from the cares of his office. Neither Nicholas II nor Hildebrand would consent to spare him.

Later career [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Peter Damian" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) He rendered valuable assistance to Pope Alexander II in his struggle with the antipope, Honorius II . In July 1061 Pope Nicholas II died and once more a schism ensued. Peter Damian used all his powers to persuade the antipope Cadalous to withdraw but to no purpose. Finally Anno II, Archbishop of Cologne and acting regent in Germany, summoned a council at Augsburg at which a long argument by Peter Damian was read and greatly contributed to the decision in favour of Alexander II.

[ 5 ] In 1063 the pope held a synod at Rome, at which Peter Damian was appointed legate to settle the dispute between the Abbey of Cluny and the Bishop of Mâcon . He proceeded to France, summoned a council at Chalon-sur-Saône , proved the justice of the contentions of Cluny, settled other questions at issue in the church of France, and returned in the autumn to Fonte Avellana.

[ citation needed ] While he was in France the antipope Cadalous had again become active in his attempts to gain Rome, and Peter Damian brought upon himself a sharp reproof from Alexander and Hildebrand for twice imprudently appealing to the royal power to judge the case anew. In 1067, the cardinal was sent to Florence to settle the dispute between the bishop and the monks of Vallombrosa , who accused the former of simony . His efforts, however, were not successful, largely because he misjudged the case and threw the weight of his authority on the side of the bishop. The matter was not settled until the following year by the pope in person.

[ citation needed ] Having served the papacy as legate to France and to Florence, he was allowed to resign his bishopric in 1067. After a period of retirement at Fonte Avellana, he proceeded in 1069 as papal legate to Germany and persuaded the emperor Henry IV to give up his intention of divorcing his wife Bertha . He accomplished this task at a council in Frankfurt before returning to Fonte-Avellana.

[ citation needed ] Early in 1072 or 1073, [ 1 ] he was sent to Ravenna to reconcile its inhabitants to the Holy See, they having been excommunicated for supporting their archbishop in his adhesion to the schism of Cadalous . On his return thence he was seized with fever near Faenza. He lay ill for a week at the monastery of Santa Maria degl'Angeli, now Santa Maria Vecchia. On the night preceding the feast of the Chair of St. Peter at Antioch , he ordered the office of the feast to be recited and at the end of the Lauds he died. He was at once buried in the monastery church, lest others should claim his relics .

[ citation needed ] During his concluding years, he was not altogether in accord with the political ideas of Hildebrand. He died the year before Hildebrand became pope, as Gregory VII . "It removed from the scene the one man who could have restrained Gregory", Norman F. Cantor remarked ( Civilization of the Middle Ages , p. 251).

Veneration [ edit ] Peter Damian is venerated as a saint and was made a Doctor of the Church by Pope Leo XII on 27 September 1828 with a feast day which is now celebrated on 21 February (Ordinary calendar).

[ 9 ] In 1970, his feast was moved there from its prior date of 23 February.

His body has been moved six times. Since 1898, Peter Damian has rested in a chapel dedicated to the saint in the cathedral of Faenza . No formal canonization ever took place, but his cult has existed since his death at Faenza, at Fonte-Avellana, at Monte Cassino, and at Cluny.

[ citation needed ] The saint is represented in art as a cardinal bearing a knotted rope (the disciplina ) in his hand; also sometimes he is depicted as a pilgrim holding a papal Bull , to signify his many legations .

[ citation needed ] Works [ edit ] Vita Beati Romualdi (modern print edition) Peter Damian's voluminous writings, including treatises (67 survive), letters, sermons, prayers, hymns and liturgical texts (though, in a departure from many early medieval monks, no biblical commentaries) [ 10 ] reflect the spiritual conditions of Italy: the groundswell of intense personal piety that would overflow in the First Crusade at the end of the century, and his Latin abounds in denunciatory epithets.

His works include: His most famous work is De Divina Omnipotentia , [ 11 ] a long letter in which he discusses God's power. The De Divina Omnipotentia purports to be a letter from Peter Damian to Desiderius, abbot of Monte Cassino . Peter develops a position he had taken in an earlier discussion with Desiderius on the claim of St. Jerome that, although God can do all things, he cannot restore virginity to a woman who had lost it. Desiderius had sided with Jerome; Damian had claimed that God could indeed restore lost virginity. In this letter, Peter defends his views, an undertaking that takes him into the discussion of the scope of divine power , the possibility of God's annulling the past, and the problems that arise from using the language of human temporality to describe divine possibilities in an eternal present. The central question of the nature and scope of divine power is related to previous discussions of the question and to the more sophisticated debates of the later Middle Ages. Damian's apparent claims that the law of contradiction does not apply to God and that God is able to annul the past deserve recognition. In these discussions, Damian shows himself the equal of any of the dialecticians that he so severely criticizes.

In the short treatise Dominus vobiscum ( The Book of "The Lord be with You" ) (PL 145:231-252), he questions whether a hermit praying in solitude should use the plural; Damian concludes that the hermit should use the plural since he is linked to the whole church by faith and fellowship.

His Life of Romauld and his treatise The Eremitical Order demonstrate his continuing commitment to solitude and severe asceticism as the ultimate form of Christian life.

He was especially devoted to the Virgin Mary , and wrote an Officium Beatae Virginis .

Liber Gomorrhianus , the treaty about sodomy and insiders of the Catholic Church De Institutione monialis , which had the aim of safeguarding Western Christians from the decadent uses of the East. Notable in this work, among other things, Damiani, then Bishop of Ostia , condemned Maria Argyre 's use of a golden fork to eat. Forks were a new invention at the time.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Disceptatio synodalis , in defense of Pope Alexander II against Antipope Honorius II De Sancta Simplicitate Liber Gratissimus , [ 15 ] against simony Modern editions [ edit ] Opera Omnia , in JP Migne, ed., Patrologia Latina , (PL), vols 144 and 145, Paris: Vives. [PL144 mostly contains his letters and sermons; PL145 contains his treatises] Pierre Damien: Lettre sur la Toute-Puissance divine , ed. Andre Cantin, SC 191 [a modern critical edition of this work] Translations [ edit ] St Peter Damian: Selected Writings on the Spiritual Life, trans. Patricia McNulty (London, 1959).

Damian, St Peter.

The Book of Gomorrah: St Peter Damian's Struggle Against Ecclesiastical Corruption . Matthew Cullinan Hoffman (trans.). Ite ad Thomam.

ISBN 978-0-9967042-1-2 . Retrieved 20 December 2017 .

See also [ edit ] Anselm of Canterbury Saint Peter Damian, patron saint archive Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c Howe, John (June 2010).

"Did St. Peter Damian Die in 1073 ? A New Perspective on his Final Days" .

Analecta Bollandiana .

128 (1): 67– 86.

doi : 10.1484/J.ABOL.5.102054 . Archived from the original on 6 January 2013.

^ a b c d This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " St. Peter Damian ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ a b c d Holopainen, Toivo J., "Peter Damian", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , (Winter 2012 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.) ^ "Saint Peter Damian" .

Franciscan Media . 21 February 2016 . Retrieved 25 September 2020 .

^ a b c "St. Peter Damiani" , CatholicNewsAgency.com; accessed 20 December 2017.

^ Mann, William E., "Damian, Peter (1007–72)", 1998, doi:10.4324/9780415249126-B031-1.

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Taylor and Francis ^ PL 145, p. 603, 1867.

^ Jack Zupko, article 'Gregory of Rimini' in A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages , ed. by Jorge J.E. Gracia & Timothy Noone, Blackwell, 2002.

^ a b Foley OFM, Leonard. "St. Peter Damian", Saint of the Day , americancatholic.org; accessed 20 December 2017.

^ Bernard McGinn, The Growth of Mysticism , (1994), p. 125 ^ Holopainen, Toivo J. (2024).

"Peter Damian" .

plato.stanford.edu . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 21 April 2025 .

^ "La diabolica forchetta" .

Festival del Medioevo (in Italian). 6 January 2016 . Retrieved 25 September 2020 .

^ "Italian inventions: the utilitarian table fork, once a "scandalous" innovation" . Archived from the original on 8 July 2020 . Retrieved 4 May 2020 .

^ "Taccuini Gastrosofici" .

www.taccuinigastrosofici.it . Retrieved 25 September 2020 .

^ "Liber gratissimus | work by Peter Damian | Britannica" .

britannica.com . Retrieved 21 April 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] David Berger, "St Peter Damian. His Attitude Toward the Jews and the Old Testament", The Yavneh Review , 4 (1965) 80-112.

Owen J. Blum, Saint Peter Damin: His Teaching on the Spiritual Life , Washington, 1947.

Owen J. Blum, "The Monitor of the Popes: St. Peter Damian", in Studi Gregoriani vol. 2 (1947), pp 459–76.

John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality Chicago, 1980.

Pierre J. Payer, Book of Gomorrah: An Eleventh-Century Treatise against Clerical Homosexual Practices , Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1962 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Damiani, Pietro ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Peter Damian .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Petrus Damiani .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bw867
Cached time: 20250817052814
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.795 seconds
Real time usage: 1.011 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4237/1000000
Revision size: 23399/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 162420/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7869/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 67905/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.473/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21694464/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  772.470      1 -total
 14.73%  113.754      2 Template:Navbox
 13.65%  105.404      2 Template:Langx
 13.43%  103.765      1 Template:Catholic_saints
 11.24%   86.823      1 Template:Cite_book
  9.36%   72.314      1 Template:Reflist
  8.97%   69.317      7 Template:Citation_needed
  8.77%   67.765      2 Template:Sister_project
  8.56%   66.095      2 Template:Side_box
  8.56%   66.089      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37133429:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052814 and revision id 1304244258. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peter_Damian&oldid=1304244258 " Categories : 1000s births 1070s deaths 11th-century Christian saints 11th-century Italian cardinals 11th-century Italian writers 11th-century writers in Latin Cardinal-bishops of Ostia Diplomats for the Holy See Doctors of the Church Italian Benedictines Italian male non-fiction writers Italian Roman Catholic writers Medieval Italian saints Medieval Latin-language poets People from the Province of Ravenna People from Ravenna Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2023 Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Italian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 21:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peter Damian 38 languages Add topic

