Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Types of theism Toggle Types of theism subsection 2.1 Classical theism 2.2 Monotheism 2.3 Polytheism 2.4 Pantheism 2.5 Deism 2.6 Autotheism 2.7 Value-judgment Theisms 2.8 Non-theism and atheism 2.9 Alterity theism 3 Academic opinions 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Theism 81 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Patois Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief in the existence of at least one deity This article needs attention from an expert in religion . The specific problem is: to prune redundant content and deal with large tracts of unsourced and unverified text and in-text lists.

WikiProject Religion may be able to help recruit an expert.

( September 2022 ) Part of a series on Religion Outline Lists Category Index History Portal Religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Alawism Alevism Azalism / Bábism Baháʼí Faith Druze Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Manichaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Yazidism Yarsanism Zoroastrianism Indic Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Eastern Taoism Confucianism Shinto Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Schools Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Apatheism Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Elite religion Exclusivism Existentialism atheist Christian Feminist Fideism Folk religion Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Hermeticism Humanism Christian religious secular Ietsism Ignosticism Inclusivism Kathenotheism Lived religion Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism humanistic metaphysical religious New Age Nondualism Nontheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Process theology Shendao shejiao Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Transtheism Unitarianism Concepts Afterlife Anthropopathism Apophatism Aseity Belief Brahman Cataphatism Demiurge Divinely simple Eschatology Enlightenment Eternalness Euthyphro dilemma Existence of God Faith Form of the Good Gender of God Gnosis Holy Spirit Intelligent design Liberation Maltheist Miracle Names of God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Pandeist Personal Prayer Problem of evil Process theology Religious belief Religious language Reincarnation Religious faith Revelation Scripture Soul Summum bonum Tawhid Theological veto Transcendence Trinity Supreme Being Unmoved mover Spirit Worship Founding figures Jesus ( Christianity ) Muhammad ( Islam ) Abraham ( Judaism ) Siddhartha Gautama ( Buddhism ) Guru Nanak ( Sikhism ) Mahavira ( Jainism ) Zoroaster ( Zoroastrianism ) Hamza ibn Ali ( Druzism ) Laozi ( Taoism ) Confucius ( Confucianism ) Baháʼu'lláh ( Baháʼí Faith ) This is a subseries on philosophy . In order to explore related topics, please visit navigation .

v t e God the Father depicted by Julius Schnorr von Carolsfeld in 1860 Theism is broadly defined as the belief in the existence of at least one deity .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In common parlance, or when contrasted with deism , the term often describes the philosophical conception of God that is found in classical theism —or the conception found in monotheism —or gods found in polytheistic religions—or a belief in God or gods without the rejection of revelation , as is characteristic of deism.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Non-theism and atheism is commonly understood as non-acceptance or outright rejection of theism in the broadest sense of the term (i.e., non-acceptance or rejection of belief in God or gods).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Related (but separate) is the claim that the existence of any deity is unknown or unknowable; a stance known as agnosticism .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Agnostic theism is a personal belief in one or more deities along with acceptance that the existence or non-existence of the deity or deities is fundamentally unknowable.

A 2020 Philpapers survey of professional philosophers found that 66.72% accepted or leaned towards atheism, 18.64% accepted or leaned towards theism, and 14.64% leaned towards another opinion.

[ 9 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term theism derives from the Greek θεός [ 10 ] ( theós ) or theoi meaning 'god' or 'gods'. The term theism was first used by Ralph Cudworth (1617–1688).

[ 11 ] In Cudworth's definition, they are "strictly and properly called Theists, who affirm that a perfectly conscious understanding being, or mind, existing of itself from eternity, was the cause of all other things".

[ 12 ] Types of theism [ edit ] Classical theism [ edit ] Main article: Classical theism Classical theism is the form of theism that describes God as the Absolute Being. Central insights of classical theistic theology includes emanationism and divine simplicity .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Classical theistic traditions can be observed in major religions and philosophies, such as Sufism in Islam , Vaishnavism in Hinduism , Sikhism in general, and Platonism .

Monotheism [ edit ] Main article: Monotheism Monotheism (from Greek μόνος ) is the belief in theology that only one deity exists.

[ 15 ] Some modern day monotheistic religions include Christianity , Judaism , Islam , Mandaeism , Druze , Baháʼí Faith , Sikhism , Zoroastrianism , Rastafari , some sects of Hinduism , and Eckankar .

Polytheism [ edit ] Main article: Polytheism Polytheism is the belief in multiple deities , which are usually assembled into a pantheon , along with their own religious sects and rituals . Polytheism was the typical form of religion before the development and spread of the Abrahamic religions of Judaism , Christianity , and Islam , which enforce monotheism. It is well documented throughout history; from prehistory and the earliest records of ancient Egyptian religion and ancient Mesopotamian religion to the religions prevalent during Classical antiquity , such as ancient Greek religion and ancient Roman religion , and in ethnic religions such as Germanic , Slavic , and Baltic paganism and Native American religions .

Notable polytheistic religions practiced today include Taoism , Shenism or Chinese folk religion , Japanese Shinto , Santería , most traditional African religions , [ 16 ] and various neopagan faiths such as Wicca , Druidry , Romuva , and Hellenism .

Hinduism , while popularly held as polytheistic, cannot be exclusively categorised as such as some Hindus consider themselves to be pantheists and others consider themselves to be monotheists. Both are compatible with Hindu texts since there exists no consensus of standardisation in the faith. Advaita Vedanta, a philosophy in Hinduism, offers a combination of monotheism and polytheism, holding that Brahman is the sole ultimate reality of the universe, yet unity with it can be reached by worshipping multiple Devas and Devies.

A major division in modern polytheistic practices is between so-called soft polytheism and hard polytheism.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] "Soft" polytheism is the belief that different gods may be psychological archetypes , personifications of natural forces, or fundamentally one deity in different cultural contexts (e.g., Odin , Zeus , and Indra all being the same god as interpreted by Germanic, Greek, and Indic peoples, respectively)—known as omnitheism .

[ 19 ] In this way, gods may be interchangeable for one another across cultures.

[ 18 ] "Hard" polytheism is the belief that gods are distinct, separate, real divine beings rather than psychological archetypes or personifications of natural forces. Hard polytheists reject the idea that "all gods are one essential god" and may also reject the existence of gods outside their own pantheon altogether .

[ 18 ] Polytheism is further divided according to how the individual deities are regarded: Henotheism Henotheism is the belief that there may be more than one deity but only one of them is to be worshiped.

Zoroastrianism is sometimes considered an example.

Kathenotheism Kathenotheism is the belief that there is more than one deity, but only one deity is worshiped at a time (or ever) and another may be worthy of worship in another time or place. If they are worshiped one at a time, then each is supreme in turn.

Monolatrism Monolatrism is the belief that there may be more than one deity but only one is worthy of being worshiped. Most of the modern monotheistic religions may have begun as monolatrous ones, but this is disputed.

[ citation needed ] The philosophy of Baruch Spinoza is often regarded as pantheist.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Pantheism [ edit ] Main article: Pantheism Pantheism is the belief that reality , the universe and the cosmos are identical to divinity and a supreme being or entity. Pointing to the universe as being an immanent creator deity in and of itself, the deity is understood as still expanding, creating, and eternal, [ 22 ] or that all things compose an all-encompassing, immanent god or goddess that is manifested as the universe.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] As such, even astronomical objects are viewed as part of the sole deity. The worship of all gods of every religion has been conceived as a form of pantheism, but such a system is more akin to Omnism .

[ 25 ] Pantheist belief does not recognize a distinct personal god , [ 26 ] anthropomorphic or otherwise, but instead characterizes a broad range of doctrines differing in forms of relationships between reality and divinity.

[ 27 ] Pantheistic concepts date back thousands of years, and pantheistic elements have been identified in various religious traditions. The term pantheism was coined by mathematician Joseph Raphson in 1697, [ 28 ] [ 29 ] and since then has been used to describe the beliefs of a variety of individuals and organizations. Pantheism was popularized in Western culture as a theology and philosophy based on the work of the 17th-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza —in particular, his book Ethics .

[ 30 ] A pantheistic stance was also expressed by the 16th-century by philosopher and cosmologist Giordano Bruno .

[ 31 ] Deism [ edit ] Main article: Deism Classical Deism Classical deism is the belief that one God exists and created the world, but that the Creator does not alter the original plan for the universe. Instead, the deity presides over it in the form of Providence ; some classical deists, however, did believe in divine intervention.

[ 32 ] Deism typically rejects supernatural events (such as prophecies, miracles, and divine revelations) prominent in organized religion. Instead, deism holds that religious beliefs must be founded on human reason and observed features of the natural world, and that these sources reveal the existence of a supreme being as creator.

[ 33 ] Pandeism Pandeism is the belief that God preceded the universe and created it but is now equivalent with it.

Polydeism Polydeism is the belief that multiple gods exist but do not intervene in the universe.

Autotheism [ edit ] Main article: Egotheism Autotheism is the belief that divinity exists within oneself and that individuals can achieve a godlike state. It is found in various philosophical and religious traditions emphasizing personal divinity or spiritual progression.

In Advaita Vedanta , a Hindu philosophical school, the phrase aham Brahmāsmi (" I am Brahman") expresses the unity of the individual self ( atman ) with the ultimate reality ( Brahman ).

[ 34 ] In Mormonism , the doctrine of exaltation suggests that faithful individuals can attain godhood in the afterlife.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Autotheistic ideas also appear in Gnosticism , which emphasizes self-knowledge ( gnosis ) as the path to recognizing one’s divine nature, [ 37 ] and in Friedrich Nietzsche’s concept of the Übermensch , which advocates transcending human limitations to create one’s own values.

Value-judgment Theisms [ edit ] Eutheism Eutheism is the belief that a deity is wholly benevolent.

Dystheism Dystheism is the belief that a deity is not wholly good, and is possibly evil.

Maltheism Maltheism is the belief that a deity exists but is wholly malicious.

Misotheism Misotheism is active hatred toward and for God, gods, and/or other divine beings.

Non-theism and atheism [ edit ] Atheism Atheism is defined by most people as the belief in the non-existence of gods, goddesses, and messiahs . Some atheists express an active disbelief or rejection of the existence of such entities.

Non-theism Non-theism is the belief in no gods or god.

Agnosticism Agnosticism is the belief that it is not known or not knowable whether a god or gods or the supernatural are part of reality regardless of how popular theistic beliefs may be.

Agnostics withhold judgement on the existence and non-existence of a god on the basis that there is not enough evidence to come to a definitive conclusion that there is a god or that there is no god'.

Alterity theism [ edit ] Alterity theism is a belief that the supreme being is radically transcendent to the point that it cannot be recognized as having any genuine being at all.

Academic opinions [ edit ] A 2020 Philpapers survey of professional philosophers found that: [ 9 ] 66.72% accepted or leaned towards atheism 18.64% accepted or leaned towards theism 14.64% leaned towards another opinion See also [ edit ] Atheism Antitheism Apeirotheism Āstika and nāstika Classical theism Deism Theistic evolution Gottgläubig References [ edit ] ^ "theism" , Archived 12 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine Dictionary.com . Retrieved 21 October 2016.

^ "theism," Archived 14 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary . Retrieved 18 March 2011.

^ "Dictionary.com Online Dictionary" .

Archived from the original on 16 December 2021 . Retrieved 21 October 2016 .

^ "Dictionary.com Online Dictionary" .

Archived from the original on 16 December 2021 . Retrieved 23 November 2016 .

^ Nielsen, Kai (2010).

"Atheism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 26 January 2011 .

Atheism, in general, the critique and denial of metaphysical beliefs in God or spiritual beings.... Instead of saying that an atheist is someone who believes that it is false or probably false that there is a God, a more adequate characterization of atheism consists in the more complex claim that to be an atheist is to be someone who rejects belief in God for the following reasons (which reason is stressed depends on how God is being conceived)...

^ Edwards, Paul (2005) [1967]. "Atheism". In Donald M. Borchert (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 1 (2nd ed.). MacMillan Reference USA (Gale). p. 359.

ISBN 9780028657806 .

On our definition, an 'atheist' is a person who rejects belief in God, regardless of whether or not his reason for the rejection is the claim that 'God exists' expresses a false proposition. People frequently adopt an attitude of rejection toward a position for reasons other than that it is a false proposition. It is common among contemporary philosophers, and indeed it was not uncommon in earlier centuries, to reject positions on the ground that they are meaningless. Sometimes, too, a theory is rejected on such grounds as that it is sterile or redundant or capricious, and there are many other considerations which in certain contexts are generally agreed to constitute good grounds for rejecting an assertion.

(page 175 in 1967 edition) ^ Hepburn, Ronald W. (2005) [1967]. "Agnosticism". In Donald M. Borchert (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 1 (2nd ed.). MacMillan Reference USA (Gale). p. 92.

ISBN 9780028657806 .

In the most general use of the term, agnosticism is the view that we do not know whether there is a God or not.

(page 56 in 1967 edition) ^ Rowe, William L.

(1998).

"Agnosticism" . In Edward Craig (ed.).

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-415-07310-3 .

In the popular sense, an agnostic is someone who neither believes nor disbelieves in God, whereas an atheist disbelieves in God. In the strict sense, however, agnosticism is the view that human reason is incapable of providing sufficient rational grounds to justify either the belief that God exists or the belief that God does not exist. In so far as one holds that our beliefs are rational only if they are sufficiently supported by human reason, the person who accepts the philosophical position of agnosticism will hold that neither the belief that God exists nor the belief that God does not exist is purely rational.

^ a b "PhilPapers Survey 2020" .

survey2020.philpeople.org . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

^ Mackintosh, Robert (1911).

"Theism" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 744.

^ Halsey, William; Robert H. Blackburn; Sir Frank Francis (1969).

Louis Shores (ed.).

Collier's Encyclopedia . Vol. 22 (20 ed.). Crowell-Collier Educational Corporation. pp.

266– 7.

^ Cudworth, Ralph (1678).

The True Intellectual System of the Universe, Vol. I . New York: Gould & Newman, 1837, p. 267.

^ Feser, Edward (2017).

Five Proofs of the Existence of God . San Francisco: IGNATIUS PRESS.

ISBN 978-1-62164-133-9 .

^ Hart , David Bentley (24 September 2013).

The Experience of God: Being, Consciousness, Bliss .

Yale University Press .

^ "Monotheism", in Britannica, 15th ed. (1986), 8:266.

^ Kimmerle, Heinz (11 April 2006).

"The world of spirits and the respect for nature: towards a new appreciation of animism" .

The Journal for Transdisciplinary Research in Southern Africa .

2 (2): 15.

doi : 10.4102/td.v2i2.277 .

ISSN 2415-2005 .

^ Galtsin, Dmitry (21 June 2018).

"Modern Pagan religious conversion revisited" .

Sacra .

14 (2): 7– 17.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2019 . Retrieved 5 February 2019 .

^ a b c Hoff, Kraemer, Christine (2012).

Seeking the mystery : an introduction to Pagan theologies . Englewood, CO: Patheos Press.

ISBN 9781939221186 .

OCLC 855412257 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Negedu, I. A. (1 January 2014).

"The Igala traditional religious belief system: Between monotheism and polytheism" .

OGIRISI: A New Journal of African Studies .

10 (1): 116– 129.

doi : 10.4314/og.v10i1.7 .

ISSN 1597-474X .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2023 . Retrieved 24 February 2023 .

^ Picton, James Allanson (1905).

Pantheism: its story and significance . Chicago: Archibald Constable & CO LTD.

ISBN 978-1419140082 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ *Fraser, Alexander Campbell "Philosophy of Theism", William Blackwood and Sons, 1895, p 163.

^ The New Oxford Dictionary of English . Oxford: Clarendon Press . 1998. p. 1341.

ISBN 978-0-19-861263-6 .

"The term 'pantheist' designates one who holds both that everything constitutes a unity and that this unity is divine." ^ Encyclopedia of Philosophy ed. Paul Edwards . New York: Macmillan and Free Press. 1967. p. 34.

^ Reid-Bowen, Paul (15 April 2016).

Goddess as Nature: Towards a Philosophical Thealogy .

Taylor & Francis . p. 70.

ISBN 9781317126348 .

^ "Definition of Pantheism" .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2023 .

^ Charles Taliaferro; Paul Draper; Philip L. Quinn (eds.).

A Companion to Philosophy of Religion . p. 340.

They deny that God is "totally other" than the world or ontologically distinct from it.

^ Levine, Michael (1994), Pantheism: A Non-Theistic Concept of Deity , Psychology Press, pp. 44, 274– 275, ISBN 9780415070645 : "The idea that Unity that is rooted in nature is what types of nature mysticism (e.g. Wordsworth, Robinson Jeffers, Gary Snyder) have in common with more philosophically robust versions of pantheism. It is why nature mysticism and philosophical pantheism are often conflated and confused for one another." "[Wood's] pantheism is distant from Spinoza's identification of God with nature, and much closer to nature mysticism. In fact it is nature mysticism." "Nature mysticism, however, is as compatible with theism as it is with pantheism." ^ Taylor, Bron (2008).

Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature . A&C Black. pp.

1341– 1342.

ISBN 978-1441122780 . Retrieved 27 July 2017 .

^ Ann Thomson; Bodies of Thought: Science, Religion, and the Soul in the Early Enlightenment, 2008, page 54.

^ Lloyd, Genevieve (2 October 1996).

Routledge Philosophy GuideBook to Spinoza and The Ethics . Routledge Philosophy Guidebooks (1st ed.).

Routledge . p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-415-10782-2 .

^ Birx, Jams H. (11 November 1997).

"Giordano Bruno" .

Mobile, AL : The Harbinger. Archived from the original on 27 July 2017 . Retrieved 5 February 2019 .

Bruno was burned to death at the stake for his pantheistic stance and cosmic perspective.

^ AskOxford: deism ^ Webster's New International Dictionary of the English Language . G.&C. Merriam. 1924.

defines deism as 'belief in the existence of a personal god, with disbelief in Christian teaching, or with a purely rationalistic interpretation of Scripture'.

Although Webster's lists deism as a type of theism , deism is completely different from theism. If anything, theism would be an off-shoot of deism since it takes beliefs a step further to include miracles and divine revelation, with deism being the 'base' belief in (a) God.

^ Gurumayum Ranjit Sharma (1987).

The Idealistic Philosophy of Swami Vivekananda . Atlantic. p. 180. GGKEY:PSWXE5NTFF4.

^ Davies, Douglas J. (23 October 2003).

An Introduction to Mormonism . Cambridge University Press. p. 79.

ISBN 9780521817387 . Retrieved 16 March 2022 – via Google Books.

^ "Chapter 47: Exaltation" .

ChurchofJesusChrist.org .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2024 . Retrieved 24 December 2024 .

^ Hans, Jonas (2001).

The Gnostic Religion: The Message of the Alien God and the Beginnings of Christianity (3rd ed.). Beacon Press.

ISBN 0807058017 .

v t e God Deity Divinity Goddess List Conceptions of God Existence Gender of God Agnostic theism Animism Antitheism Apatheism Atheism Agnostic atheism Christian atheism Implicit and explicit atheism Jewish atheism Negative and positive atheism New Atheism Theological noncognitivism Binitarianism Classical theism Deism Ceremonial deism Christian deism Pandeism Polydeism Dipolar theism Dystheism Egotheism Misotheism Henotheism Ietsism Kathenotheism Liberal theism Monolatry Monotheism Ethical monotheism Post-monotheism Mysticism Nontheism Post-theism Nontrinitarianism Open theism Panentheism Pantheism Classical pantheism Hylotheism Naturalistic pantheism Philosophical theism Physitheism Euhemerism Polytheism Skeptical theism Spiritualism Theism Theistic finitism Transtheism Trinitarianism Tritheism Unitarianism Religion portal v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Portals : Philosophy Religion Theism at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7trmj
Cached time: 20250817222822
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.907 seconds
Real time usage: 1.131 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4011/1000000
Revision size: 24367/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 414259/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3517/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 173697/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.480/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22864637/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  799.297      1 -total
 30.96%  247.466      1 Template:Reflist
 10.27%   82.056      2 Template:Lang
 10.22%   81.658      1 Template:Religion_sidebar
 10.07%   80.487      6 Template:Cite_web
 10.01%   79.986      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.89%   79.030      1 Template:Subject_bar
  9.68%   77.366     15 Template:Cite_book
  7.94%   63.494     10 Template:Navbox
  7.10%   56.778      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30843:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222822 and revision id 1296462266. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theism&oldid=1296462266 " Category : Theism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2024 Articles needing expert attention from September 2022 All articles needing expert attention Religion articles needing expert attention Articles with text in Greek languages Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2018 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 04:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theism 81 languages Add topic

