Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pedometrics 2 Pedometric vs. traditional soil mapping 3 Pedometric vs. digital soil mapping 4 Methods 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Pedometric mapping 2 languages Español ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Pedometrics ) Statistical method for studying soil Pedometric mapping , or statistical soil mapping , is data-driven generation of soil property and class maps that is based on use of statistical methods.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Its main objectives are to predict values of some soil variable at unobserved locations, and to access the uncertainty of that estimate using statistical inference i.e. statistically optimal approaches. From the application point of view, its main objective is to accurately predict response of a soil-plant ecosystem to various soil management strategies—that is, to generate maps of soil properties and soil classes that can be used for other environmental models and decision-making. It is largely based on applying geostatistics in soil science, and other statistical methods used in pedometrics .

Although pedometric mapping is mainly data-driven, it can also be largely based on expert knowledge—which, however, must be utilized within a pedometric computational framework to produce more accurate prediction models. For example, data assimilation techniques, such as the space-time Kalman filter , can be used to integrate pedogenetic knowledge and field observations.

[ 4 ] In the information theory context, pedometric mapping is used to describe the spatial complexity of soils (information content of soil variables over a geographical area), and to represent this complexity using maps, summary measures, mathematical models and simulations.

[ 5 ] Simulations are a preferred way of visualizing soil patterns, as they represent their deterministic pattern (due to the landscape), geographic hot-spots, and short range variability (see image, below).

[ citation needed ] Pedometrics [ edit ] Pedometrics is the application of mathematical and statistical methods to the study of the distribution and genesis of soils .

[ 6 ] The term is a portmanteau of the Greek roots pedos (soil) and metron (measurement). Measurement, in this case, is restricted to mathematical and statistical methods as it relates to pedology , the branch of soil science that studies soil in its natural setting.

Pedometrics addresses soil-related problems when there is uncertainty due to deterministic or stochastic variation, vagueness and lack of knowledge of soil properties and processes. It relies on mathematical, statistical and numerical methods, and includes numerical approaches to classification to deal with a supposed deterministic variation.

Simulation models incorporate uncertainty by adopting chaos theory , statistical distribution , or fuzzy logic .

Pedometrics addresses pedology from the perspective of emerging scientific fields such as wavelets analysis, fuzzy set theory and data mining in soil data modelling applications. Its advance is also linked to improvements in remote and close-range sensing.

[ 7 ] Pedometric vs. traditional soil mapping [ edit ] In traditional soil survey, spatial distribution of soil properties and soil bodies can be inferred from mental models, leading to manual delineations. Such methods can be considered subjective, and it is hence difficult or impossible to statistically assess the accuracy of such maps without additional field sampling. Traditional soil survey mapping also has limitations in a multithematic GIS, related to the fact that is often not consistently applied by different mappers, and is largely manual and difficult to automate. Most traditional soil maps are based on manual delineations of assumed soil bodies, to which soil attributes are then attached.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] With pedometric mapping, all outputs are based on rigorous statistical computing, and are hence reproducible .

Traditional soil polygon map (left) vs pedometric map — four simulations of Zinc content in top-soil generated using geostatistical simulations as shown in this sp package gallery (right).

Pedometric mapping is based largely on extensive and detailed covariate layers, such as Digital Elevation Model (DEM) derivatives, remote sensing imagery, climatic, land cover and geological GIS layers and imagery. Its evolution can be closely connected with the emergence of new technologies and global, publicly available data sources such as the SRTM DEM, MODIS , ASTER and Landsat imagery, gamma radiometrics and LiDAR imagery, and new automated mapping methods.

Comparison between traditional and pedometric (data-driven) mapping techniques Expert/knowledge-driven soil mapping Data/technology-driven (pedometric) soil mapping Target variables Soil types (soil series) Analytical soil properties Spatial data model Discrete (soil bodies) Continuous/hybrid (quantities / probabilities) Major inputs Expert knowledge / soil profile description Laboratory data / proximal soil sensing Important covariates Soil delineations (photo-interpretation) Remote sensing images, DEM-derivatives Spatial prediction model Averaging per polygon Automated (geo)statistics Accuracy assessment Validation of soil mapping units (kappa) Cross-validation (RMSE) Data representation Polygon maps + attribute tables (2D) Gridded maps (2D/3D) + prediction error map or simulations Major technical aspect Cartographic scale Grid cell size Soil sampling strategies Free survey (surveyor selects sampling locations) Statistical (design/model-based sampling designs) Pedometric vs. digital soil mapping [ edit ] Pedometric analyses rely strictly on geostatistics, whereas digital soil mapping uses more traditional soil-mapping concepts not strictly pedometric in nature. Also referred to as predictive soil mapping , [ 10 ] digital soil mapping relies on computer-assisted inference of soil properties to produce digital maps of discrete soil types . Pedometric mapping does not produce maps delineating discrete soil types.

Methods [ edit ] Pedometric mapping methods differ based on the steps of soil survey data processing: Sampling Data screening Preprocessing of soil covariates Fitting of geostatistical model Spatial prediction Cross-validation / accuracy assessment Visualization of outputs One of the main theoretical basis for pedometric mapping is the universal model of soil variation: [ 4 ] [ 11 ] Z ( s ) = m ( s ) + ε ε ′ ( s ) + ε ε ″ {\displaystyle Z(\mathbf {s} )=m(\mathbf {s} )+\varepsilon '(\mathbf {s} )+\varepsilon ''} ...where m ( s ) {\displaystyle \textstyle {m(\mathbf {s} )}} is the deterministic part of soil variation, ε ε ′ ( s ) {\displaystyle \textstyle {\varepsilon '(\mathbf {s} )}} is the stochastic, spatially auto-correlated part of variation, and ε ε ″ {\displaystyle \textstyle {\varepsilon ''}} is the remaining residual variation (measurement errors, short-range variability etc.) that is also possibly dependent on s {\displaystyle \textstyle {\mathbf {s} }} , but it is not modeled. This model was first introduced by French mathematician Georges Matheron , and has proven the Best Unbiased Linear Predictor for spatial data. One way of using this model to produce predictions or simulations is by regression-kriging (also known as universal kriging ). With soil data, the model's deterministic component is often based on the soil forming factors of climate, organism, relief, parent material (lithology), and time. This conceptual model, known as the CLORPT model, was introduced to soil-landscape modelling by Hans Jenny .

[ 2 ] A special group of pedometric mapping techniques focus on downscaling spatial information that can be area-based or continuous. Prediction of soil classes is also another subfield of pedometric mapping, where specific geostatistical methods are used to interpolate the factor-types of variables.

Pedometric mapping is also based largely on novel technologies for measuring soil properties, also referred to as digital soil mapping techniques. They include: Soil spectroscopy and proximal soil sensing (handheld or vehicle-driven devices) Remote sensing systems for soil mapping and monitoring (e.g.

SMOS ) LiDAR technology for digital elevation models Precision agriculture technologies References [ edit ] ^ Hengl, Tomislav (2003).

Pedometric mapping : bridging the gaps between conventional and pedometric approaches . [Wageningen: s.n.

ISBN 9789058088963 .

^ a b Grunwald, Sabine, ed. (2006).

Environmental soil-landscape modeling geographic information technologies and pedometrics . Boca Raton, FL: CRC/Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9780824723897 .

^ Kempen, B.; Heuvelink, G. B. M.; Brus, D. J.; Stoorvogel, J. J. (10 March 2010). "Pedometric mapping of soil organic matter using a soil map with quantified uncertainty".

European Journal of Soil Science .

61 (3): 333– 347.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2389.2010.01232.x .

S2CID 94372825 .

^ a b Heuvelink, G.B.M; Webster, R (30 April 2001). "Modelling soil variation: past, present, and future".

Geoderma .

100 ( 3– 4): 269– 301.

Bibcode : 2001Geode.100..269H .

doi : 10.1016/S0016-7061(01)00025-8 .

^ Hengl, T.; Nikolić, M.; MacMillan, R.A. (31 March 2012). "Mapping efficiency and information content".

International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation .

22 : 127– 138.

doi : 10.1016/j.jag.2012.02.005 .

^ Heuvelink, Gerard (December 2003).

"The Definition of Pedometrics" (PDF) .

Pedometron (15). International Working Group on Pedometrics - Provisional Commission on Pedometrics of the International Union of Soil Sciences . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-30 . Retrieved 2006-11-01 .

^ Peter A., Burrough; Johan Bouma ; Scott R. Yates (1994).

"The state of the art in pedometrics" (PDF) .

Geoderma .

62 ( 1– 3). Elsevier Science B. V., Amsterdam: 311– 326.

Bibcode : 1994Geode..62..311B .

doi : 10.1016/0016-7061(94)90043-4 . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 3, 2006 . Retrieved 2006-11-01 .

^ McBratney, A.B; Mendonça Santos, M.L; Minasny, B (1 November 2003). "On digital soil mapping".

Geoderma .

117 ( 1– 2): 3– 52.

Bibcode : 2003Geode.117....3M .

doi : 10.1016/S0016-7061(03)00223-4 .

^ Behrens, Thorsten; Scholten, Thomas (1 June 2006). "Digital soil mapping in Germany—a review".

Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science .

169 (3): 434– 443.

doi : 10.1002/jpln.200521962 .

^ Scull, P.; J. Franklin; O.A. Chadwick; D. McArthur (June 2003). "Predictive soil mapping - a review".

Progress in Physical Geography .

27 (2). Sage Publications: 171– 197.

Bibcode : 2003PrPG...27..171S .

doi : 10.1191/0309133303pp366ra .

S2CID 787741 .

^ Burrough, P.A. (1986).

Principles of Geographical Information Systems for Land Resources Assessment . Clarendon Press. p. 194.

External links [ edit ] Pedometrics Commission of the International Union of Soil Sciences ISRIC — World Soil Information data centre International Society for Geomorphometry Open Source tools for soil scientists by the California Soil Resource Lab Working Group on Digital Soil Mapping v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pedometric_mapping&oldid=1305272154 " Categories : Pedology Cartography Geostatistics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 02:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pedometric mapping 2 languages Add topic

