Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Demographics 2 Community 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Somali Australians Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Somali Australians Total population 18,401 (by ancestry, 2021) [ 1 ] Regions with significant populations Melbourne · Perth · Brisbane · Townsville Languages Somali , Australian English Religion Islam [ 2 ] Somali Australians are citizens and residents of Australia who are of Somali ancestry.

Although the first Somali community in Victoria was established in 1988, most Somalis began to settle in the country in the early 1990s following the civil war in Somalia.

[ 3 ] Somali Australians are active in the nation's cultural and political scenes, having also contributed significantly to local business.

[ 4 ] Demographics [ edit ] According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics , the 2006 national census counted 6,403 Somali immigrants residing in Australia .

[ 5 ] While the Somali community in Victoria was first established in 1988, [ 3 ] most Somalis began to settle in the country in the early 1990s following the outbreak of the civil war in Somalia. About 80 per cent of the new arrivals came under the aegis of the local Refugee and Special Humanitarian Program. As with many other immigrant communities, Somali community organizations are also supported through the national Diverse Australia Program, a grass-roots informational and financial initiative aimed at enhancing societal relations.

[ 4 ] Somalis are especially well represented in Victoria, having been drawn to the region's Muslim community, job opportunities and reputation for cultural diversity. The 2006 census reported some 2,624 Somalia-born residents in Victoria, a 14% rise from the previous census five years prior.

[ 3 ] The 2016 census recorded 7,668 Somalia-born people in Australia, an increase of 34.9% from the 2011 census, five years earlier. Victoria has 3,904 residents born in Somalia, making up 51% of all Somalia-born people in Australia. Western Australia has 1,334 making up 17.4% of Somalis in Australia and QLD with 1,271 making up 16.6% of Somalis in Australia.

[ 6 ] Due to many ethnic Somalis in the diaspora originating in surrounding countries such as Kenya, a more accurate way of determining statistics is based on the "ancestry" data collected in the census. In the 2021 census, there were 18,401 people identifying their ancestry as "Somali" with 54% of these residing in Victoria.

[ 7 ] Census 2021- Identified ancestry as "Somali" [ 8 ] State of residence Number of Somali population Percentage of Somali ancestry in Australia Victoria 10,018 54% Queensland 3,027 16% Western Australia 2,994 16% New South Wales 1,790 9% South Australia 467 2.5% Australian Capital Territory (ACT) 64 0.3% Northern Territory 20 0.1% Tasmania 11 0.06% Total 18,401 100% Community [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Somali Australians" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A Dahabshiil franchise outlet in Brisbane , Australia .

While faced with challenges such as having to adjust to life in a new country, learn a foreign language, and support family members back in Somalia, community members have gradually begun to integrate into Victoria's broader multi-cultural society. Most Somali men have found jobs in the transport and production industries, and a rising number of women in the community do clerical work.

[ 3 ] Communal support networks have also expanded. In 1988, the Somali Community of Victoria was established to offer support to the local Somali community and to promote Somali culture, as was the Somali Cultural Association seven years later. A Muslim community, the Somali Cultural Association likewise assists Somalis in the country to observe the holy month of Ramadan and the yearly celebrations marking the hajj .

[ 3 ] Multicultural broadcaster SBS broadcasts an hour-long radio program with news and information in Somali every Wednesday and Friday from 10:00 pm to 11:00 pm. SBS also broadcasts Somali broadcaster Universal TV's Warka news program as part of their "WorldWatch" programming block every Thursday from 10:30 am to 11:00 am.

The Somali community in Queensland is centred around the suburb of Moorooka , where many East African shops are located. However a significant number of Somalis now live in the suburbs of Acacia Ridge and Inala and this can be seen with many African grocery stores and hairdressers in both suburbs. The Somali Community Association of QLD is an organisation that supports Somali Australians in Brisbane and hosts community celebrations such as for Eid and Somali Independence Day. They are based in Inala.

[ 9 ] There is also a growing population of Somali Australians in the regional city of Townsville , where they make up a significant proportion of attendees at the Townsville Mosque and local Muslim community.

[ 10 ] They have opened a restaurant and shops on Ross River Road and are supported by the community organisation, "Bright Horn of Africa: Somali Community Townsville".

[ citation needed ] Somali Australians are active in the nation's cultural, social and political scenes.

[ 4 ] Abdullahi Alim is the CEO of the Africa Future Fund and 2017 WA Young Australian of the Year ( Western Australian of the Year Awards ).

[ 11 ] That same year, Abdullahi received the Queen's Young Leader Award from her late Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace . Born in Mogadishu — Alim’s family resettled in Perth having fled the Somali Civil War .

During the 2006 Ethiopian Invasion of Somalia , The Australian Federal Police began to investigate possible links between Islamist splinter groups such as Hizbul Islam and Al Shabaab to the Somali community in Melbourne. The AFP had concluded that around 20 Australians had joined the ranks of numerous jihadist factions in Somalia, with some of these men including the perpetrators of the Holsworthy Barracks Plot . By 2007, one Somali-Australian recruit had been reportedly killed in Mogadishu.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Nur Warsame , who was born in Somalia, is Australia's first openly gay imam.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Australia portal Somalia portal Somali diaspora African Australians Islam in Australia References [ edit ] ^ "The People of Australia – Statistics from the 2011 Census" (PDF) . Australian Government.

^ "Somalia-born: Community Information Summary" (PDF) . Department of Home Affairs.

^ a b c d e History of immigration from Somalia ^ a b c Senator Evans to attend Somali festivities in Melbourne Archived 25 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The People of Australia – Statistics from the 2011 Census" (PDF) . Australian Government.

^ Department of Home Affairs.

"Somalia-born Community Information Summary" (PDF) .

^ "Cultural diversity: Census, 2021 | Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

www.abs.gov.au . 20 September 2022 . Retrieved 29 November 2022 .

^ "Cultural diversity: Census, 2021 | Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

www.abs.gov.au . 20 September 2022 . Retrieved 29 November 2022 .

^ "SomaliQld" .

www.facebook.com . Retrieved 16 August 2022 .

^ "Somali refugee among increasing numbers settling in Townsville" .

ABC News . 16 October 2014 . Retrieved 21 March 2024 .

^ "WA's 2017 Young Australian of the Year joins Royal Family" .

auspire . 9 July 2020 . Retrieved 20 June 2024 .

^ Harris-Hogan, Shandon (2014).

"The Importance of Family: The Key to Understanding the Evolution of Jihadism in Australia" .

Security Challenges .

10 (1): 31– 50.

ISSN 1833-1459 .

^ "From Melbourne to Mogadishu" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 21 March 2024 .

^ "How Have Muslims Reacted to a LGBT-Friendly Mosque In Australia Run by a Gay Imam?" .

Al Bawaba . 29 July 2018 . Retrieved 27 July 2020 .

^ Taylor, Mildred Europa (20 July 2020).

"Meet Nur Warsame, the gay imam who wants to make a difference in Muslim homes" .

Face2faceAfrica . Retrieved 27 July 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Somali United Community of South Australia Australian Somali Community Association v t e Somali diaspora Africa Ethiopia Kenya South Africa Americas Canada United States Maine Minneapolis-St. Paul Middle East United Arab Emirates Yemen Asia India Pakistan Europe Denmark Germany Finland Italy Netherlands Norway Sweden United Kingdom Oceania Australia v t e Arab diaspora Africa Ghana Ivory Coast Kenya Senegal Sierra Leone Asia Afghanistan Afghan Arabs India Indonesia Iran Khorasan Khuzestan Japan Malaysia Pakistan Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka Turkey Caucasus Europe North Denmark Finland Sweden United Kingdom Southeast Bulgaria Dobruja Romania Serbia South Greece Italy Malta Spain West Austria Belgium France Beur Paris Germany Berlin Netherlands Switzerland North America Canada Cuba El Salvador Haiti Honduras Mexico United States Detroit Oceania Australia New Zealand South America Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador El Salvador Paraguay Uruguay Venezuela v t e North African and Middle Eastern Australians Arab Algerian Egyptian Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Palestinian Saudi Arabian Syrian Emirati Jewish Israeli Peoples of the Sudan South Sudanese Sudanese Other Coptic Iranian Kurdish Turkish Assyrian Mandaean Topics Antisemitism Anti-Arabism Anti–Middle Eastern sentiment Islamophobia Organized crime North African diaspora West Asian diaspora v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Somali_Australians&oldid=1290401939 " Categories : Australian people of Somali descent African diaspora in Australia Australia–Somalia relations Somalian diaspora Muslim communities of Australia Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use Australian English from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from January 2018 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles needing additional references from September 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 15:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Somali Australians Add languages Add topic

