Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology Toggle Etymology subsection 1.1 Alternative spellings 1.2 Festival of Lights 2 Historical sources Toggle Historical sources subsection 2.1 Books of Maccabees 2.2 Early rabbinic sources 2.3 Narrative of Josephus 2.4 Other ancient sources 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Background 3.2 Traditional view 3.3 Academic sources 3.4 Timeline 3.5 Battles of the Maccabean Revolt 3.6 Characters and heroes 4 Rituals Toggle Rituals subsection 4.1 Kindling the Hanukkah lights 4.2 Candle-lighting time 4.3 Blessings over the candles 4.3.1 Blessing for lighting the candles 4.3.2 Blessing for the miracles of Hanukkah 4.3.3 Hanerot Halalu 4.4 Maoz Tzur 4.5 Other customs 4.6 Special additions to daily prayers 4.7 Zot Hanukkah: Hanukkah as the end of the High Holy Days 4.8 Other related laws and customs 5 Customs Toggle Customs subsection 5.1 Music 5.2 Foods 5.3 Dreidel 5.4 Hanukkah gelt 5.5 Hanukkah in the White House 6 Dates 7 Symbolic importance 8 Modern history Toggle Modern history subsection 8.1 Zionism 8.2 North America 8.3 Relationship to Christmas 8.4 Relationship to Kwanzaa 9 See also 10 Footnotes 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Hanukkah 83 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Ladino Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jewish holiday For other uses, see Hanukkah (disambiguation) .

Hanukkah Dreidels , Hanukkah menorah , and sufganiyot Official name חֲנֻכָּה ‎ or חֲנוּכָּה ‎ English translation: 'Establishing' or 'Dedication' (of the Temple in Jerusalem ) Observed by Rabbinic Jews Type Jewish Significance The Maccabees successfully revolted against Antiochus IV Epiphanes .
According to the Talmud , the Temple was purified and the wicks of the menorah miraculously burned for eight days , even though there was only enough sacred oil for one day's lighting.

Celebrations Lighting candles each night. Singing special songs, such as Ma'oz Tzur . Reciting the Hallel prayer. Eating food fried in oil, such as latkes and sufganiyot , and dairy foods. Playing the dreidel game, and giving Hanukkah gelt .

Begins 25 Kislev Ends 2 Tevet or 3 Tevet Date 25 Kislev, 26 Kislev, 27 Kislev, 28 Kislev, 29 Kislev, 30 Kislev, 1 Tevet, 2 Tevet, 3 Tevet 2024 date Sunset, 25 December – nightfall, 2 January [ 1 ] 2025 date Sunset, 14 December – nightfall, 22 December [ 1 ] 2026 date Sunset, 4 December – nightfall, 12 December [ 1 ] 2027 date Sunset, 24 December – nightfall, 1 January [ 1 ] Related to Purim , Day of Salvation and Liberation as a rabbinically decreed holiday.

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: 1 Maccabees Hanukkah table Hanukkah [ a ] ( / ˈ h æ n ə k ə / , / ˈ h ɑː n ə k ə / ; חֲנֻכָּה ‎ Ḥănukkā listen ⓘ ) is a Rabbinic Jewish festival commemorating the recovery of Jerusalem and subsequent rededication of the Second Temple at the beginning of the Maccabean Revolt against the Seleucid Empire in the 2nd century BCE.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Hanukkah is observed for eight nights and days, [ 5 ] starting on the 25th day of Kislev according to the Hebrew calendar , which may occur at any time from November 28 to December 27 in the Gregorian calendar . The festival is observed by lighting the candles of a candelabrum with nine branches , commonly called a menorah or hanukkiah. One branch is placed above or below the others and its candle is used to light the other eight candles. This unique candle is called the shammash ( שַׁמָּשׁ ‎, "attendant"). Each night, one additional candle is lit by the shammash until all eight candles are lit together on the final night of the festival.

[ 6 ] Other Hanukkah festivities include singing Hanukkah songs , playing the game of dreidel and eating oil-based foods, such as latkes and sufganiyot (similar to jelly donuts), and dairy foods . Since the 1970s, the worldwide Chabad Hasidic movement has initiated public menorah lightings in open public places in many countries.

[ 7 ] Originally instituted as a feast "in the manner of Sukkot (Booths)", it does not come with the corresponding obligations, and is therefore a relatively minor holiday in strictly religious terms. Nevertheless, Hanukkah has attained major cultural significance in North America and elsewhere, especially among secular Jews , due to often occurring around the same time as Christmas during the festive season .

[ 8 ] Etymology [ edit ] The name "Hanukkah" derives from the Hebrew verb " חנך ‎", meaning "to dedicate", because on Hanukkah, the Maccabean Jews regained control of Jerusalem and rededicated the Temple.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Many homiletical explanations have been given for the name: [ 11 ] The name can be broken down into חנו כ״ה ‎, "[they] rested [on the] twenty-fifth", referring to the fact that the Jews ceased fighting on the 25th day of Kislev , the day on which the holiday begins.

[ 12 ] חינוך ‎ Chinuch , from the same root, is the name for Jewish education, emphasizing ethical training and discipline.

חנוכה ‎ (Hanukkah) is also the Hebrew acronym for ח נ רות ו הלכה כ בית ה לל ‎ – "Eight candles, and the halakha is according to the House of Hillel". This is a reference to the disagreement between two rabbinical schools of thought – the House of Hillel and the House of Shammai – on the proper order in which to light the Hanukkah flames. Shammai opined that eight candles should be lit on the first night, seven on the second night, and so on down to one on the last night (because the miracle was greatest on the first day). Hillel argued in favor of starting with one candle and lighting an additional one every night, up to eight on the eighth night (because the miracle grew in greatness each day).

Jewish law adopted the position of Hillel.

[ 13 ] Psalm 30 is called שיר חנכת הבית ‎ Shîr Ḥănukkāt HaBayit , "the Song of the 'Dedication' of the House", and is traditionally recited on Hanukkah. 25 (of Kislev) + 5 (Books of Torah) = 30, which is the number of the song.

Alternative spellings [ edit ] Spelling variations due to transliteration of Hebrew Ḥet Nun Vav Kaf Hey In Hebrew , the word Hanukkah is written חֲנֻכָּה ‎ or חֲנוּכָּה ‎ ( Ḥănukā ). It is most commonly transliterated to English as Hanukkah or Chanukah . The spelling Hanukkah , which is based on using characters of the English alphabet as symbols to re-create the word's correct spelling in Hebrew, [ 14 ] is the most common [ 15 ] and the preferred choice of Merriam–Webster , [ 16 ] Collins English Dictionary , the Oxford Style Manual , and the style guides of The New York Times and The Guardian .

[ 17 ] The sound represented by Ch ( [ χ ] , similar to the Scottish pronunciation of loch ) is not native to the English language , so those not familiar with Hebrew pronunciation may pronounce it with an h ([ h ]).

[ b ] Furthermore, the letter ḥeth ( ח ‎), which is the first letter in the Hebrew spelling, is pronounced differently in modern Hebrew ( voiceless uvular fricative ) from in classical Hebrew ( voiceless pharyngeal fricative [ ħ ] ), and neither of those sounds is unambiguously representable in English spelling. However, its original sound is closer to the English H than to the Scottish Ch , and Hanukkah more accurately represents the spelling in the Hebrew alphabet.

[ 14 ] Moreover, the 'kaf' consonant is geminate in classical (but not modern) Hebrew. Adapting the classical Hebrew pronunciation with the geminate and pharyngeal Ḥeth can lead to the spelling Hanukkah , while adapting the modern Hebrew pronunciation with no gemination and uvular Ḥeth leads to the spelling Chanukah .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Festival of Lights [ edit ] In Modern Hebrew , Hanukkah may also be called the Festival of Lights ( חַג הַאוּרִים ‎, Ḥag HaUrim ), based on a comment by Josephus in Antiquities of the Jews , καὶ ἐξ ἐκείνου μέχρι τοῦ δεῦρο τὴν ἑορτὴν ἄγομεν καλοῦντες αὐτὴν φῶτα "And from then on we celebrate this festival, and we call it Lights". The first Hebrew translation of Antiquities (1864) used ( חַג הַמְּאֹרוֹת ‎) "Festival of Lamps", but the translation "Festival of Lights" ( חַג הַאוּרִים ‎) appeared by the end of the nineteenth century.

[ 21 ] Historical sources [ edit ] Books of Maccabees [ edit ] The story of Hanukkah is told in the books of the First and Second Maccabees , which describe in detail the rededication of the Temple in Jerusalem and the lighting of the menorah . These books, however, are not a part of the canonized Masoretic Text version of the Tanakh (Hebrew and Aramaic language Jewish Bible) used and accepted by normative Rabbinical Judaism and therefore modern Jews (as copied, edited and distributed by a group of Jews known as the Masoretes between the 7th and 10th centuries of the Common Era ). However, the books of Maccabees were included among the deuterocanonical books added to the Septuagint , a Greek-language translation of the Hebrew Bible originally compiled in the mid- 3rd century BCE . The Roman Catholic and Orthodox Churches consider the books of Maccabees as a canonical part of the Old Testament.

[ 22 ] The eight-day rededication of the temple is described in 1 Maccabees, [ 23 ] though the miracle of the oil does not appear here. A story similar in character, and older in date, is the one alluded to in 2 Maccabees [ 24 ] according to which the relighting of the altar fire by Nehemiah was due to a miracle which occurred on the 25th of Kislev, and which appears to be given as the reason for the selection of the same date for the rededication of the altar by Judah Maccabee.

[ 25 ] The above account in 1 Maccabees, as well as 2 Maccabees [ 26 ] portrays the feast as a delayed observation of the eight-day Feast of Booths ( Sukkot ); similarly 2 Maccabees explains the length of the feast as "in the manner of the Feast of Booths".

[ 27 ] Early rabbinic sources [ edit ] See also: Mishnah § Omissions Megillat Taanit (1st century) contains a list of festive days on which fasting or eulogizing is forbidden. It specifies, "On the 25th of [Kislev] is Hanukkah of eight days, and one is not to eulogize".  The scholion (9th-10th century) then references the story of the rededication of the Temple.

[ 28 ] The Mishna (late 2nd century) mentions Hanukkah in several places, [ 29 ] but never describes its laws in detail and never mentions any aspect of the history behind it. To explain the Mishna's lack of a systematic discussion of Hanukkah, Nissim ben Jacob postulated that information on the holiday was so commonplace that the Mishna felt no need to explain it.

[ 30 ] Modern scholar Reuvein Margolies suggests that as the Mishnah was redacted after the Bar Kochba revolt , its editors were reluctant to include explicit discussion of a holiday celebrating another relatively recent revolt against a foreign ruler, for fear of antagonizing the Romans.

[ 31 ] Hanukkah lamp unearthed near Jerusalem about 1900 The miracle of the one-day supply of oil miraculously lasting eight days is described in the Talmud , committed to writing about 600 years after the events described in the books of Maccabees.

[ 32 ] The Talmud says that after the forces of Antiochus IV had been driven from the Temple, the Maccabees discovered that almost all of the ritual olive oil had been profaned. They found only a single container that was still sealed by the High Priest , with enough oil to keep the menorah in the Temple lit for a single day. They used this, yet it burned for eight days (the time it took to have new oil pressed and made ready).

[ 33 ] The Talmud presents three options: [ 34 ] The law requires only one light each night per household, A better practice is to light one light each night for each member of the household The most preferred practice is to vary the number of lights each night.

Except in times of danger, the lights were to be placed outside one's door, on the opposite side of the mezuza , or in the window closest to the street.

Rashi , in a note to Shabbat 21b, says their purpose is to publicize the miracle. The blessings for Hanukkah lights are discussed in tractate Succah, p. 46a.

[ 35 ] Section from the Aramaic Scroll of Antiochus in Babylonian supralinear punctuation , with an Arabic translation Megillat Antiochus (probably composed in the 2nd century [ 36 ] ) concludes with the following words: ...After this, the sons of Israel went up to the Temple and rebuilt its gates and purified the Temple from the dead bodies and from the defilement. And they sought after pure olive oil to light the lamps therewith, but could not find any, except one bowl that was sealed with the signet ring of the High Priest from the days of Samuel the prophet and they knew that it was pure. There was in it [enough oil] to light [the lamps therewith] for one day, but the God of heaven whose name dwells there put therein his blessing and they were able to light from it eight days. Therefore, the sons of Ḥashmonai made this covenant and took upon themselves a solemn vow, they and the sons of Israel, all of them, to publish amongst the sons of Israel, [to the end] that they might observe these eight days of joy and honour, as the days of the feasts written in [the book of] the Law; [even] to light in them so as to make known to those who come after them that their God wrought for them salvation from heaven. In them, it is not permitted to mourn, neither to decree a fast [on those days], and anyone who has a vow to perform, let him perform it.

[ 37 ] The Al HaNissim prayer is recited on Hanukkah as an addition to the Amidah prayer, which was formalized in the late 1st century.

[ 38 ] Al HaNissim describes the history of the holiday as follows: In the days of Mattiyahu ben Yohanan, high priest, the Hasmonean and his sons, when the evil Greek kingdom stood up against Your people Israel, to cause them to forget Your Torah and abandon the ways You desire – You, in Your great mercy, stood up for them in their time of trouble; You fought their fight, You judged their judgment, You took their revenge; You delivered the mighty into the hands of the weak, the many into the hands of the few, the impure into the hands of the pure, the evil into the hands of the righteous, the sinners into the hands of those who engaged in Your Torah; You made yourself a great and holy name in Your world, and for Your people Israel You made great redemption and salvation as this very day. And then Your sons came to the inner chamber of Your house, and cleared Your Temple, and purified Your sanctuary, and lit candles in Your holy courtyards, and established eight days of Hanukkah for thanksgiving and praise to Your holy name.

Narrative of Josephus [ edit ] The Jewish historian Titus Flavius Josephus narrates in his book, Jewish Antiquities XII, how the victorious Judas Maccabeus ordered lavish yearly eight-day festivities after rededicating the Temple in Jerusalem that had been profaned by Antiochus IV Epiphanes .

[ 39 ] Josephus does not say the festival was called Hanukkah but rather the "Festival of Lights": Now Judas celebrated the festival of the restoration of the sacrifices of the temple for eight days, and omitted no sort of pleasures thereon; but he feasted them upon very rich and splendid sacrifices; and he honored God, and delighted them by hymns and psalms. Nay, they were so very glad at the revival of their customs, when, after a long time of intermission, they unexpectedly had regained the freedom of their worship, that they made it a law for their posterity, that they should keep a festival, on account of the restoration of their temple worship, for eight days. And from that time to this we celebrate this festival, and call it Lights. I suppose the reason was because this liberty beyond our hopes appeared to us; and that thence was the name given to that festival. Judas also rebuilt the walls round about the city, and reared towers of great height against the incursions of enemies, and set guards therein. He also fortified the city Bethsura , that it might serve as a citadel against any distresses that might come from our enemies.

[ 40 ] Other ancient sources [ edit ] In the New Testament , John 10:22–23 says, "Then came the Festival of Dedication at Jerusalem. It was winter, and Jesus was in the temple courts walking in Solomon's Colonnade " (NIV). The Greek noun used appears in the neuter plural as "the renewals" or "the consecrations" ( Ancient Greek : τὰ ἐγκαίνια ; ta enkaínia ).

[ 41 ] The same root appears in 2 Esdras 6:16 in the Septuagint to refer specifically to Hanukkah. This Greek word was chosen because the Hebrew word for 'consecration' or 'dedication' is Hanukkah ( חנכה ). The Aramaic New Testament uses the Aramaic word hawdata (a close synonym), which literally means 'renewal' or 'to make new'.

[ 42 ] History [ edit ] Background [ edit ] Further information: Coele-Syria A model of Jerusalem during the Second Temple Period After the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BCE , Judea became part of the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt until 200 BCE, when King Antiochus III the Great of Syria defeated King Ptolemy V Epiphanes of Egypt at the Battle of Panium . Judea then became part of the Seleucid Empire of Syria.

[ 43 ] King Antiochus III the Great, wanting to conciliate his new Jewish subjects, guaranteed their right to "live according to their ancestral customs" and to continue to practice their religion in the Temple of Jerusalem.

[ 44 ] The Seleucids, like the Ptolemies before them, held a suzerainty over Judea, where they respected Jewish culture and protected Jewish institutions. This policy was drastically reversed by Antiochus IV Epiphanes , the son of Antiochus III, seemingly after what was either a dispute over leadership of the Temple in Jerusalem and the office of High Priest , or possibly a revolt whose nature was lost to time after being crushed.

[ 45 ] In 175 BCE, Antiochus IV invaded Judea at the request of the sons of Tobias.

[ 46 ] The Tobiads , who led the Hellenizing Jewish faction in Jerusalem, were expelled to Syria around 170 BCE when the high priest Onias and his pro-Egyptian faction wrested control from them. The exiled Tobiads lobbied Antiochus IV Epiphanes to recapture Jerusalem. As Flavius Josephus relates: The king being thereto disposed beforehand, complied with them, and came upon the Jews with a great army, and took their city by force, and slew a great multitude of those that favored Ptolemy, and sent out his soldiers to plunder them without mercy. He also spoiled the temple, and put a stop to the constant practice of offering a daily sacrifice of expiation for three years and six months.

— The Jewish War [ 47 ] Traditional view [ edit ] Main article: Miracle of the cruse of oil When the Second Temple in Jerusalem was looted and services stopped, Judaism was outlawed. In 167 BCE, Antiochus ordered an altar to Zeus erected in the Temple. He banned brit milah (circumcision) and ordered pigs to be sacrificed at the altar of the temple.

[ 48 ] Antiochus's actions provoked a large-scale revolt .

Mattathias (Mattityahu), a Jewish priest , and his five sons Jochanan , Simeon , Eleazar , Jonathan , and Judah led a rebellion against Antiochus. It started with Mattathias killing first a Jew who wanted to comply with Antiochus's order to sacrifice to Zeus, and then a Greek official who was to enforce the government's behest (1 Mac. 2, 24–25 [ 49 ] ). Judah became known as Yehuda HaMakabi ("Judah the Hammer"). By 166 BCE, Mattathias had died, and Judah took his place as leader. By 164 BCE, the Jewish revolt against the Seleucid monarchy was successful. The Temple was liberated and rededicated. The festival of Hanukkah was instituted to celebrate this event.

[ 50 ] Judah ordered the Temple to be cleansed, a new altar to be built in place of the polluted one and new holy vessels to be made.

[ 25 ] According to the Talmud, "For when the Greeks entered the Sanctuary, they defiled all the oils therein, and when the Hasmonean dynasty prevailed against and defeated them, they made search and found only one cruse of oil which lay with the seal of the kohen gadol (high priest), but which contained sufficient [oil] for one day's lighting only; yet a miracle was wrought therein, and they lit [the lamp] therewith for eight days. The following year these [days] were appointed a Festival with [the recital of] Hallel and thanksgiving." —Shabbat 21b Tertiary sources in the Jewish tradition make reference to this account.

[ 51 ] Maimonides (12th century) described Hanukkah as follows: When, on the twenty-fifth of Kislev, the Jews had emerged victorious over their foes and destroyed them, they re-entered the Temple where they found only one jar of pure oil, enough to be lit for only a single day; yet they used it for lighting the required set of lamps for eight days, until they managed to press olives and produce pure oil. Because of this, the sages of that generation ruled that the eight days beginning with the twenty-fifth of Kislev should be observed as days of rejoicing and praising the Lord. Lamps are lit in the evening over the doors of the homes, on each of the eight nights, so as to display the miracle. These days are called Hanukkah, when it is forbidden to lament or to fast, just as it is on the days of Purim. Lighting the lamps during the eight days of Hanukkah is a religious duty imposed by the sages.

[ 52 ] Academic sources [ edit ] Some modern scholars, following the account in 2 Maccabees, observe that the king was intervening in an internal civil war between the Maccabean Jews and the Hellenized Jews in Jerusalem.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] These competed violently over who would be the High Priest, with traditionalists with Hebrew/Aramaic names like Onias contesting with Hellenizing High Priests with Greek names like Jason and Menelaus .

[ 57 ] In particular, Jason's Hellenistic reforms would prove to be a decisive factor leading to eventual conflict within the ranks of Judaism.

[ 58 ] Other authors point to possible socioeconomic reasons in addition to the religious reasons behind the civil war.

[ 59 ] Modern Israeli 10 agorot coin, reproducing the menorah image from a coin issued by Mattathias Antigonus What began in many respects as a civil war escalated when the Hellenistic kingdom of Syria sided with the Hellenizing Jews in their conflict with the traditionalists.

[ 60 ] As the conflict escalated, Antiochus took the side of the Hellenizers by prohibiting the religious practices the traditionalists had rallied around. This may explain why the king, in a total departure from Seleucid practice in all other places and times, banned a traditional religion.

[ 61 ] The miracle of the oil is widely regarded as a legend and its authenticity has been questioned since the Middle Ages.

[ 62 ] However, given the famous question Joseph Karo (1488–1575) posed concerning why Hanukkah is celebrated for eight days when the miracle was only for seven days (since there was enough oil for one day), [ 63 ] it was clear that writing in the 16th century CE, he believed it to be a historical event. This belief has been adopted by most of Orthodox Judaism , in as much as Karo's Shulchan Aruch is a main code of Jewish Law.

Timeline [ edit ] Further information: Second Temple period Hasmonean Kingdom , 143 BCE Tombs of the Maccabees, Modi'in , Israel 198 BCE: Armies of the Seleucid King Antiochus III (Antiochus the Great) oust Ptolemy V from Judea and Samaria .

[ 43 ] 175 BCE: Antiochus IV (Epiphanes) ascends the Seleucid throne.

[ 64 ] 168 BCE: Under the reign of Antiochus IV, the second Temple is looted, Jews are massacred, and Judaism is outlawed.

[ 65 ] 167 BCE: Antiochus orders an altar to Zeus erected in the Temple.

Mattathias and his five sons John, Simon , Eleazar , Jonathan , and Judah lead a rebellion against Antiochus. Judah becomes known as Judah Maccabee ("Judah the Hammer").

166 BCE: Mattathias dies, and Judah takes his place as leader. The Hasmonean Jewish Kingdom begins; It lasts until 63 BCE.

164 BCE: The Jewish revolt against the Seleucid monarchy is successful in recapturing the Temple, which is liberated and rededicated (Hanukkah).

142 BCE: Re-establishment of the Second Jewish Commonwealth . The Seleucids recognize Jewish autonomy. The Seleucid kings have a formal overlordship, which the Hasmoneans acknowledge. This inaugurates a period of population growth and religious, cultural and social development. This includes the conquest of the areas now covered by Transjordan , Samaria , Galilee , and Idumea (also known as Edom ), and the forced conversion of Idumeans to the Jewish religion, including circumcision.

[ 66 ] 139 BCE: The Roman Senate recognizes Jewish autonomy.

[ 67 ] 134 BCE: Antiochus VII Sidetes besieges Jerusalem . The Jews under John Hyrcanus become Seleucid vassals but retain religious autonomy.

[ 68 ] 129 BCE: Antiochus VII dies.

[ 69 ] The Hasmonean Jewish Kingdom throws off Syrian rule completely.

96 BCE: Beginning of an eight-year civil war between Sadducee king Alexander Yanai and the Pharisees .

[ 70 ] 85–82 BCE: Consolidation of the Kingdom in territory east of the Jordan River .

[ 71 ] 63 BCE: The Hasmonean Jewish Kingdom comes to an end because of a rivalry between the brothers Aristobulus II and Hyrcanus II , both of whom appeal to the Roman Republic to intervene and settle the power struggle on their behalf. The Roman general Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (Pompey the Great) is dispatched to the area. Twelve thousand Jews are massacred in the Roman Siege of Jerusalem . The Priests of the Temple are struck down at the Altar. Rome annexes Judea.

[ 72 ] Battles of the Maccabean Revolt [ edit ] Main article: Maccabean Revolt Maccabees on the Knesset Menorah Selected battles between the Maccabees and the Seleucid Syrian-Greeks: Battle with Apollonius and Battle with Seron : Judas Maccabeus defeats two smaller Seleucid detachments.

Battle of Emmaus : Judas Maccabeus performs a daring night march to make a surprise attack on the Seleucid camp while the Seleucid forces are split.

Battle of Beth Zur : Judas Maccabeus defeats the army of Lysias , and captures Jerusalem soon after. Lysias relents and repeals Antiochus IV's anti-Jewish decrees.

Battle of Beth Zechariah : The Seleucids defeat the Maccabees.

Eleazar Avaran , another of Mattathias's sons, is killed in battle by a war elephant.

Battle of Adasa : Judas defeats the forces of Nicanor after killing him early in the battle.

Battle of Elasa : Judas dies in battle against the army of Bacchides . He is succeeded by his brother Jonathan Apphus , and eventually their other brother Simon Thassi , as leader of the rebellion. The Seleucids re-establish control of the cities for 8 years, but eventually make deals with the Maccabees and appoint their leaders as official Seleucid governors and generals in a vassal-like status before eventual independence.

Characters and heroes [ edit ] Main article: Maccabees The Triumph of Judas Maccabeus , Rubens , 1634–1636 Matityahu the Priest , also referred to as Mattathias and Mattathias ben Johanan. Matityahu was a Jewish priest who, together with his five sons, played a central role in the story of Hanukkah.

[ 73 ] Judah the Maccabee , also referred to as Judas Maccabeus and Y'hudhah HaMakabi. Judah was the eldest son of Matityahu and is acclaimed as one of the greatest warriors in Jewish history alongside Joshua , Gideon , and David .

[ 74 ] Eleazar the Maccabee , also referred to as Eleazar Avaran, Eleazar Maccabeus and Eleazar Hachorani/Choran.

Simon the Maccabee , also referred to as Simon Maccabeus and Simon Thassi.

Johanan the Maccabee , also referred to as Johanan Maccabeus and John Gaddi.

Jonathan the Maccabee , also referred to as Jonathan Apphus.

Antiochus IV Epiphanes . Seleucid king controlling the region during this period.

Judith . Acclaimed for her heroism in the assassination of Holofernes .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Hannah and her seven sons . Arrested, tortured and killed one by one, by Antiochus IV Epiphanes for refusing to bow to an idol.

[ 77 ] Rituals [ edit ] Children pull strings to tell story of Hanukah, c.

1940 Hanukkah is celebrated with a series of rituals that are performed every day throughout the eight-day holiday, some are family-based and others communal. There are special additions to the daily prayer service , and a section is added to the blessing after meals .

[ 78 ] Hanukkah is not a "Sabbath-like" holiday, and there is no obligation to refrain from activities that are forbidden on the Sabbath , as specified in the Shulkhan Arukh .

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Adherents go to work as usual but may leave early in order to be home to kindle the lights at nightfall. There is no religious reason for schools to be closed, although in Israel schools close from the second day for the whole week of Hanukkah.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Many families exchange gifts each night, such as books or games, and "Hanukkah Gelt" is often given to children. Fried foods—such as latkes (potato pancakes), jelly doughnuts ( sufganiyot ) and Sephardic bimuelos —are eaten to commemorate the importance of oil during the celebration of Hanukkah. Some also have a custom of eating dairy products to remember Judith and how she overcame Holofernes by feeding him cheese, which made him thirsty, and giving him wine to drink. When Holofernes became very drunk, Judith cut off his head .

[ 83 ] Kindling the Hanukkah lights [ edit ] Further information: Menorah (Hanukkah) and Miracle of the cruse of oil Chanukah Menorah opposite Nazi building in Kiel, Germany, December 1931.

Hanukkah festival at Brandenburg Gate in Berlin , December 2019 Public Hanukkiah lighting in Brussels next to the Berlaymont building , the headquarters of the European Commission , 2020 Boy in front of a menorah Each night throughout the eight-day holiday, a candle or oil-based light is lit. As a universally practiced "beautification" ( hiddur mitzvah ) of the mitzvah , the number of lights lit is increased by one each night.

[ 84 ] An extra light called a shammash , meaning "attendant" or "sexton", [ 85 ] is also lit each night, and is given a distinct location, usually higher, lower, or to the side of the others.

[ 80 ] Among Ashkenazim the tendency is for every male member of the household (and in many families, girls as well) to light a full set of lights each night, [ 86 ] [ 87 ] while among Sephardim the prevalent custom is to have one set of lights for the entire household.

[ 88 ] The purpose of the shammash is to adhere to the prohibition, specified in the Talmud, [ 89 ] against using the Hanukkah lights for anything other than publicizing and meditating on the Hanukkah miracle. This differs from Sabbath candles which are meant to be used for illumination and lighting. Hence, if one were to need extra illumination on Hanukkah, the shammash candle would be available, and one would avoid using the prohibited lights. Some, especially Ashkenazim, light the shammash candle first and then use it to light the others.

[ 90 ] So altogether, including the shammash , two lights are lit on the first night, three on the second and so on, ending with nine on the last night, for a total of 44 (36, excluding the shammash ). It is Sephardic custom not to light the shammash first and use it to light the rest. Instead, the shammash candle is the last to be lit, and a different candle or a match is used to light all the candles. Some Hasidic Jews follow this Sephardic custom as well.

[ 91 ] The lights can be candles or oil lamps.

[ 90 ] Electric lights are sometimes used and are acceptable in places where open flame is not permitted, such as a hospital room, or for the very elderly and infirm; however, those who permit reciting a blessing over electric lamps only allow it if it is incandescent and battery operated (an incandescent flashlight would be acceptable for this purpose), while a blessing may not be recited over a plug-in menorah or lamp. Most Jewish homes have a special candelabrum referred to as either a Hanukkah menorah (the traditional name, menorah being Hebrew for 'lamp') or a Chanukiah (the modern Israeli term). Some families use an oil lamp menorah (traditionally filled with olive oil) for Hanukkah; like the candle version, it has eight wicks to light plus the additional shammash light.

[ 92 ] In the United States, Hanukkah became a more visible festival in the public sphere from the 1970s when Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson called for public awareness and observance of the festival and encouraged the lighting of public menorahs .

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] The reason for the Hanukkah lights is not for the "lighting of the house within", but rather for the "illumination of the house without", so that passersby should see it and be reminded of the holiday's miracle (i.e. that the sole cruse of pure oil found which held enough oil to burn for one night actually burned for eight nights). Accordingly, lamps are set up at a prominent window or near the door leading to the street. It is customary amongst some Ashkenazi Jews to have a separate menorah for each family member (customs vary), whereas most Sephardi Jews light one for the whole household. Only when there was danger of antisemitic persecution were lamps supposed to be hidden from public view, as was the case in Persia under the rule of the Zoroastrians , [ 25 ] or in parts of Europe before and during World War II. However, most Hasidic groups light lamps near an inside doorway, not necessarily in public view. According to this tradition, the lamps are placed on the opposite side from the mezuzah , so people passing through the door are surrounded by the holiness of mitzvot (the commandments ).

[ 97 ] Generally, women are exempt in Jewish law from time-bound positive commandments, although the Talmud requires that women engage in the mitzvah of lighting Hanukkah candles "for they too were involved in the miracle." [ 98 ] [ 99 ] Some Jews in North America and Israel have taken up environmental concerns in relation to Hanukkah's "miracle of the oil", emphasizing reflection on energy conservation and energy independence . An example of this is the Coalition on the Environment and Jewish Life's renewable energy campaign.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] Candle-lighting time [ edit ] Biala Rebbe lights the menorah Hanukkah lights should usually burn for at least half an hour after it gets dark.

[ 103 ] Many light at sundown, while most Hasidim and many other communities light later, generally around nightfall.

[ 104 ] Many Hasidic Rebbes light much later to fulfill the obligation of publicizing the miracle by the presence of their Hasidim when they kindle the lights.

[ 105 ] Inexpensive small wax candles sold for Hanukkah burn for approximately half an hour so should be lit no earlier than nightfall.

[ 103 ] Friday night presents a problem, however. Since candles may not be lit on Shabbat itself, the candles must be lit before sunset.

[ 103 ] However, they must remain lit through the lighting of the Shabbat candles. Therefore, the Hanukkah menorah is lit first with larger candles than usual, [ 103 ] followed by the Shabbat candles . At the end of the Shabbat, there are those who light the Hanukkah lights before Havdalah and those who make Havdalah before the lighting Hanukkah lights.

[ 106 ] If for whatever reason one didn't light at sunset or nightfall, the lights should be kindled later, as long as there are people in the streets.

[ 103 ] Later than that, the lights should still be kindled, but the blessings should be recited only if there is at least somebody else awake in the house and present at the lighting of the Hannukah lights.

[ 107 ] Blessings over the candles [ edit ] See also: List of Jewish prayers and blessings § Hanukkah Typically two blessings ( brachot ; singular: brachah ) are recited during this eight-day festival when lighting the candles. On the first night only, the shehecheyanu blessing is added, making a total of three blessings.

[ 108 ] The blessings are recited before each candle is lit. On the first night of Hanukkah one light (candle or oil) is lit on the right side of the menorah, on the following night a second light is placed to the left of the first but it is lit first, and so on, proceeding from placing candles right to left but lighting them from left to right over the eight nights.

[ 109 ] Blessing for lighting the candles [ edit ] בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה ה', אֱ-לֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹתָיו, וְצִוָּנוּ לְהַדְלִיק נֵר חֲנֻכָּה.

[ 110 ] Transliteration: Barukh ata Adonai Eloheinu, melekh ha'olam, asher kid'shanu b'mitzvotav v'tzivanu l'hadlik ner Hanukkah.

Translation: "Blessed are You, L ORD our God, King of the universe, Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to kindle the Hanukkah light[s]." Blessing for the miracles of Hanukkah [ edit ] בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה ה' אֱ-לֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, שֶׁעָשָׂה נִסִּים לַאֲבוֹתֵֽינוּ בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם בַּזְּמַן הַזֶּה.

[ 110 ] Transliteration: Barukh ata Adonai Eloheinu, melekh ha'olam, she'asa nisim la'avoteinu ba'yamim ha'heim ba'z'man ha'ze.

Translation: "Blessed are You, LORD our God, King of the universe, Who performed miracles for our ancestors in those days at this time..." Hanerot Halalu [ edit ] After the lights are kindled the hymn Hanerot Halalu is recited. There are several different versions; the version presented here is recited in many Ashkenazic communities: [ 111 ] Ashkenazi version: Hebrew Transliteration English הַנֵּרוֹת הַלָּלוּ שֶׁאָנוּ מַדְלִיקִין, עַל הַנִּסִּים וְעַל הַנִּפְלָאוֹת וְעַל הַתְּשׁוּעוֹת וְעַל הַמִּלְחָמוֹת, שֶׁעָשִׂיתָ לַאֲבוֹתֵינוּ בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם בַּזְּמַן הַזֶּה, עַל יְדֵי כֹּהֲנֶיךָ הַקְּדוֹשִׁים. וְכָל שְׁמוֹנַת יְמֵי הַחֲנֻכָּה הַנֵּרוֹת הַלָּלוּ קֹדֶשׁ הֵם וְאֵין לָנוּ רְשׁוּת לְהִשְׁתַּמֵּשׁ בָּהֶם, אֶלָּא לִרְאוֹתָם בִּלְבָד, כְּדֵי לְהוֹדוֹת וּלְהַלֵּל לְשִׁמְךָ הַגָּדוֹל עַל נִסֶּיךָ וְעַל נִפְלְאוֹתֶיךָ וְעַל יְשׁוּעָתֶךָ.

Hanneirot hallalu anu madlikin 'al hannissim ve'al hanniflaot 'al hatteshu'ot ve'al hammilchamot she'asita laavoteinu bayyamim haheim, (u)bazzeman hazeh 'al yedei kohanekha hakkedoshim. Vekhol-shemonat yemei Hanukkah hanneirot hallalu kodesh heim, ve-ein lanu reshut lehishtammesh baheim ella lir'otam bilvad kedei lehodot ul'halleil leshimcha haggadol 'al nissekha ve'al nifleotekha ve'al yeshu'otekha.

We kindle these lights for the miracles and the wonders, for the redemption and the battles that you made for our forefathers, in those days at this season, through your holy priests . During all eight days of Hanukkah these lights are sacred , and we are not permitted to make ordinary use of them except for to look at them in order to express thanks and praise to Your great Name for Your miracles, Your wonders and Your salvations.

Maoz Tzur [ edit ] Main article: Ma'oz Tzur In the Ashkenazi tradition, each night after the lighting of the candles, the hymn Ma'oz Tzur is sung. The song contains six stanzas. The first and last deal with general themes of divine salvation, and the middle four deal with events of persecution in Jewish history , praising God for survival despite these tragedies ( the exodus from Egypt, the Babylonian captivity , the miracle of the holiday of Purim , the Hasmonean victory) and expressing a longing for the days when Judea will finally triumph over Rome .

[ 112 ] The song was composed in the thirteenth century by a poet only known through the acrostic found in the first letters of the original five stanzas of the song: Mordechai. The familiar tune is most probably a derivation of a German Protestant church hymn or a popular folk song.

[ 113 ] Other customs [ edit ] After lighting the candles and Ma'oz Tzur, singing other Hanukkah songs is customary in many Jewish homes. Some Hasidic and Sephardi Jews recite Psalms , such as Psalm 30, Psalm 67, and Psalm 91. In North America and in Israel it is common to exchange presents or give children presents at this time. In addition, many families encourage their children to give tzedakah (charity) in lieu of presents for themselves.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Special additions to daily prayers [ edit ] "We thank You also for the miraculous deeds and for the redemption and for the mighty deeds and the saving acts wrought by You, as well as for the wars which You waged for our ancestors in ancient days at this season. In the days of the Hasmonean Mattathias, son of Johanan the high priest, and his sons, when the iniquitous Greco-Syrian kingdom rose up against Your people Israel, to make them forget Your Torah and to turn them away from the ordinances of Your will, then You in your abundant mercy rose up for them in the time of their trouble, pled their cause, executed judgment, avenged their wrong, and delivered the strong into the hands of the weak, the many into the hands of few, the impure into the hands of the pure, the wicked into the hands of the righteous, and insolent ones into the hands of those occupied with Your Torah. Both unto Yourself did you make a great and holy name in Thy world, and unto Your people did You achieve a great deliverance and redemption. Whereupon your children entered the sanctuary of Your house, cleansed Your temple, purified Your sanctuary, kindled lights in Your holy courts, and appointed these eight days of Hanukkah in order to give thanks and praises unto Your holy name." Translation of Al ha-Nissim [ 116 ] An addition is made to the " hoda'ah " (thanksgiving) benediction in the Amidah (thrice-daily prayers), called Al HaNissim ("On/about the Miracles").

[ 117 ] This addition refers to the victory achieved over the Syrians by the Hasmonean Mattathias and his sons.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 25 ] The same prayer is added to the grace after meals. In addition, the Hallel (praise) Psalms [ 120 ] are sung during each morning service and the Tachanun penitential prayers are omitted.

[ 118 ] [ 121 ] The Torah is read every day in the shacharit morning services in synagogue , on the first day beginning from Numbers 6:22 (according to some customs, Numbers 7:1), and the last day ending with Numbers 8:4. Since Hanukkah lasts eight days it includes at least one, and sometimes two, Jewish Sabbaths (Saturdays). The weekly Torah portion for the first Sabbath is almost always Miketz , telling of Joseph 's dream and his enslavement in Egypt . The Haftarah reading for the first Sabbath Hanukkah is Zechariah 2:14 – Zechariah 4:7. When there is a second Sabbath on Hanukkah, the Haftarah reading is from 1 Kings 7:40–50.

The Hanukkah menorah is also kindled daily in the synagogue, at night with the blessings and in the morning without the blessings.

[ 122 ] The menorah is not lit during Shabbat, but rather prior to the beginning of Shabbat as described above and not at all during the day.
During the Middle Ages " Megillat Antiochus " was read in the Italian synagogues on Hanukkah just as the Book of Esther is read on Purim . It still forms part of the liturgy of the Yemenite Jews .

[ 123 ] Zot Hanukkah: Hanukkah as the end of the High Holy Days [ edit ] The last day of Hanukkah is known by some as Zot Hanukkah and by others as Chanukat HaMizbeach , from the verse read on this day in the synagogue Numbers 7:84, Zot Hanukkat Hamizbe'ach : "This was the dedication of the altar". According to the teachings of Kabbalah and Hasidism , this day is the final "seal" of the High Holiday season of Yom Kippur and is considered a time to repent out of love for God. In this spirit, many Hasidic Jews wish each other Gmar chatimah tovah ("may you be sealed totally for good"), a traditional greeting for the Yom Kippur season. It is taught in Hasidic and Kabbalistic literature that this day is particularly auspicious for the fulfillment of prayers.

[ 124 ] Some Hasidic scholars teach that the Hanukkah is in fact the final conclusion of God's judgment extending High Holy Days of Rosh Hashana when humanity is judged and Yom Kippur when the judgment is sealed: Hassidic masters quote from Kabbalistic sources that the God's mercy extends even further, giving the Children of Israel till the final day of Chanukah (known as "Zot Chanukah" based on words which appear in the Torah reading of that day), to return to Him and receive a favorable judgment. They see several hints to this in different verses. One is Isaiah 27:9: "Through this (zot) will Jacob's sin be forgiven" – i.e., on account of the holiness of Zot Chanukah.

[ 125 ] Other related laws and customs [ edit ] It is customary for women not to work for at least the first half-hour of the candles' burning, and some have the custom not to work for the entire time of burning. It is also forbidden to fast or to eulogize during Hanukkah.

[ 80 ] Customs [ edit ] Music [ edit ] Main article: Hanukkah music Radomsk Hasidic Ma'oz Tzur .

Hanukkah songs (in Hebrew except where indicated) include " Ma'oz Tzur " (Rock of Ages), " Latke'le Latke'le " ( Yiddish : "Little Latke , Little Latke"), " Hanukkiah Li Yesh " ("I Have a Hanukkah Menorah"), " Ocho Kandelikas " ( Judeo-Spanish : "Eight Little Candles"), " Kad Katan " ("A Small Jug"), " S'vivon Sov Sov Sov " ("Dreidel, Spin and Spin"), " Haneirot Halolu " ("These Candles Which We Light"), " Mi Yimalel " ("Who Can Retell") and " Ner Li, Ner Li " ("I have a Candle").

Among the best known songs in English-speaking countries are " Dreidel, Dreidel, Dreidel " [ 126 ] and " Oh Chanukah ".

[ 127 ] In the Nadvorna Hasidic dynasty, it is customary for the rebbes to play violin after the menorah is lit.

[ 128 ] Penina Moise 's Hannukah Hymn published in the 1842 Hymns Written for the Use of Hebrew Congregations was instrumental in the beginning of Americanization of Hanukkah.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] Foods [ edit ] Sufganiyot / doughnuts filled with strawberry jelly There is a custom of eating foods fried or baked in oil (preferably olive oil ) to commemorate the miracle of a small flask of oil keeping the Second Temple 's Menorah alight for eight days.

[ 132 ] Traditional foods include potato pancakes , known as latkes in Yiddish , especially among Ashkenazi families. Sephardi, Polish , and Israeli families eat jam-filled doughnuts ( Yiddish : פּאָנטשקעס pontshkes ), bimuelos (fritters) and sufganiyot which are deep-fried in oil.

Italkim and Hungarian Jews traditionally eat cheese pancakes known as "cassola" or " cheese latkes ".

[ 133 ] Latkes are not popular in Israel, having been largely replaced by sufganiyot due to local economic factors, convenience and the influence of trade unions.

[ 134 ] Bakeries in Israel have popularized many new types of fillings for sufganiyot besides the traditional strawberry jelly filling, including chocolate cream, vanilla cream, caramel, cappuccino and others.

[ 135 ] In recent years, downsized, "mini" sufganiyot containing half the calories of the regular, 400-to-600-calorie version, have become popular.

[ 136 ] Potato latke frying in hot olive oil .

Rabbinic literature also records a tradition of eating cheese and other dairy products during Hanukkah.

[ 137 ] This custom, as mentioned above, commemorates the heroism of Judith during the Babylonian captivity of the Jews and reminds us that women also played an important role in the events of Hanukkah.

[ 138 ] The deuterocanonical book of Judith (Yehudit or Yehudis in Hebrew), which is not part of the Tanakh , records that Holofernes , an Assyrian general, had surrounded the village of Bethulia as part of his campaign to conquer Judea. After intense fighting, the water supply of the Jews was cut off and the situation became desperate. Judith, a pious widow, told the city leaders that she had a plan to save the city. Judith went to the Assyrian camps and pretended to surrender. She met Holofernes, who was smitten by her beauty. She went back to his tent with him, where she plied him with cheese and wine. When he fell into a drunken sleep, Judith beheaded him and escaped from the camp, taking the severed head with her (the beheading of Holofernes by Judith has historically been a popular theme in art). When Holofernes' soldiers found his corpse, they were overcome with fear; the Jews, on the other hand, were emboldened and launched a successful counterattack. The town was saved, and the Assyrians defeated.

[ 139 ] Roast goose has historically been a traditional Hanukkah food among Eastern European and American Jews, although the custom has declined in recent decades.

[ 140 ] Indian Jews traditionally consume gulab jamun , fried dough balls soaked in a sweet syrup, similar to teiglach or bimuelos , as part of their Hanukkah celebrations.

Italian Jews eat fried chicken, cassola (a ricotta cheese latke almost similar to a cheesecake), and fritelle de riso par Hanukkah (a fried sweet rice pancake).

Romanian Jews eat pasta latkes as a traditional Hanukkah dish.

Syrian Jews consume Kibbet Yatkeen , a dish made with pumpkin and bulgur wheat similar to latkes , as well as their own version of keftes de prasa spiced with allspice and cinnamon.

[ 141 ] Dreidel [ edit ] Main article: Dreidel Dreidels in a Jerusalem market After lighting the candles, it is customary to play (or spin) the dreidel The dreidel, or סביבון ( romanized : sevivon ) i in Hebrew, is a four-sided spinning top that children play with during Hanukkah. Each side is imprinted with a Hebrew letter which is an abbreviation for the Hebrew words נס גדול היה שם ( N es G adol H aya S ham , "A great miracle happened there"), referring to the miracle of the oil that took place in the Beit Hamikdash . The fourth side of some dreidels sold in Israel are inscribed with the letter פ ( Pe ) , rendering the acronym נס גדול היה פה ( N es G adol H aya P o , "A great miracle happened here"), referring to the fact that the miracle occurred in the land of Israel, although this is a relatively recent [ when?

] innovation. Stores in Haredi neighborhoods sell the traditional Shin dreidels as well, because they understand "there" to refer to the Temple and not the entire Land of Israel, and because the Hasidic Masters ascribe significance to the traditional letters.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] Hanukkah gelt [ edit ] Main article: Hanukkah gelt Chocolate gelt Chanukkah gelt ( Yiddish for "Chanukkah money"), known in Israel by the Hebrew translation Hebrew : דְּמֵי חֲנֻכָּה , romanized : dmei Hanukkah , is often distributed to children during the festival of Hanukkah. The giving of Hanukkah gelt also adds to the holiday excitement. The amount is usually in small coins, although grandparents or relatives may give larger sums. The tradition of giving Chanukah gelt dates back to a long-standing East European custom of children presenting their teachers with a small sum of money at this time of year as a token of gratitude. One minhag favors the fifth night of Hanukkah for giving Hanukkah gelt.

[ 144 ] Unlike the other nights of Hanukkah, the fifth does not ever fall on the Shabbat, hence never conflicting with the Halachic injunction against handling money on the Shabbat .

[ 145 ] Hanukkah in the White House [ edit ] Main article: White House Hanukkah Party Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion (center) gives President Truman (left) a Hanukkah menorah as ambassador Abba Eban watches in the Oval Office The earliest Hanukkah link with the White House occurred in 1951 when Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion presented United States President Harry Truman with a Hanukkah menorah. In 1979 President Jimmy Carter took part in the first public Hanukkah candle-lighting ceremony of the National Menorah held across the White House lawn. In 1989, President George H. W. Bush displayed a menorah in the White House. In 1993, President Bill Clinton invited a group of schoolchildren to the Oval Office for a small ceremony.

[ 94 ] The United States Postal Service has released several Hanukkah-themed postage stamps. In 1996, the United States Postal Service (USPS) issued a 32 cent Hanukkah stamp as a joint issue with Israel .

[ 146 ] In 2004, after eight years of reissuing the menorah design, the USPS issued a dreidel design for the Hanukkah stamp. The dreidel design was used through 2008. In 2009 a Hanukkah stamp was issued with a design featured a photograph of a menorah with nine lit candles.

[ 147 ] In 2008, President George W. Bush held an official Hanukkah reception in the White House where he linked the occasion to the 1951 gift by using that menorah for the ceremony, with a grandson of Ben-Gurion and a grandson of Truman lighting the candles.

[ 148 ] In December 2014, two Hanukkah celebrations were held at the White House. The White House commissioned a menorah made by students at the Max Rayne school in Israel and invited two of its students to join U.S. President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama as they welcomed over 500 guests to the celebration. The students' school in Israel had been subjected to arson by extremists. President Obama said these "students teach us an important lesson for this time in our history. The light of hope must outlast the fires of hate. That's what the Hanukkah story teaches us. It's what our young people can teach us – that one act of faith can make a miracle, that love is stronger than hate, that peace can triumph over conflict." [ 149 ] Rabbi Angela Warnick Buchdahl , in leading prayers at the ceremony commented on the how special the scene was, asking the President if he believed America's founding fathers could possibly have pictured that a female Asian-American rabbi would one day be at the White House leading Jewish prayers in front of the African-American president.

[ 150 ] Dates [ edit ] Further information: Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050 The dates of Hanukkah are determined by the Hebrew calendar . Hanukkah begins at the 25th day of Kislev and concludes on the second or third day of Tevet (Kislev can have 29 or 30 days). The Jewish day begins at sunset. Hanukkah dates for recent and upcoming: Sunset, 18 December 2022 – nightfall, 26 December 2022 [ 1 ] Sunset, 7 December 2023 – nightfall, 15 December 2023 Sunset, 25 December 2024 – nightfall, 2 January 2025 Sunset, 14 December 2025 – nightfall, 22 December 2025 Sunset, 4 December 2026 – nightfall, 12 December 2026 Sunset, 24 December 2027 – nightfall, 1 January 2028 Sunset, 12 December 2028 – nightfall, 20 December 2028 Sunset, 1 December 2029 – nightfall, 9 December 2029 In 2013, on 28 November, the American holiday of Thanksgiving fell during Hanukkah for only the third time since Thanksgiving was declared a national holiday by President Abraham Lincoln . The last time was 1899, and  due to the nature of the Gregorian and Jewish calendars being slightly out of sync with each other, it will not happen again in the foreseeable future.

[ 151 ] This rare convergence prompted the creation of the neologism Thanksgivukkah .

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] Symbolic importance [ edit ] Second night of Hannukah at Jerusalem's Western Wall Major Jewish holidays are those when all forms of work are forbidden, and that feature traditional holiday meals, kiddush, holiday candle-lighting, etc. Only biblical holidays fit these criteria, and Chanukah was instituted some two centuries after the Hebrew Bible was completed. Nevertheless, though Chanukah is of rabbinic origin, it is traditionally celebrated in a major and very public fashion. The requirement to position the menorah, or Chanukiah, at the door or window, symbolizes the desire to give the Chanukah miracle a high-profile.

[ 155 ] Moreover, Hallel (a set of Psalms expressing praise that is recited on significant Jewish holidays) is recited on all eight days of Hanukkah, which signifies Hanukkah's importance on the Jewish calendar. While not considered the most significant holiday, the recitation of Hallel on Hanukkah highlights its importance in Jewish tradition.

[ 156 ] Some Jewish historians suggest a different explanation for the rabbinic reluctance to laud the militarism.

[ clarification needed ] First, the rabbis wrote after Hasmonean leaders had led Judea into Rome's grip and so may not have wanted to offer the family much praise. Second, they clearly wanted to promote a sense of dependence on God, urging Jews to look toward the divine for protection. They likely feared inciting Jews to another revolt that might end in disaster, as the Bar Kochba revolt did.

[ 157 ] Modern history [ edit ] Zionism [ edit ] "Hanukkah is an ancient holiday, but a modest one. The holiday of the Hasmoneans is new, yet it is full of spiritual exaltation and national joy. What was Hanukkah forty years ago? 'Al ha-nissim' and Hallel; a short reading in the synagogue; lighting the tiny, slender wax candles or oil lights; at home, levivot [latkes-potato pancakes], cards for the older children, and sevivonim [dreidels-spinning tops] for the little ones. But what is Hanukkah today? The holiday of the Hasmoneans. A holiday of salvation. A great national holiday, celebrated in all the countries of the Diaspora with dances and speeches, melody and song, outings and parades, as if a new soul has been breathed into the ancient holiday, another spirit renewed within it. One thing is clear: if those tiny, modest candles had been extinguished in Diaspora times, if our grandparents had not preserved the traditions of Hanukkah in the synagogue and at home . .., the holiday of the Hasmoneans could never have been created. There would have been nothing to change, nothing to renew. The new soul of our times would not have found a body in which to envelop itself." Joseph Klausner , 1938, in Haim Harari 's Sefer Hanukkah [ 158 ] [ 159 ] The emergence of Jewish nationalism and the Zionist movement in the late 19th and early 20th centuries had a profound impact on the celebration and reinterpretation of Jewish holidays . These developments resulted in increased emphasis on certain Jewish celebrations, of which Hanukkah and Tu BiShvat are prominent examples.

[ 160 ] Hanukkah took on renewed meaning following the rise of Jewish nationalism as a nationalist holiday , symbolizing the struggle of the Jewish people against foreign oppression and their desire for national re-creation [ 161 ] (although the struggle of Jews against foreign oppression has always been a core component of Hanukkah, as shown by the Al HaNissim , which has been part of Jewish liturgy since at least 700 CE).

[ 162 ] Hanukkah served as a common ground where both religious and secular Zionists could unite around their nationalist agenda. Rabbi Shmuel Mohilever , an early religious Zionist, proposed making Hanukkah the official holiday of the proto-Zionist organization Hovevei Zion in Russia in 1881. Public celebrations of Hanukkah gained prominence in the early 20th century, with parades and public events becoming common. Schools in Mandate Palestine played an early role in promoting these celebrations.

[ 163 ] With the advent of Zionism and the state of Israel , the themes of militarism were reconsidered. In modern Israel, the national and military aspects of Hanukkah became, once again, more dominant.

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] North America [ edit ] US President Jimmy Carter attends Menorah Lighting, Lafayette Park , Washington, D.C.

, 1979 In North America, Hanukkah in the 21st century has taken a place equal to Passover as a symbol of Jewish identity. Both the Israeli and North American versions of Hanukkah emphasize resistance, focusing on some combination of national liberation and religious freedom as the defining meaning of the holiday.

[ 166 ] [ 8 ] Diane Ashton attributed the increased visibility and reinvention of Hanukkah by some of the American Jewish community as a way to adapt to American life, re-inventing the festival in "the language of individualism and personal conscience derived from both Protestantism and the Enlightenment".

[ 129 ] Relationship to Christmas [ edit ] See also: Jews and Christmas In North America, Hanukkah became increasingly important to many Jewish individuals and families during the latter part of the 20th century, including a large number of secular Jews , who wanted to celebrate a Jewish alternative to the Christmas celebrations which frequently overlap with Hanukkah.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] Diane Ashton argues that Jewish immigrants to America raised the profile of Hanukkah as a kid-centered alternative to Christmas as early as the 1800s.

[ 169 ] This in parts mirrors the ascendancy of Christmas, which like Hanukkah increased in importance in the 1800s.

[ 170 ] During this time period, Jewish leaders (especially Reform ) such as Max Lilienthal and Isaac Mayer Wise made an effort to rebrand Hanukkah and started creating Hanukkah celebration for kids at their synagogues, which included candy and singing songs.

[ 169 ] [ 171 ] By the 1900s, it started to become a commercial holiday like Christmas, with Hanukkah gifts and decorations appearing in stores and Jewish Women's magazines printing articles on holiday decorations, children's celebrations, and gift giving.

[ 169 ] Ashton says that Jewish families did this in order to maintain a Jewish identity which is distinct from mainline Christian culture, on the other hand, the mirroring of Hanukkah and Christmas made Jewish families and kids feel that they were American.

[ 169 ] Though it was traditional for Ashkenazi Jews to give "gelt" or money to children during Hanukkah, in many families, this tradition has been supplemented with the giving of other gifts so that Jewish children can enjoy receiving gifts just like their Christmas-celebrating peers do.

[ 172 ] Children play a big role in Hanukkah, and Jewish families with children are more likely to celebrate it than childless Jewish families, and sociologists hypothesize that this is because Jewish parents do not want their kids to be alienated from their non-Jewish peers who celebrate Christmas.

[ 167 ] Recent celebrations have also seen the presence of the Hanukkah bush , which is considered a Jewish counterpart to the Christmas tree . Today, the presence of Hanukkah bushes is generally discouraged by most rabbis .

[ 173 ] Relationship to Kwanzaa [ edit ] In December 2022, New York City Mayor Eric Adams , Reverends Al Sharpton and Conrad Tillard , businessman Robert F. Smith , Rabbi Shmuley Boteach , and Elisha Wiesel joined to celebrate Hanukkah and Kwanzaa together, and combat racism and antisemitism, at Carnegie Hall .

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] See also [ edit ] Miracle of the cruse of oil Jewish greetings Jewish holidays Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Usually spelled חֲנוּכָּה ‎, pronounced [χanuˈka] in Modern Hebrew , [ˈχanukə] or [ˈχanikə] in Yiddish ; a transliteration also romanized as Chanukah , Ḥanukah, Chanuka, Chanukkah, Hanuka , and other forms [ 2 ] ^ Its use in transliteration of Hebrew into English is based on influences of Yiddish and German, particularly since transliteration into German tended to be earlier than transliteration into English. See Romanization of Hebrew § How to transliterate References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "Dates for Hanukkah" . Hebcal.com by Danny Sadinoff and Michael J. Radwin (CC-BY-3.0) . Retrieved 26 August 2018 .

^ Miller, Jason (21 December 2011).

"How Do You Spell Hanukkah?" .

The New York Jewish Week .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "What Is Hanukkah?" . Chabad-Lubavitch Media Center.

In the second century BCE, the Holy Land was ruled by the Seleucids (Syrian-Greeks), who tried to force the people of Israel to accept Greek culture and beliefs instead of mitzvah observance and belief in G‑d. Against all odds, a small band of faithful but poorly armed Jews, led by Judah the Maccabee, defeated one of the mightiest armies on earth, drove the Greeks from the land, reclaimed the Holy Temple in Jerusalem and rededicated it to the service of G‑d.

... To commemorate and publicize these miracles, the sages instituted the festival of Hanukkah.

^ Bible_(King_James)/2_Maccabees#Chapter_10 – via Wikisource .

^ "01. The Mitzva to Light Hanukah Candles – Peninei Halakha" . Retrieved 6 December 2023 .

^ "How to Light the Menorah" .

chabad.org .

Archived from the original on 5 June 2017 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "JTA NEWS" .

Joi.org . Archived from the original on 6 October 2007.

^ a b Moyer, Justin (22 December 2011).

"The Christmas effect: How Hanukkah became a big holiday" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ "Hanukkah" .

bbc.co.uk . 17 December 2014. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018 . Retrieved 12 May 2019 .

^ Goldman, Ari L. (2000).

Being Jewish: The Spiritual and Cultural Practice of Judaism Today . Simon & Schuster. p.

141 .

ISBN 978-0-684-82389-8 .

^ Scherman, Nosson (23 December 2005).

"Origin of the Name Chanukah" . Torah.org.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2012 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Ran Shabbat 9b ( "Hebrew text" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

) ^ "The Lights of Chanukah: Laws and Customs" . Orthodox Union. 9 April 2014 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ a b "Yes, Virginia, Hanukkah Has a Correct Spelling" . 30 December 2011.

^ "Is There a Right Way to Spell Hanukkah? Chanukah? Hannukah?" .

Time .

^ "Definition of HANUKKAH" .

www.merriam-webster.com . 5 December 2023.

^ Powney, Harriet (7 December 2012).

"Hanukah or Chanukah? Have the chutzpah to embrace Yiddish" .

the Guardian .

^ "Hebrew Alphabet" (PDF) . 1 January 2011. p. 2 . Retrieved 25 November 2023 .

^ "Which Is Correct: Hanukkah or Chanukah? | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 25 November 2023 .

^ "How Do You Spell Hanukkah?" .

My Jewish Learning . Retrieved 25 November 2023 .

^ dimap (17 December 2019).

אורים ואורות .

האקדמיה ללשון העברית (in Hebrew) . Retrieved 24 November 2022 .

^ Stergiou, Fr. R.

"The Old Testament in the Orthodox Church" .

OrthodoxChristian.info . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ 1 Maccabees 4:36–4:59 ^ 2 Maccabees 1:18–1:36 ^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Kaufmann, Kohler (1901–1906).

"Ḥanukkah" . In Singer, Isidore ; et al. (eds.).

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

^ 2 Maccabees 1:9 ^ 2 Maccabees 10:6 ^ "Megillat Taanit, Kislev 7" .

www.sefaria.org .

^ Bikkurim 1:6 , Rosh HaShanah 1:3 , Taanit 2:10 , Megillah 3:4 and 3:6 , Moed Katan 3:9 , and Bava Kama 6:6 ^ In his Hakdamah Le'mafteach Hatalmud ^ Yesod Hamishna Va'arichatah pp. 25–28 ( "Hebrew text" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

) ^ Dolanksy, Shawna (23 December 2011).

"The Truth(s) About Hanukkah" .

Huffington Post . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "Shabbat 21b" .

^ "Babylonian Talmud: Shabbath 21b" .

sefaria.org .

Sefaria . Retrieved 5 May 2019 .

^ "Sukkah 46a:8" .

www.sefaria.org . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Zvieli, Benjamin.

"The Scroll of Antiochus" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Bashiri, Y.

(1964). "מגלת בני חשמונאי". In Yosef Ḥubara (ed.).

Sefer Ha-Tiklāl (Tiklāl Qadmonim) (in Hebrew). Jerusalem: Yosef Ḥubara. pp. 75b–79b (Megillat Benei Ḥashmunai).

OCLC 122703118 .

(penned in the handwriting of Shalom b. Yihye Qoraḥ, and copied from "Tiklal Bashiri" which was written in 1618 CE ). Original Aramaic text: בָּתַר דְּנָּא עָלוּ בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לְבֵית מַקְדְּשָׁא וּבְנוֹ תַּרְעַיָּא וְדַכִּיאוּ בֵּית מַקְדְּשָׁא מִן קְטִילַיָּא וּמִן סְאוֹבֲתָא. וּבעוֹ מִשְׁחָא דְּזֵיתָא דָּכְיָא לְאַדְלָקָא בּוֹצִנַיָּא וְלָא אַשְׁכַּחוּ אֵלָא צְלוֹחִית חֲדָא דַּהֲוָת חֲתִימָא בְּעִזְקָת כָּהֲנָא רַבָּא מִיּוֹמֵי שְׁמוּאֵל נְבִיָּא וִיַדְעוּ דְּהִיא דָּכְיָא. בְּאַדְלָקוּת יוֹמָא חֲדָא הֲוָה בַּהּ וַאֲלָה שְׁמַיָּא דִּי שַׁכֵין שְׁמֵיהּ תַּמָּן יְהַב בַּהּ בִּרְכְּתָא וְאַדְלִיקוּ מִנַּהּ תְּמָנְיָא יוֹמִין. עַל כֵּן קַיִּימוּ בְּנֵי חַשְׁמוּנַּאי הָדֵין קְיָימָא וַאֲסַרוּ הָדֵין אֲסָּרָא אִנּוּן וּבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל כּוּלְּהוֹן. לְהוֹדָעָא לִבְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל לְמֶעֲבַד הָדֵין תְּמָנְיָא יוֹמִין חַדְוָא וִיקָר כְּיּוֹמֵי מוֹעֲדַיָּא דִּכְתִיבִין בְּאוֹרָיְתָא לְאַדְלָקָא בְּהוֹן לְהוֹדָעָא לְמַן דְּיֵּיתֵי מִבַּתְרֵיהוֹן אֲרֵי עֲבַד לְהוֹן אֱלָהֲהוֹן פּוּרְקָנָא מִן שְׁמַיָּא. בְּהוֹן לָא לְמִסְפַּד וְלָא לְמִגְזַר צוֹמָא וְכָל דִּיהֵי עֲלוֹהִי נִדְרָא יְשַׁלְּמִנֵּיהּ ^ Babylonian Talmud, Berachot 28a ^ Josephus (1930).

Jewish Antiquities .

doi : 10.4159/DLCL.josephus-jewish_antiquities.1930 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

– via digital Loeb Classical Library (subscription required) ^ Perseus.tufts.edu , Jewish Antiquities xii. 7, § 7, #323 ^ This is the first reference to the Feast of Dedication by this name ( ta egkainia , ta enkainia [a typical "festive plural"]) in Jewish literature (Hengel 1999: 317).

^ Roth, Andrew Gabriel (2008).

Aramaic English New Testament, 3rd Ed . Netzari Press LLV. p. 266.

^ a b Sacchi, Paolo (2004).

The History of the Second Temple Period . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-567-04450-1 .

^ "T. Livivs" .

TheLatinLibrary.com . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Hengel, Martin (1974).

Judaism and Hellenism. 1 (1st engl. ed.). London: SCM Press.

ISBN 978-0-334-00788-3 .

^ Josephus, Flavius.

" The Wars of the Jews i. 31" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Josephus, Flavius (1825).

"The Works of Flavius Josephus" – via Google Books.

^ Josephus, Flavius.

" The Wars of the Jews i. 34" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "1 Maccabees" .

EarlyJewishWritings.com . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "1 Macc. iv. 59" . Archived from the original on 27 June 2004.

^ Epstein, Baruch.

"All's Well – When it Ends" .

Chabad.org . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Mishneh Torah , "Hilchot Megilot v Hanukkah 3:2–3" .

^ Telushkin, Joseph (1991).

Jewish Literacy: The Most Important Things to Know about the Jewish Religion, Its People, and Its History . W. Morrow. p.

114 .

ISBN 978-0-688-08506-3 .

^ Johnston, Sarah Iles (2004).

Religions of the Ancient World: A Guide .

Harvard University Press . p. 186.

ISBN 978-0-674-01517-3 .

^ Greenberg, Irving (1993).

The Jewish Way: Living the Holidays . Simon & Schuster. p.

29 .

ISBN 978-0-671-87303-5 .

^ Schultz, Joseph P. (1981).

Judaism and the Gentile Faiths: Comparative Studies in Religion .

Fairleigh Dickinson University Press . p. 155.

ISBN 978-0-8386-1707-6 .

Modern scholarship on the other hand considers the Maccabean revolt less as an uprising against foreign oppression than as a civil war between the orthodox and reformist parties in the Jewish camp ^ Gundry, Robert H. (2003).

A Survey of the New Testament .

Zondervan . p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-310-23825-6 .

^ Grabbe, Lester L. (2000).

Judaic Religion in the Second Temple Period: Belief and Practice from the Exile to Yavneh .

Routledge . p.

59 .

ISBN 978-0-415-21250-2 .

^ Freedman, David Noel; Allen C. Myers; Astrid B. Beck (2000).

Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible . Wm.B.

Eerdmans Publishing . p.

837 .

ISBN 978-0-8028-2400-4 .

^ Wood, Leon James (1986).

A Survey of Israel's History . Zondervan. p. 357.

ISBN 978-0-310-34770-5 .

^ Tcherikover, Victor (1999) [1959].

Hellenistic Civilization and the Jews . Baker Academic.

ISBN 978-0-8010-4785-5 .

^ Fred Skolnik; Michael Berenbaum, eds. (2007).

Encyclopaedia Judaica, Volume 8 . Granite Hill Publishers. p. 332.

^ Frankiel, Rabbi Yaakov.

"Why Eight Days?" . Archived from the original on 13 December 2017 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ M. Zambelli, "L'ascesa al trono di Antioco IV Epifane di Siria," Rivista di Filologia e di Istruzione Classica 38 (1960) 363–389 ^ Newsom, Carol Ann; Breed, Brennan W. (2014).

Daniel: A Commentary . Presbyterian Publish Corp. p. 26.

ISBN 978-0-664-22080-8 .

^ "Josephus, Ant.

xiii, 9:1., via" .

^ 1 Maccabees 8:17–20 ^ Smith, Mahlon H.

"Antiochus VII Sidetes" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Ginzburg, Louis (1901).

"Antiochus VII., Sidetes" .

Jewish Encyclopedia . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Ginzberg, Louis.

"Alexander Jannæus (Jonathan)" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

Jewish Encyclopedia .

^ Ginzberg, Louis.

"Alexander Jannæus (Jonathan)" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

His three years' war east of the Jordan (about 85–82) was successful; and he conquered Pella, Dium, Gerasa, Gaulana, Seleucia, and the strong fortress Gamala.

Jewish Encyclopedia .

^ Josephus , Antiquities of the Jews 14:70–71 ^ Missler, Dr. Chuck.

"Happy Hanukkah" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

Mattathias and his five sons became the nucleus of a growing band of rebels against Antiochus.

^ Saundra L. Washington (2010).

God's Intertestamental Silence: Then Came Jesus Christ . Saundra L Washington. p. 14.

ISBN 978-1-4523-9735-1 .

^ "On Hanukkah, Women As Role Models" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

Also in the Apocrypha is the Book of Judith, which tells how this heroine stopped the siege of Jerusalem by decapitating Holofernes, a major military leader for the enemy.

^ "December: Judith and the Hanukkah Story" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

For several centuries there was another hero associated with Hanukkah: Judith.

^ Dice, Elizabeth A. (2009).

Christmas and Hanukkah . Infobase Publishing. p. 24.

ISBN 978-1-4381-1971-7 .

^ "Chanukah with Torah Tidbits" .

OU.org . 29 June 2006 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Shulkhan Arukh Orach Chayim 670:1 ^ a b c Becher, Rabbi Mordechai.

"The Laws of Chanukah" .

Ohr.edu . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Skop, Yarden (24 March 2014).

"Education Ministry Changes Start of School Year – Again" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "לוח החופשות והימים המיוחדים לשנת תשע"ח" .

Edu.gov.il . Archived from the original on 7 October 2018 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Glazer, Rabbi Chalm.

"Chanukah: Performances and Customs" .

Kashrut.com . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Shulkhan Arukh Orach Chayim 671:2 ^ "How to Light the Menorah – Light Up Your Environment!" .

Chabad.org . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Aiken, Richard B. (30 November 2015).

"Halacha L'Maaseh on Chanuka" . Orthodox Union . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Posner, Menachem.

"Why Don't Women Work While the Chanukah Candles Are Burning?" . Chabad-Lubavitch Media Center . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "Hakirah Volume 25, Fall 2018" (PDF) .

Hakirah.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 October 2018 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Tractate Shabbat 21b–23a ^ a b Shulkhan Arukh Orach Chayim 673:1 ^ "The following is a response from Hakham Ya'aqob Menashe" .

Midrash.org . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "OU's Chanukah Guide" . Orthodox Union. Archived from the original on 9 May 2021 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Plaut, Joshua Eli (2012).

A Kosher Christmas: 'Tis the Season to be Jewish . Rutgers University Press. p.

167 .

ISBN 9780813553818 .

^ a b Sarna, Jonathan D. (2 December 2009).

"How Hanukkah Came to the White House" . Forward . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Telushkin, Joseph (2014).

Rebbe: The Life and Teachings of Menachem M. Schneerson, the Most Influential Rabbi in Modern History . HarperCollins. p. 269.

^ Posner, Menachem (1 December 2014).

"40 Years Later: How the Chanukah Menorah Made Its Way to the Public Sphere" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "Shabbat 22a" .

^ Babylonian Talmud: Shabbat 23a ^ Yosef, Rabbeinu Ovadia (11 December 2017).

"The Obligation of Women Regarding Chanukah Candles" .

Halachayomit.co.il . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Waskow, Rabbi Arthur (16 November 2007).

"The Eight Days of Hanukkah: Eight Actions to Heal the Earth through the Green Menorah Covenant" . The Shalom Center. Archived from the original on 7 October 2018 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Hoffman, Gil (4 December 2007).

" 'Green Hanukkia' Campaign Sparks Ire" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Dobb, Rabbi Fred Scherlinder (6 July 2011).

"CFL Hannukah Installation Ceremony" . Coalition on Environment and Jewish Life (COEJL). Archived from the original on 28 November 2013 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ a b c d e "How to Celebrate Chanukah" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

[...] the menorah must contain enough fuel at the time of the lighting to burn until 30 minutes after nightfall.

^ Shulchan Aruch OC 672:1, as understood by the Magen Avraham and others.

^ "Some Light Chanukah Questions" . 25 November 2013 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "CTI Laws and Customs of Chanukah" . 5 November 2015. Archived from the original on 1 January 2017.

^ "What to do on Chanukah" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Shulkhan Arukh Orach Chayim 676:1–2 ^ "The Lights of Chanukah: Laws and Customs" . Orthodox Union. 9 April 2014 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ a b Ross, Lesli Koppelman (2000).

Celebrate!: The Complete Jewish Holidays Handbook . Jason Aronson, Incorporated.

ISBN 978-1-4616-2772-2 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Shulkhan Arukh Orach Chayim 676:4 ^ "Maoz Tzur: Translation & Explanation – Jewish Holidays" . Orthodox Union. 29 June 2006 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "Maoz Tzur: Rock of Ages" .

My Jewish Learning . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Newman, Bruce (7 December 2012).

"Hanukkah ushers in 'tzedakah,' a religious obligation to do what is right and just" .

The Mercury News . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Maidenberg, Rhiana (11 December 2012).

"The Fifth Night Project: Teaching Giving During Hanukkah" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Singer, Isidore (1905).

"Chanukkah, or the Feast of Dedication" .

New Era Illustrated Magazine .

5 : 621 – via Google Books .

^ Shulkhan Arukh Orach Chayim 682:1 ^ a b "Chanukah with Torah Tidbits" . Orthodox Union. 29 June 2006 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Nulman, Cantor Macy.

"Al Hanisim: Concerning the Miracles" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Psalm 113–118 ^ Abramowitz, Rabbi Jack.

"133. Days on Which Tachanun is Omitted" .

OU Torah . Orthodox Union . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Enkin, Rabbi Ari (7 December 2010).

"Chanuka – Lighting in Shul" .

www.torahmusings.com . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Rahel.

"The Scroll Of The Hasmoneans" . Archived from the original on 28 May 2007.

^ Gutfreund, Sara Debbie (23 December 2014).

"Hanukkah's Last Light" .

aishcom . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Ask the Rabbi (22 December 2017).

"Final Judgment on Chanukah" .

www.aish.com . Aish HaTorah . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "Chanukah – Dreidel, Dreidel, Dreidel" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

As one of the most famous Chanukah songs...

^ "Oh Chanukah (Jewish Traditional) sheet music for Trombone" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

Oh Chanukah (or Oj Chanukah) is a very popular modern English Chanukah song.

^ Greenberg, Shlomo (15 December 2012).

"Belz resumed practice of playing violin at candle lighting" .

Behadrey Haredim . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ a b Ashton, Dianne (2013).

Hanukkah in America: A History . NYU Press. pp.

42– 46.

ISBN 978-1-4798-5895-8 .

Throughout the nineteenth century some Jews tried various ways to adapt Judaism to American life. As they began looking for images to help understand and explain what a proper response to American Challenges might be, Hanukkah became ripe for reinvention. In Charleston, South Carolina, one group of Jews made Hanukkah into a time for serious religious reflexion that responded to their evangelical Protestant milieu...[Moise's] poem gave Hanukkah a place in the emerging religious style of American culture that was dominated by the language of individualism and personal conscience derived from both Protestantism and the Enlightenment. However, neither the Talmud nor the Shulchan Aruch identifies Hanukkah as a special occasion to ask for the forgiveness of sins.

^ Parker, Adam (18 December 2011).

"Celebrating Hanukkah" .

The Post and Courier . Archived from the original on 5 January 2015 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Ashton, Dianne. "Quick to the Party: The Americanization of Hanukkah and Southern Jewry".

Southern Jewish History .

12 : 1– 38.

^ "Chanukah is upon us" . The Philadelphia Jewish Voice. 7 January 2006 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Nathan, Joan (12 December 2006).

"Hanukkah Q&A" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Jeffay, Nathan (17 December 2009).

"Why Israel is a latke-free zone" .

thejc.com .

^ Gur, Jana (2008).

The Book of New Israeli Food: A Culinary Journey . Schocken. pp.

238– 243.

ISBN 978-0-8052-1224-2 .

^ Minsberg, Tali; Lidman, Melanie (10 December 2009).

"Love Me Dough" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Soloveitchik, Benyamina.

"Why All the Oil and Cheese (and Potatoes)?" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "The Story of Yehudit: The Woman Who Saved the Day" .

Chabad.org . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Mishna Berurah 670:2:10 ^ Cooper, John (1993).

Eat and be Satisfied: A Social History of Jewish Food .

Jason Aronson . p. 192.

ISBN 978-0-87668-316-3 .

Fabricant, Florence (23 November 1994).

"Hanukkah's a-Coming: Geese Are Getting Fat" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

Yoskowitz, Jeffrey (24 December 2016).

"Goose: A Hanukkah Tradition" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "8 Foods You Didn't Know Jews Eat During Hanukkah" .

My Jewish Learning . 8 December 2016 . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

^ Golinknin, Rabbi David.

"The Surprising Origin of the Dreidel" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Rosenberg, Anat (14 December 2014).

"Gyration Nation: The Weird Ancient History of the Dreidel" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Golinkin, Rabbi Prof. David (19 December 2014).

"Why Do We Give Hanukkah Gelt and Hanukkah Presents?" . The Schecter Institutes . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Lebowitz, Rabbi Aryeh (11 December 2005).

"Chanukah Gelt and Gifts" (PDF) .

Dvarim Hayotzim Min Halev (PDF). Vol. 17, no. 6. p. 3.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

In fact, the Orchos Rabeinu in cheilek ג teaches that the Steipler Gaon maintained the minhag of giving out Chanukah gelt davka on the fifth night of Chanukah. Why specifically the fifth night? Answers the Orchos Rabeinu, since the fifth night is the only night that cannot coincide with Shabbos.

^ "Israeli-American Hanukkah Stamp" . Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 22 October 1996 . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Service, United States Postal.

"Stamp Announcement 09-47: Hanukkah" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Donius, Susan K. (5 December 2013).

"From the Archives: Hanukkah at the White House" . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Ghert-Zand, Renee (18 December 2014).

"Arab–Jewish school's menorah lights up White House Hanukkah party" .

TimesOfIsrael.com . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Eisner, Jane (18 December 2014).

"A Most Inspiring Hanukkah at the White House" .

Forward.com . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Hoffman, Joel (24 November 2013).

"Why Hanukkah and Thanksgiving Will Never Again Coincide" .

Huffington Post . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Spiro, Amy (17 November 2013).

"Thanksgivukka: Please pass the turkey-stuffed doughnuts" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Byrne, Christine (2 October 2013).

"How To Celebrate Thanksgivukkah, The Best Holiday Of All Time" . Buzzfeed . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Stu Bykofsky (11 October 2013).

"Thanks for Thanukkah!" . The Inquirer . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ "Chanukah FAQs" .

Chabad.org . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Staff, O. U. (14 September 2011).

"The Recitation of Hallel" .

Jewish Holidays . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ Ashton, Dianne (2013).

Hanukkah in America: A History . New York: New York University Press. p. 29.

ISBN 978-0-8147-0739-5 .

^ Conforti 2012 , p. 159.

^ Zion & Spectre 2000 , p. 13.

^ Conforti 2012 , p. 158-159, "Jewish nationalism and Zionism breathed new life into the Jewish holidays. The traditional Jewish calendar is full of holidays and days of commemoration, which served as a basis for the revival of modern Jewish nationalism. From its inception, Zionism made broad use of the reserve of Jewish memories and myths from biblical times and from the Second Temple period. This was the case for the renewal of biblical names and symbols as well as the significance of national holidays. Significant examples of this are the holidays of Hanukkah and Tu bi-Shvat. These two holidays were initiated relatively late in history, and had relatively little importance in the religious sense. But beginning with the Zionist awakening in the 1880s, these holidays took on central meaning. In the 1890s, many of the newly founded Zionist organisations adopted the names 'Hasmoneans and 'Maccabees', in an attempt to create a clear connection between the heroic foundations of the ancient biblical golden age and the renaissance of Jewish nationalism… Hanukkah, celebrated in the Diaspora as the festival of lights, mainly expressed God's might and the principles of the Jewish faith. But at the inception of the Zionist project, this holiday was transformed into a symbol of the power and rebellion of the entire nation against its foreign oppressor (Don-Yehiya 1992). The connection that the Zionist movement made between ba-vamim ha-hem u-ba-zman ha-zeh [*in days past, and in these times'] expressed the Zionist desire to return to a heroic past and 'the lost Jewish masculinity'. It also reflected the aspiration to create a new Jew, in contrast to the Diaspora Jew (Bashkin 1998). Instead of God's might, the Zionists began to emphasise the strength of the rebel Maccabbees. In the arts, Boris Schatz's sculpture "Mattathias the Hasmonean' was given a position of honour in Zionist iconography.".

^ Zion & Spectre 2000 , p. 12, "The rabbinic religious tradition - in so far as it recalled the Hasmoneans at all - emphasized the religious miracle in their battle against persecution of Judaism and the desecration of the Temple (see the traditional praver "Al Ha. Nissim"). However the Secular Zionists rejected the miracle and emphasized the earthly realism of Hasmonean heroism. Zionism made Hanukkah a nationalist holidav. The secularization and nationalization of religious celebrations focused on minor religious holidavs and reprioritized their significance. Lag BaOmer became a celebration of Bar Kochba's revolt against the Roman Empire (132-135 CE): Tu B'Shvat became a celebration of the redemption of Eretz Yisrael through reforestation. However. Hanukkah was the main site of national re-creation. The early religious Zionist Rabbi Shmuel Mohi-lever proposed that Hanukkah be the official holiday of the proto-Zionist organization in Russia - Hovevei Zion (1881). This minor holiday provided neutral ground for religious and secular Zionists to share their nationalist program.".

^ "What is the origin of Al Ha Nissim for Hanukka?" .

Mi Yodeya . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ Conforti 2012 , p. 160ps:"Schools in the Yishuv as well as adults followed the tradition of visiting the tombs of the Maccabees. Thus beginning in this period, Hanukkah was given a renewed interpretation that was nationalist, romantic, and activist, as opposed to the traditional interpretation. From the inception of Zionism in the 1880s and '90s, Hanukkah took on a central position as a national holiday. The pioneers of the First Aliya to Palestine (1882-1903), as well as members of the Zionist organisations in Europe, raised Hanukkah to the level of a national holiday. Hanukkah would not have taken its central place in the national calendar without the close cooperation between religious and secular Zionists from the beginning of Zionism until the period of the British mandate and the Jewish settlement (Yishuv) in Palestine (Dotan 1988:38-43). With the revival of Jewish nationalism, Hanukkah took on a new character. It was celebrated not only at home, but in public as well. In the 1920s, the holiday began to receive increasing public expression. Parades were held in celebration of Hanukkah, the festival of lights. For example, schoolchildren in Tel Aviv marched in a torch procession organised by the school in conjunction with the Tel Aviv municipality (Arieh-Sapir 2002). This process of adapting a 'useful past' for the purpose of strengthening the national narrative was not necessarily made "from the top down'. Rather, it had many agents, all of which contributed to the success of Hanukkah celebrations throughout all of Palestine. Although institutions were involved in moulding the character of the holiday, many citizens also participated "from the bottom up'. Furthermore, the religious character of the symbols did not completely disappear from the public arena. For example, the Great Synagogue on Allenby Street in Tel Aviv served as the starting point for the festival parade in the 1930s, with the menorah lit on top of the building. The revolution that Zionism led in the celebration of Hanukkah is just one example of the broader revolution it initiated in other Jewish holidays by granting them a new Zionist interpretation. Examples of this are Shavuot celebrations among the workers' settlements and Purim festivities in Tel Aviv, as well as other holidays, in the 1920s and '30s (Helman 2007; Shoham 2006).".

^ Haberman, Bonna (1 October 2014).

Rereading Israel: The Spirit of the Matter . Urim Publications. p. 152.

ISBN 978-965-524-202-7 .

^ Berkowitz, Michael (2004).

Nationalism, Zionism and Ethnic Mobilization of the Jews in 1900 and Beyond . BRILL. p. 244.

ISBN 978-90-04-13184-2 .

^ Zion, Noah (4 December 2012).

"Reinventing Hanukkah: The Israeli Politics of the Maccabean Holiday" . Shalom Hartman Institute . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ a b Abramitzky, Ran; Einav, Liran; Rigbi, Oren (1 June 2010).

"Is Hanukkah Responsive to Christmas?" (PDF) .

The Economic Journal .

120 (545): 612– 630.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0297.2009.02305.x .

ISSN 0013-0133 .

S2CID 17782856 . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ "How Christmas Transformed Hanukkah in America" .

My Jewish Learning . Retrieved 10 December 2020 .

^ a b c d Ashton, Dianne (2013).

Hanukkah in America : a history . Internet Archive. New York : New York University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-0739-5 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Jacob R. Straus (16 November 2012).

"Federal Holidays: Evolution and Current Practices" (PDF) . Congressional Research Service.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 January 2014 . Retrieved 2 January 2014 .

^ Rubin, Debra.

"Since the 1800s, Hanukkah in the US is a response to Xmas" .

www.timesofisrael.com . Retrieved 10 December 2020 .

^ Rosenstock, Natasha (1 October 2016).

"Hanukkah Gifts" . My Jewish Learning . Retrieved 6 October 2018 .

^ Diamant, Anita (1998).

Choosing a Jewish Life: A Handbook for People Converting to Judaism and for Their Family and Friends . Schocken Books.

ISBN 978-0-8052-1095-8 .

Rabbis are emphatic and virtually unanimous in their feeling that there is no place for Christmas celebrations within a Jewish home.

But that would seem to be overstating the case, vide Ron Isaacs (2003).

Ask the Rabbi: The Who, What, When, Where, Why, & How of Being Jewish . Jossey-Bass.

ISBN 0-7879-6784-X .

^ "Mayor Eric Adams, Rev. Al Sharpton, others gather for joint Kwanzaa, Hanukkah celebration" .

New York Amsterdam News . 21 December 2022.

^ Stewart Ain and TaRessa Stovall (23 December 2022).

"Kwanzakkah: A way to celebrate dual heritage, and combat hate" .

The Forward .

^ "Mayor Eric Adams, Rev. Al Sharpton, Robert F. Smith, Robert F. Smith, Rev. Conrad Tillard, Rabbi Shmuley Boteach and Elisha Wiesel join together to host '15 Days of Light,' celebrating Hanukkah and Kwanzaa" .

JNS .

^ "Black and Jewish Leaders Gather at Carnegie Hall to Take a Stand Against Antisemitism and Racism" .

Yahoo . 20 December 2022. Archived from the original on 25 December 2022 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sacks, Benjamin (1913).

The story of Chanukah . Pittsburgh: Hebrew Institute.

Conforti, Yitzhak (2012).

"Zionist Awareness of the Jewish Past: Inventing Tradition or Renewing the Ethnic Past?" .

Studies in Ethnicity and Nationalism .

12 (1). Wiley: 155– 171.

doi : 10.1111/j.1754-9469.2012.01155.x .

ISSN 1473-8481 .

Zion, N.; Spectre, B. (2000).

A Different Light: A Pluralist Anthology : the Big Book of Hanukkah . Devora Pub.

ISBN 978-1-930143-37-1 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Hanukkah at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Data from Wikidata Hanukah – Story and Art Activities.

Hanukkah Archived 12 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine at About.com Hanukkah at the History channel Hanukkah at the Jewish Encyclopedia Hanukkah Archived 27 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine at the Jewish Agency for Israel Hanukkah at Chabad.org Hanukkah at Aish HaTorah v t e Hanukkah חֲנֻכָּה Traditions Symbols Hanukkah menorah Dreidel (Sevivon) Gelt Public menorah Foods Biscochos Syrniki Fritas de prasa Latke Noodle latkes Sfenj Sufganiyah Buñuelos Music " Ma'oz Tzur (Rock of Ages)" " Haneirot Halalu (These lights)" " Odecha Ki Tovot Gamalta (I will Thank You)" " Ichlu Mashmanim (Eat Fattened Animals)" " I Have a Little Dreidel " " Oh Chanukah " " The Chanukah Song " " Erran Baron Cohen Presents: Songs in the Key of Hanukkah " Light One Candle " " Puppy for Hanukkah " The Hanukkah Sessions Films Eight Crazy Nights Full-Court Miracle The Hebrew Hammer In television " Mr. Hankey's Christmas Classics " " The One with the Holiday Armadillo " " A Rugrats Chanukah " Activities Festigal Latke–Hamantash Debate Other Thanksgivukkah Hallel Hanukkah bush Hanukkah Harry Mensch on a Bench Chrismukkah Maccabean Revolt Events Seleucid Empire Temple in Jerusalem Maccabees Hasmonean Kingdom Historical accounts Books of Maccabees (1 and 2) The War of the Jews Miracle of the cruse of oil People Mattathias John Simon Judas Eleazar Jonathan Antiochus IV Epiphanes Battles Ma'aleh Levona Beth Horon Emmaus Beth Zur Campaigns of 163 BC Beth Zechariah Adasa Elasa v t e Jewish and Israeli holidays and observances Jewish holidays and observances Shabbat Shabbat Special Shabbat High Holy Days Rosh Hashanah Ten Days of Repentance Yom Kippur Three Pilgrimage Festivals Passover Fast of the Firstborn Pesach Sheni Shavuot Sukkot Hoshana Rabbah Shemini Atzeret Simchat Torah Yom tov sheni shel galuyot Chol HaMoed Isru chag Rosh Chodesh Fast of Gedalia Hanukkah Tenth of Tevet Tu BiShvat Fast of Esther Purim Purim Katan Counting of the Omer Lag BaOmer 17th of Tammuz The Three Weeks The Nine Days Tisha B'Av Tu B'Av Rosh Hashanah LeMa'sar Behemah Israeli public holidays Yom HaShoah (Holocaust Remembrance Day) Yom HaZikaron (Memorial Day) Yom HaAtzmaut (Independence Day) Yom Yerushalayim (Jerusalem Day) Yom HaAliyah (Aliyah Day) Ben-Gurion Day Herzl Day Jabotinsky Day Rabin Day Israeli ethnic holidays Mimouna Seharane Sigd Day to Mark the Departure and Expulsion of Jews from the Arab Countries and Iran Hebrew months Nisan Iyar Sivan Tammuz Av Elul Tishrei Cheshvan Kislev Tevet Shevat Adar and Adar Sheni Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050 Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef NARA Yale LUX Portal : Judaism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hanukkah&oldid=1304667458 " Categories : Hanukkah Cultural depictions of the Maccabees Kislev observances Tevet observances Traditions involving fire Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with Hebrew IPA CS1: unfit URL CS1 uses Hebrew-language script (he) CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Subscription required using via Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from December 2018 Infobox holiday (other) Wikisource templates with missing id Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Imperial Aramaic (700-300 BCE)-language text Articles containing Yiddish-language text All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from December 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2020 Articles prone to spam from December 2015 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 12:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hanukkah 83 languages Add topic

