Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Average storm shelter Toggle Average storm shelter subsection 1.1 Hillside/embankment shelters 1.2 Above ground shelters 1.3 Below-ground shelters 1.4 Geolocation services 2 Additional uses 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Storm cellar 3 languages العربية Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of shelter A storm cellar on the Texas plains A storm shelter or storm cellar is a type of underground bunker designed to protect the occupants from severe weather , particularly tornadoes . They are most frequently seen in the Midwest (" Tornado Alley ") and Southeastern (" Dixie Alley ") United States where tornadoes are generally frequent and the low water table permits underground living .

Average storm shelter [ edit ] An average storm cellar for a single family is built close enough to the home to allow instant access in an emergency , but not so close that the house could tumble on the door during a storm, trapping the occupants inside. This is also the reason the main door on most storm cellars is mounted at an angle rather than perpendicular with the ground. An angled door allows for debris to blow up and over the door, or sand to slide off, without blocking it, and the angle also reduces the force necessary to open the door if rubble has piled up on top. The floor area is generally around eight by twelve feet (2.4 by 3.7 m), with an arched roof like that of a Quonset hut , but entirely underground. In most cases the entire structure is built of blocks faced with cement and rebar through the bricks for protection from the storm. Doing so makes it nearly impossible for the bricks to collapse. New ones are sometimes made of septic tanks that have been modified with a steel door and vents. Some new shelters are rotationally molded from polyethylene .

Most storm cellars are accessible by a covered stairwell, and at the opposite end of the structure there can be conduits for air that reach the surface, and perhaps a small window to serve as an emergency exit and also to provide some light. Storm cellars, when connected to the house, may potentially compromise security.

[ 1 ] Fully enclosed underground storm shelters offer superior tornado protection to that of a traditional basement (cellar) because they provide separate overhead cover without the risk of occupants being trapped or killed by collapsing rubble from above. For this reason they also provide the only reliable form of shelter against EF5 tornadoes which tend to rip the house from its foundation, removing the overhead cover which was protecting the occupant.

There are several different styles of storm cellars. There are the generic underground storm/tornado cellar, also called storm or tornado shelters, as well as the new above-ground safe rooms . A "cellar" is an underground unit, but for the sake of the specified use of a "storm cellar" to protect one from high-wind storms, it seems relevant to mention saferooms. There are two basic styles of underground storm cellars. One is the "hillside" or "embankment" and the other is the "flat" ground.

One other style of shelter is the under garage.

[ 2 ] While similar to other underground shelters, its main difference is that it is installed in a garage rather than outside. Having it installed in the garage allows access to it without having to go outside during a storm. It is sometimes not an option to have a shelter installed outside either due to insufficient space, or local ordinances.

Hillside/embankment shelters [ edit ] Hillside or embankment models are usually installed in one of two ways. It can be installed in an existing hill/embankment or dirt is built up around a freestanding unit, forming a hill around it. The door can be set at an angle or vertically. There can be steps leading into the unit, or it can be installed to where the floor is level with the ground outside. The embankment storm cellar can be made from concrete, steel, fiberglass, or any other structurally sound material or composite and is usually installed in a hill or embankment, leaving only the door exposed. In some situations, they can hold an entire neighborhood or town as with a community shelter. More often, they are built to hold one or two families, specified as a residential shelter. All underground "storm or tornado" shelters must be properly anchored.

Above ground shelters [ edit ] Above ground shelters are used in many areas of the country and by a wide variety of homeowners and businesses. Groundwater tables may make it impossible to install or build a shelter below ground, elderly or people with limited mobility may be unable to access a below ground shelter, or people may have significant phobias pertaining to below ground sheltering. FEMA P-320, Taking Shelter from the Storm: Building a Safe Room for Your Home or Small Business (2014) [ 3 ] and ICC/NSSA Standard for the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters [ 4 ] provide engineering and testing requirements to ensure that above ground shelters manufactured to the published specifications will withstand winds in excess of 250 mph (400 km/h) (EF5 tornado). Above ground shelters may be built of different materials such as steel reinforced concrete [ 5 ] or 1/8" 10 ga. hot rolled steel and may be installed inside a home, garage, or outbuilding, or as a stand-alone unit. These types of shelters are typically prefabricated and installed on a home site or commercial location. Walls can be provided which form a deflector baffle entry so that the path of the storm debris must touch two impact resistant surfaces before it penetrates into the protected area of the occupants.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Wind engineering specialists from Texas Tech University's National Wind Institute have done extensive research that concludes that sheltering in an above ground storm shelter that meets the engineering criteria outlined in FEMA Pub. 320 and 361 and ICC/NSSA Standard for the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters is as safe as seeking below ground shelter during massive EF4 and EF5 tornadoes. TTU engineer Joseph Dannemiller presented the research findings at a TEDxTexasTechUniversity symposium in February 2014.

[ 8 ] Below-ground shelters [ edit ] The below-ground shelters are designed so that the door is flat with the ground and can be made from any one of the materials previously described. This unit is put in a hole deep enough to cover the bottom section, and then the excavated dirt is filled in around the top and packed down. Storm shelters must be designed, built, tested, and installed properly for them to meet any of the US FEMA-320, [ 3 ] FEMA-361, [ 9 ] ICC-500, [ 10 ] NPCTS (National Performance Criteria for Tornado Shelters), or ICC/NSSA Standards.

Geolocation services [ edit ] Many storm shelter manufacturers include geolocation services or incorporate GPS technologies to assist in ensuring recovery from the shelter after a storm or other catastrophic event. In addition, shelter owners may opt to incorporate their own geolocation services in their shelter. Shelter owners can provide their shelter's GPS coordinates to an emergency response center that is linked to a nationwide severe weather notification system. If a storm occurs, the emergency response center places a phone call to the shelter owner and then secondary contacts, lastly contacting local emergency response if unable to contact the shelter owner.

[ 11 ] Additional uses [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Functionally underground bunkers , storm cellars are readily provisioned as bomb shelters and/or fallout shelters (although they are not usually dug as deeply or equipped with filtered ventilation, respectively). Too, since their underground construction makes them steadily cool and dark, storm cellars on farmsteads in the Midwest and elsewhere have traditionally been used as root cellars to store seasonal canned goods for consumption during the winter.

See also [ edit ] Storm door Storm drain Storm room Storm windows Tornado preparedness Hurricane preparedness References [ edit ] ^ Abley, Mac (June 5, 2009).

"Home Security – How Secure is Your Home?" . Home Improvement Hut. Archived from the original on 2010-10-29 . Retrieved June 22, 2010 .

^ "Under Garage Storm Shelter" .

tornadotoughshelters.com . Tornado Tough, LLC . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ a b "FEMA Pub. 320 Taking Shelter From the Storm" (PDF) .

FEMA.gov .

Federal Emergency Management Agency . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 26, 2015 . Retrieved 27 July 2015 .

^ ICC/NSSA Standard for the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters (First ed.). International Code Council, Inc. August 2008.

ISBN 978-1-58001-746-6 .

^ "Debris Test on Safe Sheds, Inc. Storm Shelter Door" .

safesheds.com . Safe Sheds, Inc . Retrieved 27 July 2015 .

^ [1] Structural Design and Coordination of ICC 500 Tornado Shelters | Jessica Simon, P.E. and Andrew Dziak, P.E. | Figure 3 Baffling system example. Published July, 2020 ^ [2] Overview of the ICC 500 ICC/NSSA Standard for the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters | Based on the 2015 International Codes® | Baffled Shelter Entry System | slide 41 of 79 ^ Dannemiller, Joseph.

"How above-ground tornado shelters can be safe: Joseph Dannemiller at TEDxTexasTechUniversity" . TED.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved 27 July 2015 – via YouTube.

^ "FEMA P-361, Safe Rooms for Tornadoes and Hurricanes: Guidance for Community and Residential Safe Rooms" (PDF) (Third ed.). Federal Emergency Management Agency. 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 28, 2016.

^ "Highlights of ICC 500-2014, ICC/NSSA Standard for the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters" (PDF) . Federal Emergency Management Agency. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 4, 2016 – via FEMA.gov.

^ Malagarie, Danielle (August 12, 2017).

"Family shares why it's important to register storm shelters" .

newschannel6now.com . Wichita Falls, Texas: KAUZ . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

Further reading [ edit ] Skousen, Joel M. (1999).

The Secure Home (3rd ed.).

American Fork, Utah : Swift Learning Resources.

ISBN 978-1-56861-055-9 .

OCLC 42930398 .

"National Storm Shelter Association (NSSA)" . Retrieved 28 March 2013 .

v t e Rooms and spaces of a house Shared rooms Bonus room Common room Den Dining room Family room Garret Great room Home cinema Keeping room Kitchen dirty kitchen kitchenette Living room Gynaeceum harem Andron man cave Recreation room billiard room Shrine Study Sunroom Private rooms Bathroom toilet Bedroom closet Bedsit Boudoir Cabinet Nursery Spaces Atrium Balcony Breezeway Conversation pit Cubby-hole Deck Elevator dumbwaiter Entryway / Genkan Fireplace hearth Foyer Hall Hallway Inglenook Lanai Loft Loggia Overhang Patio Porch screened sleeping Ramp Secret passage Stairs / Staircase Terrace Veranda Vestibule Technical , utility and storage Attic Basement Carport Cloakroom Closet Crawl space Electrical room Equipment room Furnace room / Boiler room Garage Janitorial closet Larder Laundry room / Utility room / Storage room Mechanical room / floor Pantry Root cellar Semi-basement Storm cellar / Safe room Studio Wardrobe Wine cellar Wiring closet Workshop Great house areas Antechamber Ballroom Kitchen-related butler's pantry buttery saucery scullery spicery still room Conservatory / Orangery Courtyard Drawing room Great chamber Great hall Library Long gallery Lumber room Parlour Sauna Servants' hall Servants' quarters Smoking room Solar State room Swimming pool Turret Undercroft Other Furniture Hidden room House house plan styles types Multi-family residential Secondary suite Duplex Terraced Detached Semi-detached Townhouse Studio apartment Architectural elements Arch Balconet Baluster Belt course Bressummer Ceiling Chimney Colonnade / Portico Column Cornice / Eaves Dome Door Ell Floor Foundation Gable Gate Portal Lighting Molding Ornament Plumbing Quoins Roof shingles Roof lantern Sill plate Style list Skylight Threshold Transom Vault Wall Window Related Backyard Driveway Front yard Garden roof garden Home Home improvement Home repair Shed Tree house Category: Rooms v t e Man-made and man-related subterranea Natural features Cave Cenote Grotto Sinkhole Civilian features Bank vault Basement Burial vault (tomb) Borehole Catacombs Dungeon Dugout (shelter) Dry well Earth shelter Erdstall Fogou Hypogeum Manhole Rapid transit Rock-cut tomb Root cellar Tunnel Utility vault Underground city Well Wine cave Secret passage Semi-basement Stepwell Storm cellar Smuggling tunnel Ventilation shaft Military features Air raid shelter Bunker Blast shelter Casemate Fallout shelter Missile launch facility (silo) Scallywag bunker Underground base Underground hangar Spider hole Mining , quarrying , and underground construction Rock-cut architecture Subsurface utility engineering Tunnel construction Underground mine ventilation Underground hard-rock mining Underground soft-rock mining Related topics Cave dweller Caves of Maastricht Civil defense Coober Pedy Houston tunnel system Kőbánya cellar system Tunnel warfare Tunnel network Trench warfare Underground living Underground City (Beijing) Underground City, Montreal Mine exploration Mines of Paris Mole people Naples underground geothermal zone Sapping Subterranean London Subterranean Toledo Subterranean warfare Subterranean fiction Earth shelters US Bill Gates' house Forestiere Underground Gardens Underground House Colorado Underground House Las Vegas Underground World Home Earth shelters UK Underhill, Holme Hockerton Housing Project Malator Earth shelters Australia Coober Pedy Lightning Ridge v t e Civil defence History Citizens! During shelling this side of the street is the most dangerous Civil Defence Corps Civil Defence Service Luftschutzpolizei Osoaviakhim Reichsluftschutzbund Swedish Civil Defence Board Technische Nothilfe Tonarigumi Unione Nazionale Protezione Antiaerea Equipment and fortifications Air raid shelter Bunker Blast shelter Bomb shelter Geiger counter Civil defense siren List Emergency population warning Fallout shelter Merkhav Mugan Safe room Storm cellar Strategic reserve Strategic steam reserve Volcano observatory Activities Decontamination Contamination control Human decontamination Mass decontamination First aid Nonviolent resistance Sabotage Search and rescue Surveillance Organizations Algerian Civil Defence Civil Air Defense Bureau (China) Civil Defense Directorate Civil Defence Ireland Civil Protection in Switzerland Committee of Emergency Situations and Civil Defense of Tajikistan Chōnaikai Dubai Civil Defence Directorate General of Civil Defence (Pakistan) Forward Alliance Home Front Command Kuma Academy Lebanese Civil Defense Ministry of Emergency Situations (Russia) Norwegian Civil Defence Office of Civil Defense (Philippines) Palestinian Civil Defence Protezione Civile Republic of Korea Civil Defense Corps Saudi Civil Defense Sécurité Civile Syrian Civil Defence State Emergency Service of Ukraine Singapore Civil Defence Force Worker-Peasant Red Guards By country Finland Germany East Germany Israel Russia Taiwan United States Publications Beneath the City Streets In case of crisis or war Making Europe Unconquerable Interdisciplinary Homeland defense Infrastructure security Total defence Transarmament Other All clear Civil conscription Emergency service List of civil defense ranks Operation Red Dragon Radio silence United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Storm_cellar&oldid=1300821469 " Categories : Agricultural buildings Civil defense Farms Rooms Security Subterranea (geography) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2018 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 15:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Storm cellar 3 languages Add topic

