Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Implications for seafarers 2 Combined tidal stream and current 3 Misconceptions 4 Dodge tides 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Slack tide 5 languages Ελληνικά Français 한국어 Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Slack water ) Short period in a body of tidal water For the TV episode, see Slack Tide (Dexter) .

"Slack water" redirects here. For the Awake episode, see Slack Water .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Slack tide" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Slack tide or slack water is the short period in a body of tidal water when the water is completely unstressed, and there is no movement either way in the tidal stream. It occurs before the direction of the tidal stream reverses.

[ 1 ] Slack water can be estimated using a tidal atlas or the tidal diamond information on a nautical chart .

[ 2 ] The time of slack water, particularly in constricted waters, does not occur at high and low water, [ 3 ] and in certain areas, such as Primera Angostura , the ebb may run for up to three hours after the water level has started to rise. Similarly, the flood may run for up to three hours after the water has started to fall. In 1884, Thornton Lecky illustrated the phenomenon with an inland basin of infinite size, connected to the sea by a narrow mouth. Since the level of the basin is always at mean sea level, the flood in the mouth starts at half tide, and its velocity is at its greatest at the time of high water, with the strongest ebb occurring conversely at low water.

[ 4 ] Implications for seafarers [ edit ] For scuba divers , the absence of a flow means that less effort is required to swim and there is less likelihood of drifting away from a vessel or shore. Slack water following high tide can improve underwater visibility , as the previously incoming tide brings clear water with it. Following low tide, visibility can be reduced as the ebb draws silt, mud, and other particulates with it.  In areas with potentially dangerous tides and currents, it is standard practice for divers to plan a dive at slack times.

For any vessel, a favourable flow will improve the vessel's speed over the bottom for a given speed in the water. Difficult channels are also more safely navigated during slack water, as any flow may set a vessel out of a channel into danger.

Combined tidal stream and current [ edit ] In many locations, in addition to the tidal streams there is also a current causing the tidal stream in the one direction to be stronger than, and last for longer than the stream in the opposite direction six hours later. Variations in the strength of that current will also vary the time when the stream reverses, thus altering the time and duration of slack water. Variations in wind stress also directly affect the height of the tide, and the inverse relationship between the height of the tide and atmospheric pressure is well understood (1 cm change in sea level for each 1 mb change in pressure) while the duration of slack water at a given location is inversely related to the height of the tide at that location.

Misconceptions [ edit ] Slack water is different from the 'stand of the tide', which is when tide levels 'stand' at a maximum or minimum (i.e., at that moment in time, not rising or falling).

[ 5 ] Dodge tides [ edit ] Some localities have unusual tidal characteristics, such as Gulf St Vincent , South Australia, where the amplitudes of the main semi-diurnal tide constituents are almost identical.  At neap tides the semi-diurnal tide is virtually absent, resulting in the phenomenon known as a "dodge tide" [ 6 ] [ 7 ] —a day-long period of slack water—occurring twice a month; this effect is accentuated near the equinoxes when the diurnal component also vanishes, resulting in a period of 2–3 days of slack water.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Stability theory , a main mathematical concept considering forces in equilibrium.

References [ edit ] ^ The American Practical Navigator , Chapter 9:Tides and Tidal Currents , page 139. Accessed 3 September 2011.

^ Sport Diving, British Sub Aqua Club, ISBN 0-09-163831-3 , page 167 ^ The American Practical Navigator , Chapter 9:Tides and Tidal Currents , pp.141-142. Accessed 19 December 2013.

^ Squire Thornton Stratford Lecky; William Allingham (1918).

Wrinkles in Practical Navigation . G. Philip & son. p.

285 .

^ Flood Rescue Boat Operation - Australian Emergency Manual (Natural Disaster Organization), Chapter 12. Accessed 12 February 2020.

^ Australian Government > Bureau of Meteorology > National Tidal Unit Glossary Accessed 13 March 2015.

^ Australian Government > Bureau of Meteorology > Dodge tide Accessed 13 March 2015.

^ Bye, J. A. T. (1976): Physical oceanography of Gulf St Vincent and Investigator Strait. In: Twidale, C. R.

, Tyler, M. J. & Webb, B. P. (Eds.), Natural history of the Adelaide Region . Royal Society of SA Inc., Adelaide.

^ Bye, J.A.T. & Kämpf, J. (2008): Physical oceanography.

In: Shepherd, S.A., Bryars, S., Kirkegaard, I.R., Harbison, P. & Jennings, J. T. (Eds.): Natural history of Gulf St Vincent . Royal Society of South Australia Inc., Adelaide.

^ The American Practical Navigator , Chapter 9:Tides and Tidal Currents , pages 134-5. Accessed 3 September 2011.

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Slack_tide&oldid=1293298581 " Categories : Tides Underwater diving environment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2011 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 22:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Slack tide 5 languages Add topic

