Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tools and technologies 2 Staffing areas and notable past and present scientists 3 Organization of research—laboratories and programs 4 Funding and management 5 NCAR directors 6 Visiting Toggle Visiting subsection 6.1 Scientific visitors 6.2 Public tours 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents National Center for Atmospheric Research 16 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Македонски 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 39°58′41″N 105°16′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 39.97815°N 105.27492°W ﻿ / 39.97815; -105.27492 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US federally funded research and development center "NCAR" redirects here; not to be confused with Norwegian Centre Against Racism .

NCAR National Center for Atmospheric Research NCAR Mesa Laboratory , Boulder, Colorado Established 1960 Director Everette Joseph [ 1 ] Staff Nearly 1,400 [ 2 ] Location Boulder , Colorado , United States 39°58′41″N 105°16′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 39.97815°N 105.27492°W ﻿ / 39.97815; -105.27492 Website ncar .ucar .edu The US National Center for Atmospheric Research ( NCAR / ˈ ɛ n k ɑːr / ) [ 3 ] is a US federally funded research and development center (FFRDC) managed by the nonprofit University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) and funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF).

[ 4 ] NCAR has multiple facilities, including the I. M. Pei -designed Mesa Laboratory headquarters in Boulder, Colorado . Studies include meteorology , climate science , atmospheric chemistry , solar-terrestrial interactions, environmental and societal impacts.

Tools and technologies [ edit ] NSF/NCAR Gulfstream V research aircraft.

NCAR was instrumental in developing lidar , light radar, now a key archaeological tool, as well as providing a broad array of tools and technologies to the scientific community for studying Earth's atmosphere , including, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Specialized instruments to measure atmospheric processes Research aircraft High-performance computing and cyberinfrastructure, including supercomputers Mauna Loa Solar Observatory Cooperative field campaigns Atmospheric models of weather, chemical, solar, and climate processes, including cooperatively developed models such as: Community Earth System Model (CESM) Weather Research and Forecasting model (WRF) Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM) Technology transfer to support societal needs Data sets, data services, and other resources NCAR Command Language (NCL), a programming language designed for use with climate and model data [ 7 ] Staffing areas and notable past and present scientists [ edit ] The center is staffed by scientists, engineers, technicians, and support personnel.

[ 4 ] Key research areas include: [ 8 ] Climate (Earth's past, present, and future climate; the greenhouse effect , global warming , and climate change; El Niño, La Niña, and other large-scale atmospheric patterns; drought, wildfires) Meteorology / Weather (short-term forecasts; weather forecasting and predictability; weather's effect on climate; hurricanes, tornadoes, and other severe storms; physical processes) Environmental and societal impacts (impacts of climate change on the natural and managed environment; interactions of weather, climate, and society; weather hazard systems for aviation and ground transportation; national security) Pollution and air chemistry (air pollution on local, regional, and global scales; air chemistry and climate; chemical evolution and transport in the atmosphere) The Sun and space weather (the structure of the Sun, from its interior to sunspots to the solar corona; the solar cycle; the Sun's effect on Earth's weather and climate; space weather) Other components of the Earth system (the effects on weather and climate of interactions with: the oceans and other components of Earth's water cycle , including sea ice, glaciers, and the rest  of the cryosphere; forests, agriculture, urbanization and other types of land use) Notable scientists on the current staff at the center include Tom Wigley , Kevin Trenberth , Clara Deser , and Caspar Ammann, [ 9 ] [ better source needed ] and in past have included Paul Crutzen (Nobel Prize in chemistry, 1995); Paul Julian , who with colleague Roland Madden discovered the Madden–Julian oscillation ; Stephen Schneider . Greg Holland initiated the multiscale modeling project "Predicting the Earth System Across Scales".

[ 10 ] Organization of research—laboratories and programs [ edit ] NCAR is currently organized into seven laboratories and two programs: [ 11 ] Laboratories Atmospheric Chemistry Observations and Modeling laboratory (ACOM) Climate and Global Dynamics laboratory (CGD) Computational & Information Systems Laboratory (CISL)—CISL was formerly known as the Scientific Computing Division (SCD).  CISL manages and operates NCAR's supercomputers, mass storage system, networking, and other computing and cyberinfrastructure services. The Institute for Mathematics Applied to Geosciences (IMAGe) is a research division within CISL.

[ 11 ] Earth Observing Laboratory (EOL)—EOL was formerly known as the Atmospheric Technology Division (ATD). EOL manages and operates NCAR's lower atmosphere observing systems, including ground-based instrumentation and two research aircraft, on behalf of the NSF.

High Altitude Observatory (HAO)—The oldest part of NCAR, HAO is NCAR's solar-terrestrial physics laboratory. Research foci are the Sun and the Earth's upper atmosphere. HAO operates the Mauna Loa Solar Observatory (MLSO).

Mesoscale and Microscale Meteorology laboratory (MMM) Research Applications Laboratory (RAL) Programs Advanced Study Program (ASP) Integrated Science Program (ISP) NCAR's service to the universities and larger geosciences community is reinforced by the offerings of UCAR's community programs .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Funding and management [ edit ] NCAR is managed by the nonprofit UCAR and is one of the NSF 's Federally Funded Research and Development Centers , with approximately 95% of its funding coming from the federal government. However, it is not a federal agency and its employees are not part of the federal personnel system.

[ 3 ] NCAR employs about 761 staff. Its annual expenditures in fiscal year 2015 were $167.8 million.

[ 3 ] [ 14 ] NCAR directors [ edit ] The founding director of NCAR was Walter Orr Roberts .

[ 15 ] The current director is Everette Joseph.

[ 16 ] [ 4 ] NCAR Director Dates in office Walter Orr Roberts 1960–1968 John W. Firor 1968–1974 Francis P. Bretherton 1974–1980 Wilmot N. Hess 1980–1986 Richard A. Anthes 1986–1988 Robert Serafin 1989–2000 Timothy L. Killeen 2000–2008 Eric J. Barron 2008–2010 Roger M. Wakimoto 2010–2013 Maura Hagan 2013 (interim director) James W. Hurrell 2013–2018 Everette Joseph 2019–present Visiting [ edit ] Scientific visitors [ edit ] NCAR has many opportunities for scientific visits to the facilities for workshops, colloquia, and collaboration by colleagues in academia, government labs, and the private sector.

[ 17 ] Many NCAR staff also visit colleagues at universities and labs and serve as adjunct or visiting faculty.

[ 13 ] [ 17 ] Public tours [ edit ] The Visitor Center at the Mesa Laboratory is open to the public daily at no charge. Guided tours and self-guided tablet tours include video and audio on one of the first supercomputers built by Seymour Cray as well as NCAR's modern supercomputer fleet, many hands-on educational exhibits demonstrating weather phenomena and the changes in Earth's climate brought on by global warming, and a scenic outdoor weather trail.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ "Leadership | University Corporation for Atmospheric Research" .

www.ucar.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-26 .

^ "Staff | University Corporation for Atmospheric Research" .

www.ucar.edu . Retrieved 2024-04-26 .

^ a b c Quick Facts about NCAR & UCAR ^ a b c "New Director of the U.S. National Center for Atmospheric Research Rose Through the Ranks" . July 31, 2013.

^ NCAR Research & Resources ^ National Center for Atmospheric Research (NSF Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences) ^ "CISL's NCAR Command Language (NCL)" .

UCAR .

^ Atmospheric & Earth System Research: NCAR research topics , 2008, accessed 2010-06-22.

Archived 2010-07-25 at the Wayback Machine ^ Pearce, Fred , The Climate Files: The Battle for the Truth about Global Warming , (2010) Guardian Books , ISBN 978-0-85265-229-9 , p. XVIII.

^ M. Gad-el-Hak Large Scale Disasters Prediction Control and Mitigation 2008 "was initiated by Greg Holland" ^ a b "NCAR's Clickable Organization Chart" . Archived from the original on 2015-01-10 . Retrieved 2013-03-14 .

^ "UCAR Community Programs" . Archived from the original on 2014-12-08 . Retrieved 2013-03-14 .

^ a b UCAR Highlights ^ "NCAR Annual Report" . Archived from the original on 2018-06-19 . Retrieved 2016-06-14 .

^ NCAR Directors ^ Hosansky, David (December 7, 2018).

"Everette Joseph is named NCAR director" .

NCAR & UCAR News . Retrieved 2019-10-16 .

^ a b Visitor Programs – Opportunities for Scientific Visitors & Students External links [ edit ] Official website Public tours & exhibits , at the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research High-end Computing at NCAR Archived 2017-12-29 at the Wayback Machine , at the Computational and Information Systems Laboratory NCAR Archives NCAR Research Data Archive (RDA) OpenSky Repository v t e Atmospheric, oceanographic, cryospheric, and climate models Model types Atmospheric model Oceanographic model Cryospheric model Climate model Numerical weather prediction Tropical cyclone forecast model Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chemical transport model Upper-atmospheric models Ensemble forecasting Model output statistics Meteorological reanalysis Parametrization Specific models Climate IGCM HadCM3 HadGEM1 GFDL CM2.X CGCM CCSM CESM CFSv2 ECHAM Global weather IFS (ECMWF) FIM GEM / GDPS GFS MPAS NAEFS NAVGEM UM JMA-GSM GME / ICON ARPEGE Regional and mesoscale atmospheric NAM RR / RAP RAMS WRF RAQMS HIRLAM LAPS RPM HWRF RGEM HRDPS Regional and mesoscale oceanographic HyCOM ROMS POM MOM FVCOM MITgcm FESOM ADCIRC Atmospheric dispersion ADMS AERMOD ATSTEP AUSTAL2000 CALPUFF DISPERSION21 ISC3 MEMO MERCURE NAME OSPM PUFF-PLUME RIMPUFF SAFE AIR SILAM Chemical transport CLaMS MOZART GEOS-Chem CHIMERE Land surface parametrization JULES CLASS ISBA Cryospheric models CICE Discontinued Eta LFM MM5 NGM NOGAPS RUC Mathematical model Statistical model Scientific modelling Computer simulation Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Norway Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Portal : United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Center_for_Atmospheric_Research&oldid=1304325083 " Categories : Air pollution organizations Meteorology and climate education Meteorological organizations based in the United States Meteorological research institutes Federally Funded Research and Development Centers Supercomputer sites Earth science research institutes Research institutes in Colorado Companies based in Boulder, Colorado I. M. Pei buildings Environmental research institutes Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from June 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 10:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Center for Atmospheric Research 16 languages Add topic

