Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Internationalist era 2 Independence from Soviet Union 3 Rehabilitation of cultural figures 4 Ceaușescu's cultural revolution 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents National communism in Romania 7 languages Català Español 한국어 Română Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia State ideology of Romania, 1960s to 1989 This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "National communism in Romania" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2016 ) Part of a series on the Socialist Republic of Romania Organizations Communist Party Securitate Army Union of Communist Youth Great National Assembly State Council Patriotic Guards National Council of Women Pioneers Ștefan Gheorghiu Academy Romanian Orthodox Church Scînteia People's Democratic Front Front of Socialist Unity and Democracy Comturist Leaders Constantin Ion Parhon Petru Groza Ana Pauker Ion Gheorghe Maurer Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Gheorghe Apostol Chivu Stoica Nicolae Ceaușescu Manea Mănescu Ilie Verdeț Elena Ceaușescu Ideology Dacianism July Theses Neo-Stalinism National communism Ceaușescu's cult of personality Policies Collectivization Nationalization Literacy campaigns Five-Year Plans De-Stalinization Decree 770 Systematization ( Rural ) 1980s austerity Culture Daciad Cîntarea României Cenaclul Flacăra Obsessive decade Socialist realism Emblem Flag Repression Censorship Danube–Black Sea Canal Re-education Bărăgan deportations Tămădău affair Pitești Prison Sighet Prison Protests and resistance 1940s–1950s resistance Bucharest student movement of 1956 Dissent under Nicolae Ceaușescu Jiu Valley miners' strike of 1977 SLOMR Brașov rebellion Letter of the Six Romanian revolution Trial and execution of the Ceaușescus Relationship with the USSR Soviet occupation (1944–1958) SovRom De-satellization Relations with other states China Italy North Korea Soviet Union Yugoslavia v t e National communism in Romania is a term referring to a form of nationalism promoted in the Socialist Republic of Romania between the early 1960s and 1989; the term itself was not used by the Communist regime. Having its origins in Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej 's political emancipation from the Soviet Union , it was greatly developed by Nicolae Ceaușescu , who began in 1971, through his July Theses manifesto, a national cultural revolution . Part of the national mythology was Nicolae Ceaușescu's cult of personality and the idealization of Romanian history , known in Romanian historiography as protochronism .

This nationalistic ideology was built upon a mixture of both Marxist–Leninist principles and doctrines of Romanian nationalism .

[ 1 ] The driving force behind the ideology of national communism was the belief that Romanians are an isolated " Latin island" in Eastern Europe who have endlessly and unanimously fought off external forces throughout two thousand years to achieve unity and independence.

[ 1 ] Internationalist era [ edit ] Before World War II , the historical ideology was based on Romanian nationalism and the main dispute in Romanian society was between people who promoted indigenous traditions and those who wanted a Western values-based society.

[ 2 ] Marxists played only a minor role in Romanian culture and, according to historiographer Lucian Boia , the Romanian Left was typically of rural traditional pre-capitalist persuasion, rather than in support of a post-capitalist workers' state as elsewhere in Europe.

[ 2 ] In this context, the ideological change in the Romanian society after the Communists came to power in Romania appeared more radical.

[ 3 ] In the space of a few years, the history of Romania had been rewritten: while the pre-war history had been written from a nationalist point of view, the new history was written in an internationalist spirit.

[ 4 ] For instance, in Mihail Roller 's "History of Romania", the 1859 unification of Moldavia and Wallachia was seen as the will of the bourgeois and boyars, who benefited from it, the decision being taken without the consideration of the will of the people.

[ 4 ] The Union of Bessarabia with Romania was seen as being an "imperialist intervention against the Socialist Revolution in Russia" and the Union of Transylvania with Romania was considered an occupation.

[ 4 ] A major change occurred regarding the relationship of the Romanians with the Western world . Before the war, the national mythology considered Romanians "An island of Latinity in a Slavic sea". Roller's history emphasized the cohabitation of Romanians and Slavs in the Middle Ages and discussed the connections between the Slavs and Romanians, ending with the "liberation of Romania by the glorious Soviet Army".

[ 4 ] Independence from Soviet Union [ edit ] Starting with late 1950s, Romanian nationalism gradually became part of the official ideology, in parallel with a diminution of Slavic, Russian, and Soviet importance within Romanian history.

[ 5 ] This process culminated with the "declaration of independence" of April 1964, when it abandoned internationalism.

[ 5 ] Rehabilitation of cultural figures [ edit ] The Communist regime integrated the whole Romanian heritage into their national ideology. For instance, right-wing historian Nicolae Iorga was rehabilitated for being "anti-fascist" (having been assassinated by the Iron Guard ), his works being republished with the exception of those that directly argued against communism.

Eugen Lovinescu 's History of Modern Romanian Civilization was republished in an abridged version and the introduction said Lovinescu's work was not anti-Marxist polemic and that it had common points with historical materialism .

[ 6 ] Even fascist Conducător Ion Antonescu was semi-rehabilitated, getting a much gentler treatment than previously, in line with the nationalism and the façade of anti-Sovietism.

[ 7 ] This was part of a strategy of inserting "great leaders" throughout the Romanian history narrative, to serve Ceaușescu's cult of personality, [ 8 ] Antonescu being seen as a "misunderstood patriot" rather than a traitor.

[ 9 ] This process began with Marin Preda 's novel Delirul (1975), continuing with Aurică Simion 's Preliminarii politico-diplomatice ale insurecției române din august 1944 (1979), before becoming part of the official ideology in Ilie Ceaușescu 's Istoria militară a poporului român , vol 6 (1989).

[ 10 ] Ceaușescu's cultural revolution [ edit ] Main article: July Theses Beginning with the 1960s, the Romanian government began to permit greater liberties and treat its citizens better, including an amnesty of political prisoners and allowing more freedom of expression, such as in the nuances that were appropriate in literature. This all ended with the July Theses of 1971, which ended the liberalisation and openness, beginning a trend that accentuated the totalitarianism and isolated Romania from the rest of the world.

[ 11 ] This was known as Ceaușism .

[ 12 ] Nationalism became ubiquitous and the most important political argument. Romanians were depicted as being united throughout their history around the Leader.

[ 11 ] 1980 Romanian stamp, labeled "2050 years from the creation of the first Dacian state, centralised and independent under the rule of Burebista" Historical research began focusing on the ancient era, especially the Dacian (pre-Roman) era. The "Institute of History of the Party", specialised in writing monographs on trade unionists, labour struggle and working class heroes, began studying the Dacians, politicising ancient history. In 1980, the Romanian government celebrated the 2050th anniversary of the founding of the unitary and centralised state under Burebista , most notably in the epic film Burebista .

[ 7 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Petrescu, Cristina.

"Rethinking National Identity after National-Communism? The case of Romania" .

www.eurhistxx.de . Archived from the original on 2014-03-05 . Retrieved 2014-04-03 .

^ a b Boia 2001 , p. 70.

^ Boia 2001 , p. 71.

^ a b c d Boia 2001 , p. 72.

^ a b Boia 2001 , p. 73.

^ Boia 2001 , p. 76.

^ a b Boia 2001 , p. 78.

^ Boia 2001 , p. 224.

^ Verdery 1991 , p. 352.

^ Boia 2001 , p. 245.

^ a b Boia 2001 , p. 77.

^ https://moldova.europalibera.org/a/31187489.html [ bare URL ] References [ edit ] Verdery, Katherine (1991).

National Ideology Under Socialism: Identity and Cultural Politics in Ceauşescu's Romania . Berkeley: University of California Press .

ISBN 0-520-20358-5 .

Boia, Lucian (2001).

History and Myth in Romanian Consciousness . Budapest: Central European University Press .

ISBN 963-9116-96-3 .

v t e Romanian nationalism Ideology Dacianism Dacology Legionarism Neo-Legionarism National communism Poporanism Protochronism Events Revolt of Horea, Cloșca and Crișan Moldavian Revolution of 1848 Wallachian Revolution of 1848 Great National Assembly of Alba Iulia Bridge of Flowers Unifications Unification of Moldavia and Wallachia Union of Bessarabia with Romania Union of Bukovina with Romania Union of Transylvania with Romania Great Union Greater Romania Figures Vlad the Impaler Stephen the Great Michael the Brave Alexandru Ioan Cuza Carol I of Romania Ferdinand I of Romania Political parties Current Greater Romania Party New Generation Party Noua Dreaptă People's Movement Party National Identity Bloc in Europe Alliance for the Union of Romanians Romanian Nationhood Party Social Democratic Party Romanian Socialist Party (2003) National Liberal Party Alliance for the Homeland Romanian Village Party S.O.S. Romania Party of Young People Former Romanian National Party Democratic Nationalist Party Bessarabian Peasants' Party Democratic Union Party National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement National Romanian Fascio National Liberal Party (Romania, 1875) Romanian Communist Party National Fascist Movement National-Christian Defense League Iron Guard National Liberal Party-Brătianu National Socialist Party Crusade of Romanianism Romanian Front Romanian National Unity Party Socialist Party of Labour Everything For the Country Party People's Party – Dan Diaconescu United Romania Party Organizations ASTRA Cenaclul Flacăra Cîntarea României Junimea Popular culture Songs " Cântă cucu-n Bucovina " " Dac-am plecat, Ardealule, din tine " " Deșteaptă-te, române!

" " Doamne, ocrotește-i pe români " " Drum bun " " Hora Unirii " " Pe-al nostru steag e scris Unire " " Pui de lei " " Treceți, batalioane române, Carpații " " Trei culori " Phrases " Bessarabia, Romanian land " Nationalists Ion Antonescu Nicolae Ceaușescu Corneliu Zelea Codreanu Mihai Eminescu Doina Nicolae Iorga Nicolae Petrescu-Comnen Horia Sima Corneliu Vadim Tudor Policies Aromanian question Re-latinization of Romanian Romanianization Related topics Anti-Romanian sentiment Bessarabian question Moldovenism Unification of Moldova and Romania v t e National communism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_communism_in_Romania&oldid=1305698937 " Categories : 1960s establishments in Romania 1989 disestablishments in Romania Communism in Romania Left-wing nationalism National communism Romanian Communist Party Romanian nationalism Socialist Republic of Romania State ideologies Totalitarian ideologies Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 15:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National communism in Romania 7 languages Add topic

