Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works Toggle Works subsection 1.1 Published editions 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Istakhri 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча مازِرونی 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский سنڌي Svenska தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geographer of Abbasid period For places in Iran, see Estakhri, Iran .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Istakhri" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Abū Ishāk al-Fārisī al-Iṣṭakhrī Born Istakhr [ 1 ] Died After 952 [ 1 ] Baghdad [ 1 ] Academic background Influences Al-Balkhi Academic work Era Islamic Golden Age School or tradition Balkhi school Main interests Islamic geography Istakhri's map, from the Book of Roads and Kingdoms Map of Fars A map of the Persian Gulf by Istakhri Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Farisi al-Istakhri ( آبو إسحاق إبراهيم بن محمد الفارسي الإصطخري ) (also Estakhri , Persian : استخری , i.e. from the Iranian city of Istakhr , b. – d. 346 AH/AD 957) [ 2 ] was a 10th-century travel author and Islamic geographer who wrote valuable accounts in Arabic of the many Muslim territories he visited during the Abbasid era of the Islamic Golden Age . There is no consensus regarding his origin. Some sources describe him as Persian , [ 1 ] while others state he was Arab .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Encyclopedia Iranica states: "Biographical data are very meager. From his nesbas (attributive names) he appears to have been a native of Eṣṭaḵr in Fārs, but it is not known whether he was Persian".

[ 5 ] Istakhri's account of windmills is the earliest known. Istakhri met the celebrated traveller-geographer Ibn Hawqal , while travelling, and Ibn Hawqal incorporated the work of Istakhri in his book Kitab al-Surat al-Ard .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Works [ edit ] Istakhri's two surviving works are: Masālik al-Mamālik ( مسالك الممالك , Routes of the Realms ), or Kitab al-masalik wa-l-mamalik (كتاب المسالك والممالك Book of Roads and Kingdoms ), a contribution to the " Book of Roads and Kingdoms " tradition. This combines maps with descriptive text to describe the geography of Iran and surrounding kingdoms. It is based mainly on lists of stations of postal routes, and seems intended to help commit those lists to memory rather than to guide travellers through the territory. There is no consistency between the map projections . An illuminated manuscript (MS Or. 3101) dated AH 589 (AD 1193) is held by Leiden University Libraries and is digitally available.

[ 6 ] Another illuminated manuscript dated AH 706 (AD 1306–07) now resides in the Khalili Collection of Islamic Art . It contains many maps, though some mentioned in the text are missing.

[ 7 ] Ṣuwar al-ʿAqālīm ( صور الاقاليم , Pictures of the Regions ).

Published editions [ edit ] An 8-volume edition of works by medieval Arab geographers, edited by the Dutch orientalist Michael Jan de Goeje in a series titled Bibliotheca geographorum Arabicorum was published by Brill, Lugduni-Batavora (Leiden) in the 1870s.  An edition of Istakhri's MS text was produced for the first volume under the Latin title Viae Regnorum descriptio ditionis Moslemicae – "Description of Roads of the Kingdoms in Muslim territories". In 1927, the editor Theodore Noldeke produced a second edition.

In 1845, the German orientalist A. D. Mordtmann published a translation in Hamburg with the title Das Buch der Länder von Schech Ebu Ishak el Farsi el Isztachri , with a foreword by C. Ritter. (Schriften der Akademie von Ham Bd. 1, Abth. 2).

See also [ edit ] Ibn Hawqal Al-Maqdisi Ibn al-Faqih Qudama ibn Ja'far Ibn Khordadbeh Ibn Rustah Al-Ya'qubi Al-Masudi List of Iranian scientists Surat Al-Ard References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Shboul, Ahmad M. H. (1991).

"Iṣṭakhrī, al-" . In Kazhdan, Alexander (ed.).

The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-504652-8 .

^ Mojtahed-Zadeh, Pirous. "The Persian Gulf in the Geographical Views of the Ancient World" In Cartographie Historique du Golfe Persique . Edited by M. Taleghani, D. Silva Couto, & J.-L. Bacque-Grammont. Louvain, Belgium: Diffusion, 2006. 17.

^ van Donzel, E.J., ed. (1994).

Islamic Desk Reference (compiled from the Encyclopedia of Islam) . Brill. p.

177 .

ISBN 978-9004097384 .

^ a b Miquel, André (1954–2005).

"Iṣṭakhrī, Abū Isḥāḳ Ibrāhīm" . In Gibb, H. A. R.; Kramers, J. H.; Lévi-Provençal, E.; Schacht, J. (eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam (2nd ed.). Leiden: Brill.

IV:222b-223b.

^ a b Bolshakov, O. G. (1998).

" Eṣṭaḵrī, Abū Esḥāq Ebrāhīm " . In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.).

Encyclopædia Iranica . New York: Encyclopædia Iranica Foundation, Inc.

VIII(6):646-647 (I have used the updated online version).

^ "Digital version of An abridgement of Kitāb al-masālik wa-al-mamālik by Abū Isḥāq Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad al-Iṣṭaḵrī – Or. 3101" .

Leiden University Libraries . Retrieved 2024-04-10 .

^ Rogers, J. M.

(2008).

The arts of Islam : treasures from the Nasser D. Khalili collection (Revised and expanded ed.). Abu Dhabi: Tourism Development & Investment Company (TDIC). p. 167.

OCLC 455121277 .

Sources [ edit ] Bolshakov, O. G. (1998). "EṢṬAḴRĪ, ABŪ ESḤĀQ EBRĀHĪM".

Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. VIII, Fasc. 6 . pp.

646– 647.

Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (1989). "al-Masālik wa'l-Mamālik".

The Encyclopedia of Islam , Volume 6 . Leiden: E. J. Brill . pp.

639 - 640 .

de Goeje, M.J., ed. (1927).

Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabicorum (1927), vol 1: Viae Regnorum descriptio ditionis Moslemicae auctore Abu Ishák al-Fárisí al-Istakhrí (in Arabic). Leden: E. J. Brill.

Ouseley, William, ed. (1800).

The oriental geography of Ebn Haukal, an Arabian traveller of the tenth century . London.

– Note: in fact, it is a work by Istakhri Al-Istakhri, Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Muhammad (1927), Goeje , M. J. de; Noldeke , Theodore (eds.), "Viae Regnorum descriptio ditionis Moslemicae auctore Abū Ishāk al-Fārisi al-Istakhri" , Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabicorum (in Arabic and Latin), 1 (2 ed.), Lugdunum Batavorum ( Leiden ): Brill publishers Ibn Haukal (1873), Goeje , M. J. de (ed.), "Viae et regna, descriptio ditionis moslemicae auctore Abu'l-Kasim Ibn Haukal" , Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabicorum (in Arabic and Latin), 2 , Lugdunum Batavorum ( Leiden ): Brill publishers Goeje , M. J. de, ed. (1870), "Indices, glossarium et addenda et emendanda ad Part I-III" , Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabicorum (in Arabic and Latin), 4 , Lugdunum Batavorum ( Leiden ): Brill Das Buch der Länder von Schech Ebu Ishak el Farsi el Isztachri , translated by Mordtmann , Andreas David, Frankfurt/M.: Rauhen Hauses in Horn, 1995 [1845] External links [ edit ] Media related to Estakhri at Wikimedia Commons World Map of al-Istakhri Archived 2011-05-14 at the Wayback Machine v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Istakhri&oldid=1269104020 " Categories : 950s deaths 10th-century Iranian writers Balkhi school Istakhr 10th-century Iranian geographers People associated with wind power Scholars under the Buyid dynasty Travel writers of the medieval Islamic world Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2011 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Persian-language text CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Year of birth unknown Year of death uncertain This page was last edited on 13 January 2025, at 01:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Istakhri 27 languages Add topic

