Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Goals and tactics 3 Reception 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Project Esther 2 languages العربية Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American conservative project against pro-Palestinian protests and alleged antisemitism Project Esther Established October 7, 2024 ; 10 months ago ( 2024-10-07 ) Location Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

Services Opposition to pro-Palestinian protests and antisemitism Leader Victoria Coates Publication Project Esther: A National Strategy to Combat Antisemitism (2024) Parent organization The Heritage Foundation Victoria Coates of the Heritage Foundation leads Project Esther.

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Project Esther is a project of The Heritage Foundation , a conservative think tank based in Washington, D.C.

, that aims to suppress pro-Palestinian protests and what it classifies as antisemitism. The effort has received support from several evangelical Christian organizations but no major Jewish ones.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] According to The New York Times , Slate , Haaretz , The Forward , and Jewish Insider , Project Esther does not address right-wing antisemitism.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] It has also been criticized for incorporating antisemitic tropes into its rhetoric.

[ 6 ] Project Esther broadly labels criticism of Israel as terrorism and calls for targeting universities, students, and American progressive politics and politicians.

[ 2 ] Politico described Project Esther as "a lesser-known blueprint from the same creators of Project 2025 ." [ 7 ] In May 2025, The New York Times found that the second Trump administration had called for or acted upon more than half of Project Esther's proposals.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The Heritage Foundation launched Project Esther in October 2024; it is named after the biblical figure Esther , [ 2 ] and incorrectly claims Esther appears in the Torah .

[ 8 ] The plan was drafted by Victoria Coates , Robert Greenway, and Daniel Flesch following the October 7 Hamas-led attack on Israel .

[ 2 ] The project describes pro- Palestinian groups as part of a " Hamas Support Network", [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and aims to dismantle the pro-Palestinian movement in the U.S., its support at schools and universities, progressive organizations, and in Congress by labeling them as "effectively a terrorist support network".

[ 2 ] [ 11 ] According to The New York Times , the plan built on efforts from summer 2024 to create a national strategy to "convince the public to perceive the pro-Palestinian movement in the United States as part of a global 'Hamas Support Network' that 'poses a threat not simply to American Jewry, but to America itself.'" [ 2 ] The project reportedly struggled to find Jewish organizations with which to partner, while sidelining those that do partner with it.

[ 1 ] [ 12 ] Several Jewish and Christian Zionist organizations told The New York Times that they did not want to associate with the plan because its failure to focus on right-wing antisemitism was too partisan.

[ 2 ] Goals and tactics [ edit ] As part of its plans, Project Esther said it would wait until a friendly presidential administration, after which "We will organize rapidly, take immediate action to 'stop the bleeding,' and achieve all objectives within two years." A New York Times report found that many of the second Trump administration 's actions called for and closely matched more than half of Project Esther's proposals. In an interview with The Times , Project Esther's architects said that while there were "clear parallels" between its proposals and Trump administration actions, Heritage officials did not know whether the White House had used Project Esther as a guide.

[ 2 ] In January 2025, a report by The Forward revealed a leaked pitch deck the Heritage Foundation sent to Project Esther donors that included a plan to identify and target Wikipedia editors the group said were "abusing their position" by publishing allegedly antisemitic content.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The New York Times described Project Esther's goal as "branding a broad range of critics of Israel as 'effectively a terrorist support network,' so that they could be deported, defunded, sued, fired, expelled, ostracized and otherwise excluded from what it considered 'open society.'" It highlighted attempts to remove curriculum viewed as "Hamas support" from schools and universities, remove "supporting faculty", purge social media of alleged antisemitic content, rescind institutions' public funding, and revoke visas for and deport those who engaged in pro-Palestinian advocacy .

[ 2 ] Project Esther accuses "America's Jewish community" of "complacency". Its sole Jewish co-chair, Ellie Cohanim , has criticized other Jewish groups combating antisemitism.

[ 2 ] Project Esther has sought to identify those who attend pro-Palestinian protests as engaging in "material support" for terrorism, and targeted groups such as Jewish Voice for Peace and Students for Justice in Palestine . Project Esther's pitch materials were first reported on by The Forward , which highlighted its goals as reforming academia by defunding institutions, denying some pro-Palestinian groups access to campuses, and removing faculty. It also supported lawfare through filing civil lawsuits and identifying foreign students for deportation, and planned to enlist local state and federal law enforcement to "generate uncomfortable conditions" to dissuade groups from protesting.

[ 2 ] The group has targeted eight "masterminds"— George Soros , Alex Soros , JB Pritzker , Angela Davis , Manolo de los Santos, Vijay Prashad , Neville Singham , and Jodie Evans —who it believes are at the center of progressive politics . The Soros family is the subject of a number of longstanding antisemitic conspiracy theories that match the language used by Project Esther.

[ 5 ] The New York Times reported its pitch materials to potential donors include an illustration of a pyramid of "progressive elites" with Soros and Pritzker at the top. The presentation also targeted the Tides Foundation and the Rockefeller Brothers Fund as part of an antisemitism "ecosystem", along with "aligned" politicians Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren .

[ 2 ] According to Mondoweiss , the project is intended not to combat antisemitism, but to combat political activism , particularly by the left.

[ 15 ] According to The New York Times , Slate , Haaretz , The Forward , and Jewish Insider , Project Esther does not address right-wing antisemitism.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] According to Slate , Project Esther does not acknowledge or address right-wing antisemitism or white supremacy .

[ 3 ] According to The Forward , "Project Esther focuses exclusively on left-wing critics of Israel, ignoring the antisemitism problems from white supremacists and other far-right groups." [ 5 ] Haaretz has also reported that Project Esther does not address right-wing antisemitism.

[ 4 ] When asked by Jewish Insider to explain why the effort did not include right-wing antisemitism, James Carafano , the head of Heritage's antisemitism operations, said "white supremacists are not my problem because white supremacists are not part of being conservative".

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] According to The New York Times , Project Esther head Victoria Coates "acknowledged that antisemitism was also a problem on the right", adding that the progressive groups targeted by the Project are a threat to American society, not just to Israel.

[ 2 ] The Times of Israel has described Project Esther's aim as a "government crackdown on anti-Israel groups once Donald Trump returns to the White House".

[ 16 ] According to Religion Dispatches and The New York Times , Project Esther is closely tied to Christian Zionism and the New Apostolic Reformation .

[ 2 ] [ 17 ] The New York Times reported that a number of evangelical Christian groups involved in Project Esther had aligned themselves with conservatives in Israel who believe the Bible gives Israel the right to control occupied Palestinian territories , and that some also believe supporting Israel will hasten the end times or advance Christianity's global influence.

[ 2 ] Reception [ edit ] Inside Philanthropy wrote, "The Project Esther document is repetitive and the prose is overwrought, but given the Heritage Foundation's potential influence in a second Trump administration, it's worth taking seriously." [ 18 ] The Project has received support primarily from evangelical Christian organizations.

[ 19 ] Supporting organizations include the Family Research Council , Faith and Freedom Coalition , Coalition for Jewish Values , and the National Committee for Religious Freedom.

[ 1 ] Critics argue that Project Esther sometimes engages in weaponization of antisemitism . For example, The New York Times reported that Project Esther has been criticized for "exploiting real concerns about antisemitism" to advance "radically reshaping higher education and crushing progressive movements more generally".

[ 2 ] Jonathan Jacoby , the national director of the Nexus Project , criticized Esther for making antisemitism "no longer about ideology or politics; it's about terrorism and threats to American national security." [ 2 ] Project Esther has been criticized for incorporating antisemitic tropes into its rhetoric, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and for not addressing right-wing antisemitism.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The journalist Michelle Goldberg has criticized Esther for accusing progressive Jews of antisemitism .

[ 20 ] According to Baptist News Global , "Project Esther's own rhetoric about battling powerful Jewish 'masterminds' reinforces centuries-old conspiracy theories about Jews who have too much power and influence." [ 6 ] An open letter from three dozen former members of Jewish groups and former Anti-Defamation League national chair Robert Sugarman criticized Project Esther, saying, "a range of actors are using a purported concern about Jewish safety as a cudgel to weaken higher education, due process, checks and balances, freedom of speech and the press" and calling on Jewish leaders and institutions "to resist the exploitation of Jewish fears and publicly join with other organizations that are battling to preserve the guardrails of democracy." [ 2 ] Executive director Stefanie Fox of Jewish Voice for Peace criticized Project Esther and Trump as "pulling straight from the authoritarian playbook, using tools of repression first against those organizing for Palestinian rights", and "in so doing, sharpening those tools for use against anyone and everyone who challenges his fascist agenda." [ 2 ] Fox said that Project Esther has "absolutely nothing to do with Jewish safety, and it is intended solely to destroy the Palestinian liberation movement using tools that can then be used against all communities and movements and democracy itself." [ 21 ] [ full citation needed ] Schuyler Mitchell wrote on Truthout that Project Esther is particularly interested in finding ways to interfere with left-leaning activism, in part through the use of the RICO Act , and that its methods resemble those of McCarthyism .

[ 22 ] Jacobin has said Project Esther is part of a red scare against the pro-Palestinian movement and the political left .

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Antisemitism in the United States Antisemitism during the Gaza war Project 2025 Weaponization of antisemitism 2024 pro-Palestinian protests on university campuses New antisemitism Zionist antisemitism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Deutch, Gabby (14 October 2024).

"Heritage Foundation struggles to find partners in fight against antisemitism" .

Jewish Insider . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w J.M. Baker, Katie (May 18, 2025).

"The Group Behind Project 2025 Has a Plan to Crush the Pro-Palestinian Movement" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved May 18, 2025 .

Project Esther exclusively focuses on antisemitism on the left, ignoring antisemitic harassment and violence from the right.

^ a b c d Tamkin, Emily (4 November 2024).

"The Lie Trump Is Offering Jewish Voters" .

Slate . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ a b c d Samuels, Ben.

"Trump-allied Group Behind Project 2025 Unveils Plan to Crack Down on pro-Palestinian Activists, Antisemitism" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g Rosenfeld, Arno (6 December 2024).

"Scoop: Internal Project Esther documents describe conspiracy of Jewish 'masterminds' seeking to dismantle Western values" .

The Forward . Retrieved 21 January 2025 .

^ a b c Rabey, Steve (10 January 2025).

"Heritage Foundation antisemitism effort recycles conspiracy theories" .

Baptist News Global . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ Ward, Myah; Senter, Irie (6 April 2025).

"Trump's pro-Palestinian activism crackdown closely mirrors a plan from the creators of Project 2025" .

POLITICO . Retrieved 29 May 2025 .

^ Abrams, Rachel (2025-07-16).

"Project 2025's Other Project" .

The Daily (Podcast). The New York Times . Retrieved 2025-07-16 .

^ Rashid, Hafiz.

"Pro-Trump Project 2025 Has Sinister Plan to Crush Palestine Activism" .

The New Republic . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ Cohen, Mari.

"Repression of journalism under the guise of fighting antisemitism" .

niemanlab.org .

Nieman Lab . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ Speri, Alice (18 November 2024).

"Trump likely to use antisemitism claims to launch crackdown on US universities" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ Rabey, Steve (14 November 2024).

"Heritage Foundation's antisemitism effort ignores Jewish groups" .

Baptist News Global . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ Rosenfeld, Arno (7 January 2025).

"Scoop: Heritage Foundation plans to 'identify and target' Wikipedia editors" .

The Forward . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ Merid, Feven (March 13, 2025).

"Wikipedia's Reluctant Resisters" .

Columbia Journalism Review . Retrieved June 4, 2025 .

^ Plitnick, Mitchell (22 November 2024).

"Inside Project Esther, the right wing action plan to take down the Palestine movement" .

Mondoweiss . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ Elia-Shalev, Asaf.

"Realizing old tactics aren't enough, US Jewish groups use science to fight antisemitism" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ Lorber, Ben (22 October 2024).

"Heritage Foundation's Christian Nationalist 'Project Esther' Won't Combat Antisemitism — But It Will Weaponize Jews" .

Religion Dispatches . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ Matthiessen, Connie (10 December 2024).

"What Is Project Esther and What Does It Mean for Funders — and Civil Society?" .

www.insidephilanthropy.com . Retrieved 29 May 2025 .

^ Rosenfeld, Arno (15 October 2024).

"The group behind Project 2025 has a new plan to fight antisemitism" .

The Forward . Retrieved 21 January 2025 .

^ Goldberg, Michelle.

"The Trump-Supporting Christians Accusing Jews of Antisemitism" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2025-05-20 .

^ "Project Esther: NYT Details Right-Wing Plan to "Rebrand All Critics of Israel" as Hamas Supporters".

Democracy Now!

. 19 May 2025.

^ Mitchell, Schuyler (May 23, 2025).

"Project Esther Is a McCarthy-Era Blueprint for Crushing the American Left" .

Truthout . Retrieved May 24, 2025 .

^ Marcetic, Branko.

"Trump Is Planning a Third Red Scare" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

v t e Second presidency of Donald Trump (2025–present) Previous: Biden administration See also: First Trump administration General Appointments ambassadors attorneys Cabinet Vance vice presidency Executive orders Legal affairs Opinion polling Pardons January 6 defendants Proclamations Trips 2025 international Marco Rubio Events Timeline First 100 days 2025 Q1 Q2 Q3 Speeches Joint address to Congress Other Transition Inauguration Policies Domestic DEI Department of Government Efficiency network of DOGE deferred resignation mass layoffs targets USAID " Designating English as the Official Language of the United States " Dismissals of inspectors general Education Federal funding freeze Federal hiring freeze Golden Dome NOAA Office of Shipbuilding Online resource removals " Restoring Names That Honor American Greatness " Gulf of America Mount McKinley Science TAKE IT DOWN Act Targeting political opponents and civil society Law firms Transgender people US Army 250th Anniversary Parade White House Faith Office Economic Cryptocurrency $Trump memecoin dinner Strategic bitcoin reserve " No tax on tips " Stargate Project Tariffs China trade war Canada and Mexico trade war "Liberation Day" tariffs TACO AI policy Environment Paris Agreement withdrawal Fiscal One Big Beautiful Bill Act Rescissions Act of 2025 Foreign Expansionism Canada Gaza Strip Greenland Munich Security Conference Russian invasion of Ukraine Putin call Saudi Arabia summit Zelenskyy Oval Office meeting minerals agreement peace talks Putin summit in Alaska Withdrawal from WHO Gaza war Yemen attacks Signal group chat leaks Ras Isa oil terminal airstrikes US–Houthi ceasefire Relations with Iran Iran negotiations Iran–Israel war June 2025 Iran strikes Iran–Israel war ceasefire Middle East visit Ramaphosa Oval Office meeting Armenia–Azerbaijan agreement Immigration Deportation and detention of U.S. citizens Alligator Alcatraz Deportation of immigrants Indians Venezuelans J.G.G. v. Trump Deportation of Kilmar Abrego Garcia W.M.M. v. Trump Activist deportations Mahmoud Khalil Rasha Alawieh Rümeysa Öztürk Mohsen Mahdawi Arrest of Hannah Dugan Laken Riley Act Jocelyn Nungaray National Wildlife Refuge Guantanamo Migrant Operations Center White South African refugee program Trump Gold Card " Protecting the Meaning and Value of American Citizenship " State of Washington v. Trump Trump v. CASA Barbara v. Trump Travel ban Proclamation 10949 Healthcare Make America Healthy Again MAHA Commission MAHA report HHS gender dysphoria report Protests Efforts to impeach resolutions 50501 movement protests Day of Action Anti-deportation protests Los Angeles Newsom v. Trump Canadian boycott Day Without Immigrants Department of Justice resignations Economic Blackout Response to DOGE DOGE lawsuits People's March Stand Up for Science 2025 Hands Off protests No Kings protests Good Trouble Lives On protest Rage Against the Regime Related 2024 election Trump campaign Presidential library Agenda 47 Anti-LGBTQ movement Border crisis Donald Trump and fascism Elon Musk feud Kennedy Center Penny debate in the United States Project 2025 Project Esther Trumpism Unlawful Impersonations of ICE officials Mar-a-Lago face Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Project_Esther&oldid=1305554759 " Categories : 2024 establishments in Washington, D.C.

Projects established in 2024 The Heritage Foundation Christian Zionism in the United States Cultural depictions of Esther Politics of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict New antisemitism Anti-Palestinian sentiment in the United States Censorship in the United States Evangelicalism in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from May 2025 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 19:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Project Esther 2 languages Add topic

