Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Christianity Toggle Christianity subsection 1.1 Catholicism 1.1.1 Membership and vows 1.1.2 Leadership 1.1.3 Distinction between a nun and a religious sister 1.1.4 United States 1.1.5 Canada 1.1.6 Early modern Spain 1.2 Eastern Orthodox 1.3 Protestantism 1.3.1 Lutheranism 1.3.2 Anglicanism 1.3.3 Presbyterian 1.3.4 Methodism 2 Buddhism Toggle Buddhism subsection 2.1 Thailand 2.2 Taiwan 2.3 Tibet 2.4 Japan 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Nun 59 languages العربية Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí བོད་ཡིག Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Li Niha Limburgs Lingála Magyar Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Member of a religious community of women For other uses, see Nun (disambiguation) .

"Sœur" redirects here. For other uses, see soeur (disambiguation) .

Nun Nuns in different parts of the world A nun is a woman who vows to dedicate her life to religious service and contemplation, [ 1 ] typically living under vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience in the enclosure of a monastery or convent .

[ 2 ] The term is often used interchangeably with religious sisters who do take simple vows [ 3 ] but live an active vocation of prayer and charitable work.

In Christianity , nuns are found in the Catholic , Oriental Orthodox , Eastern Orthodox , Lutheran , and Anglican and some Presbyterian traditions,  as well as other Christian denominations.

[ 1 ] In the Buddhist tradition, female monastics are known as Bhikkhuni , and take several additional vows compared to male monastics ( bhikkhus ). Nuns are most common in Mahayana Buddhism , but have more recently become more prevalent in other traditions.

Christianity [ edit ] Catholicism [ edit ] St.

Scholastica , sister of St. Benedict and founder of the Benedictine nuns Hildegard of Bingen and her nuns Maria Johanna Baptista von Zweyer, Abbess of the Cistercian abbey of Wald Three Sisters of Charity of St. Vincent de Paul in the Portal of a Church , by Armand Gautier In the Catholic tradition, there are many religious institutes of nuns and sisters (the female equivalent of male monks or friars ), each with its own charism or special character. Traditionally, nuns are members of enclosed religious orders and take solemn religious vows , while sisters do not live in the papal enclosure and formerly took vows called "simple vows".

[ 4 ] As monastics , nuns living within an enclosure historically commit to recitation of the full Divine Office throughout the day in church, usually in a solemn manner. They were formerly distinguished within the monastic community as "choir nuns", as opposed to lay sisters who performed upkeep of the monastery or errands outside the cloister. This last task is still often entrusted to women, called "externs", who live in the monastery, but outside the enclosure. They were usually either oblates or members of the associated Third Order , often wearing a different habit or the standard woman's attire of the period.

Membership and vows [ edit ] In general, when a woman enters a religious order or monastery she first undergoes a period of testing life for six months to two years called a postulancy. If she, and the order, determine that she may have a vocation to the life, she receives the habit of the order (usually with some modification, normally a white veil instead of black, to distinguish her from professed members) and undertakes the novitiate , a period (that lasts one to two years) of living the life of the religious institute without yet taking vows .

[ 5 ] Upon completion of this period she may take her initial, temporary vows.

[ 6 ] Temporary vows last one to three years, typically, and will be professed for not less than three years and not more than six.

[ 7 ] Finally, she will petition to make her "perpetual profession", taking permanent, solemn vows .

[ 8 ] In the branches of the Benedictine tradition, (Benedictines, Cistercians , Camaldolese , and Trappists , among others) nuns take vows of stability (that is, to remain a member of a single monastic community), obedience (to an abbess or prioress ), and conversion of life (which includes poverty and celibacy). In other traditions, such as the Poor Clares (the Franciscan Order) and the Dominican nuns , they take the threefold vows of poverty , chastity and obedience . These are known as the 'evangelical counsels' as opposed to 'monastic vows' proper. Most orders of nuns not listed here follow one of these two patterns, with some Orders taking an additional vow related to the specific work or character of their Order (for example, to undertake a certain style of devotion, praying for a specific intention or purpose).

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Bridgettine Sisters at the March For Life in Washington, D.C.

, January 2009 Mother Teresa , founder of the Missionaries of Charity [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Cloistered nuns ( Carmelites , for example) observe "papal enclosure" [ 11 ] rules, and their nunneries typically have walls separating the nuns from the outside world. The nuns rarely leave (except for medical necessity or occasionally for purposes related to their contemplative life) though they may receive visitors in specially built parlors, often with either a grille or half-wall separating the nuns from visitors. They are usually self-sufficient, earning money by selling jams, candies or baked goods by mail order, or by making liturgical items (such as vestments, candles, or hosts to be consecrated at Mass for Holy Communion).

They often undertake contemplative ministries – that is, a community of nuns is often associated with prayer for some particular good or supporting the missions of another order by prayer (for instance, the Dominican nuns of Corpus Christi Monastery in the Bronx , New York, pray in support of the priests of the Archdiocese of New York ). Yet religious sisters can also perform this form of ministry, e.g., the Maryknoll Missionary Sisters have small houses of contemplative sisters, some in mission locations, who pray for the work of the priests, brothers, and other sisters of their congregation, and since Vatican II have added retreat work and spiritual guidance to their apostolate; [ 12 ] the Sister Disciples of the Divine Master are also cloistered sisters who receive visitors and pray in support of their sister congregation, [ 13 ] the Daughters of St. Paul in their media ministry.

Leadership [ edit ] A canoness is a nun who corresponds to the male equivalent of canon , usually following the Rule of St. Augustine. The origin and rules of monastic life are common to both. As with the canons, differences in the observance of rule gave rise to two types: the canoness regular , taking the traditional religious vows, and the secular canoness, who did not take vows and thus remained free to own property and leave to marry, should they choose. This was primarily a way of leading a pious life for the women of aristocratic families and generally disappeared in the modern age, except for the modern Lutheran convents of Germany.

A nun who is elected to head her religious house is termed an abbess if the house is an abbey, a prioress if it is a monastery, or more generically may be referred to as "Mother Superior" and styled "Reverend Mother". The distinction between abbey and monastery has to do with the terms used by a particular order or by the level of independence of the religious house. Technically, a convent is any home of a community of sisters – or, indeed, of priests and brothers, though this term is rarely used in the United States. The term " monastery " is often used by The Benedictine family to speak of the buildings and "convent" when referring to the community. Neither is gender specific. 'Convent' is often used of the houses of certain other institutes.

The traditional dress for women in religious communities consists of a tunic , which is tied around the waist with a cloth or leather belt. Over the tunic some nuns wear a scapular which is a garment of long wide piece of woolen cloth worn over the shoulders with an opening for the head. Some wear a white wimple and a veil, the most significant and ancient aspect of the habit. Some orders – such as the Dominicans – wear a large rosary on their belt. Benedictine abbesses wear a cross or crucifix on a chain around their neck.

After the Second Vatican Council , many religious institutes chose in their own regulations to no longer wear the traditional habit and did away with choosing a religious name .

Catholic Church canon law states: "Religious are to wear the habit of the institute, made according to the norm of proper law, as a sign of their consecration and as a witness of poverty." [ 14 ] Distinction between a nun and a religious sister [ edit ] See also: Religious sister (Catholic) Although usage has varied throughout church history, typically "nun" (Latin: monialis ) is used for women who have taken "solemn" vows , and "sister" (Latin: soror ) is used for women who have taken "simple" vows (that is, vows other than solemn vows).

During the first millennium, nearly all religious communities of men and women were dedicated to prayer and contemplation . These monasteries were built in remote locations or were separated from the world by means of a precinct wall . The mendicant orders , founded in the 13th century, combined a life of prayer and dedication to God with active works of preaching, hearing confessions, and service to the poor, and members of these orders are known as friars rather than monks . At that time, and into the 17th century, Church custom did not allow women to leave the cloister if they had taken religious vows. Female members of the mendicant orders ( Dominican , Augustinian and Carmelite nuns and Poor Clares ) continued to observe the same enclosed life as members of the monastic orders .

[ 15 ] Originally, the vows taken by profession in any religious institute approved by the Holy See were classified as solemn.

[ 11 ] [ 16 ] This was declared by Pope Boniface VIII (1235–1303).

[ 17 ] The situation changed in the 16th century. In 1521, two years after the Fourth Lateran Council had forbidden the establishment of new religious institutes, Pope Leo X established a religious Rule with simple vows for those tertiaries attached to existing communities who undertook to live a formal religious life. In 1566 and 1568, Pope Pius V rejected this class of congregation, but they continued to exist and even increased in number. After at first being merely tolerated, they afterwards obtained approval.

[ 16 ] Finally in the 20th century, Pope Leo XIII recognized as religious all men and women who took simple vows.

[ 18 ] Their lives were oriented not to the ancient monastic way of life, but more to social service and to evangelization , both in Europe and in mission areas. Their number had increased dramatically in the upheavals brought by the French Revolution and subsequent Napoleonic invasions of other Catholic countries, depriving thousands of religious of the income that their communities held because of inheritances and forcing them to find a new way of living the religious life. But members of these new associations were not recognized as "religious" until Pope Leo XIII 's Constitution "Conditae a Christo" of 8 December 1900.

[ 19 ] The 1917 Code of Canon Law reserved the term "nun" (Latin: monialis ) for religious women who took solemn vows or who, while being allowed in some places to take simple vows, belonged to institutes whose vows were normally solemn.

[ 20 ] It used the word "sister" (Latin: soror ) exclusively for members of institutes for women that it classified as " congregations "; and for "nuns" and "sisters" jointly it used the Latin word religiosae (women religious). The same religious order could include both "nuns" and "sisters", if some members took solemn vows and others simple vows.

The new legal code of the Catholic Church which was adopted in 1983, however, remained silent on this matter. Whereas previously the code distinguished between orders and congregations, the code now refers simply to religious institutes.

Since the code of 1983 , the Vatican has addressed the renewal of the contemplative life of nuns. It produced the letter Verbi Sponsa in 1999, [ 21 ] the apostolic constitution Vultum Dei quaerere in 2016, and the instruction Cor Orans in 2018 [ 22 ] "which replaced the 1999 document Verbi Sponsa and attempted to bring forward the ideas regarding contemplative life born during the Second Vatican Council".

[ 23 ] Sister Rosália Sehnem of the Sisters of St. Francis of Penance and Christian Charity A sister of the Theresienne Sisters of Basankusu wearing a brightly coloured habit, riding a motor-bike, Democratic Republic of Congo , 2013 [ 24 ] A Ugandan nun teaching during a community service day United States [ edit ] Main article: Catholic sisters and nuns in the United States Nuns and sisters played a major role in American religion, education, nursing and social work since the early 19th century.

[ 25 ] In Catholic Europe, convents were heavily endowed over the centuries, and were sponsored by the aristocracy. There were very few rich American Catholics , and no aristocrats. Religious orders were founded by entrepreneurial women who saw a need and an opportunity, and were staffed by devout women from poor families. The numbers grew rapidly, from 900 sisters in 15 communities in 1840, 50,000 in 170 orders in 1900, and 135,000 in 300 different orders by 1930. Starting in 1820, the sisters always outnumbered the priests and brothers.

[ 26 ] Their numbers peaked in 1965 at 180,000 then plunged to 56,000 in 2010. Many women left their orders, and few new members were added.

[ 27 ] Since the Second Vatican Council the sisters have directed their ministries more to the poor, working more directly among them and with them.

[ 28 ] Canada [ edit ] Main article: Catholic sisters and nuns in Canada Nuns have played an important role in Canada, especially in heavily Catholic Quebec. Outside the home, Canadian women had few domains which they controlled. An important exception came with Catholic nuns, especially in Québec. Stimulated by the influence in France, the popular religiosity of the Counter Reformation , new orders for women began appearing in the seventeenth century. In the next three centuries women opened dozens of independent religious orders, funded in part by dowries provided by the parents of young nuns. The orders specialized in charitable works, including hospitals, orphanages, homes for unwed mothers , and schools.

[ 29 ] Early modern Spain [ edit ] Prior to women becoming nuns during early modern Spain, aspired nuns underwent a process. The process was ensured by the Council of Trent , which King Philip II (1556–1598) adopted within Spain.

[ 30 ] King Phillip II acquired the aid of the Hieronymite order to ensure that monasteries abided by the decrees of the Council of Trent.

[ 30 ] This changed the way in which nuns would live.

[ 31 ] One edict of the Council of Trent was that female monasteries be enclosed in order to limit nuns' relationship with the secular world.

[ 31 ] Enclosure of monasteries during this time was associated with chastity.

[ 31 ] Another decree issued by the Council of Trent was that religious devotion be "true and voluntary".

[ 31 ] A male clergy member would ask the aspiring nuns if whether or not their vocation was "true and voluntary" in order to ensure no enforced conversion.

[ 31 ] To be considered as a nun, one must have the economic means to afford the convent dowry.

[ 32 ] During this time convent dowries were affordable, compared to secular marriages between a man and a woman.

[ 33 ] Typically during early modern Spain many nuns were from elite families who had the means to afford the convent dowry and "maintenance allowances", which were annual fees.

[ 32 ] Monasteries were economically supported through convent dowries.

[ 32 ] Convent dowries could be waived if the aspiring nun had an artistic ability benefiting the monastery.

[ 34 ] Once an aspiring nun has entered the convent and has the economic means to afford the dowry, she undergoes the process of apprenticeship known as the novitiate period.

[ 35 ] The novitiate period typically lasts 1–2 years, and during this time the aspiring nun lives the life of a nun without taking the official vows.

[ 36 ] As she lives in the convent she is closely monitored by the other women in the community to determine if her vocation is genuine. This would be officially determined by a vote from the choir nuns.

[ 32 ] If the aspiring nun passes the scrutiny of the women of the religious community, she then can make her solemn vows .

[ 32 ] Prior to making the vows, the family of the nun is expected to pay the convent dowry.

[ 32 ] Nuns were also expected to renounce their inheritance and property rights.

[ 32 ] Religious class distinctions: Choir nuns: Usually from elite families, they held office, could vote within the convent, and were given the opportunity to read and write.

[ 37 ] Lay-sisters: Lower-class women, assigned tasks related to the labour of the convent, generally were not given the opportunities to read and write, and paid a lower dowry.

[ 37 ] Eastern Orthodox [ edit ] Main article: Eastern Christian Monasticism Saint Sophia of Suzdal , wearing the full monastic habit of a Schemanun Nun in Gradac , Serbian orthodox monastery In the Eastern Orthodox Church there is no distinction between a monastery for women and one for men. In Greek , Russian , and other languages of primarily Christian Orthodox nations, both domiciles are called "monasteries" and the ascetics who live therein are "monastics". In English, however, it is acceptable to use the terms "nun" and "convent" for clarity and convenience. The term for an abbess is the feminine form of abbot ( hegumen ) – Greek: ἡγουμένη ( hegumeni ); Serbian : игуманија ( igumanija ); Russian: игумения ( igumenia ). Orthodox monastics do not have distinct "orders" as in Western Christianity. Orthodox monks and nuns lead identical spiritual lives.

[ 38 ] There may be slight differences in the way a monastery functions internally but these are simply differences in style (Gr.

typica ) dependent on the abbess or abbot . The abbess is the spiritual leader of the convent and her authority is absolute (no priest , bishop , or even patriarch can override an abbess within the walls of her monastery). Abbots and Abbesses rank in authority equal to bishops in many ways and were included in ecumenical councils . Orthodox monasteries are usually associated with a local synod of bishops by jurisdiction, but are otherwise self-governing. Abbesses hear confessions (but do not absolve ) and dispense blessings on their charges, though they still require the services of a presbyter (i.e., a priest) to celebrate the Divine Liturgy and perform other priestly functions, such as the absolution of a penitent.

In general, Orthodox monastics have little or no contact with the outside world, especially family. The pious family whose child decides to enter the monastic profession understands that their child will become "dead to the world" and therefore be unavailable for social visits.

There are a number of different levels that the nun passes through in her profession: Main article: Degrees of Eastern Orthodox monasticism Novice – When one enters a monastery the first three to five years are spent as a novice . Novices may or may not (depending on the abbess's wishes) dress in the black inner robe ( Isorassa ); those who do will also usually wear the apostolnik or a black scarf tied over the head (see photo, above). The isorassa is the first part of the monastic " habit " of which there is only one style for Orthodox monastics (this is true in general, there have been a few slight regional variations over the centuries, but the style always seems to precipitate back to a style common in the 3rd or 4th century). If a novice chooses to leave during the novitiate period no penalty is incurred.

Rassaphore – When the abbess deems the novice ready, the novice is asked to join the monastery. If she accepts, she is tonsured in a formal service during which she is given the outer robe ( Exorassa ) and veil ( Epanokamelavkion ) to wear, and (because she is now dead to the world) receives a new name. Nuns consider themselves part of a sisterhood; however, tonsured nuns are usually addressed as "Mother" (in some convents, the title of "Mother" is reserved to those who enter into the next level of Stavrophore).

Stavrophore – The next level for monastics takes place some years after the first tonsure when the abbess feels the nun has reached a level of discipline, dedication, and humility . Once again, in a formal service the nun is elevated to the "Little Schema" which is signified by additions to her habit of certain symbolic articles of clothing. In addition, the abbess increases the nun's prayer rule , she is allowed a stricter personal ascetic practice.

Great Schema – The final stage, called "Megaloschemos" or " Great Schema " is reached by nuns whose Abbess feels they have reached a high level of excellence. In some monastic traditions the Great Schema is only given to monks and nuns on their death bed, while in others they may be elevated after as little as 25 years of service.

Princess Praskovya Yusupova Before Becoming a Nun , Nikolai Nevrev , 1886 The Way of Humility : Russian Orthodox nun working at Ein Karem , Jerusalem Protestantism [ edit ] Ebstorf Abbey has continued as a Lutheran convent in the Benedictine tradition since 1529.

After the Protestant Reformation, some monasteries in Lutheran lands (such as Amelungsborn Abbey near Negenborn and Loccum Abbey in Rehburg-Loccum ) and convents (such as Ebstorf Abbey near the town of Uelzen and Bursfelde Abbey in Bursfelde ) adopted the Lutheran Christian faith.

[ 39 ] Other convents, especially those in Reformed areas, closed after the Reformation, with some sisters deciding to marry.

A modern resurgence of the early Christian Deaconess office for women began in Germany in the 1840s and spread through Scandinavia, Britain and the United States, with some elements of the religious life, such as simple vows, and a daily obligation of prayer. Lutherans were especially active, and within both Lutheranism and Anglicanism some Deaconesses formed religious communities, with community living, and the option of life vows in religion.

[ 40 ] The modern movement reached a zenith about 1910, then slowly declined as secularization undercut religiosity in Europe, and the professionalization of nursing and social work offered better career opportunities for young women. A small movement still exists, and its legacy is seen in the names of numerous hospitals.

[ 41 ] The example of the Deaconess communities eventually led to the establishment of religious communities of monks and nuns within some Protestant traditions, [ 42 ] particularly those influenced by the more liturgical Protestant reformers (such as Martin Luther ) rather than the more extreme reformers (such as John Calvin ). This has allowed for communities of nuns (or, in some cases, mixed communities of nuns and monks) to be re-established in some Protestant traditions. Many of these are within the episcopal Lutheran tradition and the closeness of Lutheranism with Anglicanism in its belief and practice has led to local arrangements of inter-Communion between the two traditions, such as the Porvoo Communion .

[ 43 ] Lutheranism [ edit ] Bursfelde Abbey has continued as a Lutheran convent since A.D. 1579 There are a plethora of religious orders within the Lutheran Churches , such as the Order of Lutheran Franciscans and Daughters of Mary . Nearly all active Lutheran orders are located in Europe.

The Evangelical Sisterhood of Mary , an order of Lutheran nuns, operates a guesthouse for Holocaust survivors in Jerusalem.

[ 43 ] Anglicanism [ edit ] Main article: Anglican religious order Two Anglican nuns Two Birgitta sisters in Sweden 2019.

Religious communities throughout England were destroyed by King Henry VIII when he separated the Church of England from papal authority during the English Reformation (see Dissolution of the Monasteries ). Monasteries and convents were deprived of their lands and possessions, and monastics were forced to either live a secular life on a pension or flee the country. Many Catholic nuns went to France.

Anglican religious orders are organizations of laity or clergy in the Anglican Communion who live under a common rule. The term "religious orders" is distinguished from Holy Orders (the sacrament of ordination which bishops, priests, and deacons receive), though many communities do have ordained members.

The structure and function of religious orders in Anglicanism roughly parallels that which exists in Catholicism. Religious communities are divided into orders proper, in which members take solemn vows and congregations, whose members take simple vows.

With the rise of the Oxford Movement in Anglicanism in the early 19th century came interest in the revival of "religious life" in England. Between 1841 and 1855, several religious orders for nuns were founded, among them the Community of St. Mary at Wantage and the Society of Saint Margaret at East Grinstead .

In the United States and Canada, the founding of Anglican religious orders of nuns began in 1845 with the Sisterhood of the Holy Communion (now defunct) in New York.

Whilst there is no single central authority for all religious orders, and many member churches of the Anglican Communion have their own internal structures for recognising and regulating religious orders, some central functions are performed by the Anglican Religious Communities Department at Church House, Westminster , the headquarters of the Church of England's Church Commissioners , General Synod , Archbishops' Council , and National Society . This department publishes the biennial Anglican Religious Life , a world directory of religious orders, and also maintains an official Anglican Communion website for religious orders.

Anglican Religious Life defines four categories of community.

[ 44 ] "Traditional celibate religious orders and communities": Members take a vow of celibacy (amongst other vows) and follow a common Rule of life. They may be enclosed and contemplative or open and engaged in apostolic works.

"Dispersed communities": These are orders or communities whose members, whilst taking vows (including celibacy), do not live together in community. In most cases the members are self-supporting and live alone, but follow the same Rule of life, and meet together frequently in assemblies often known as 'Chapter meetings'. In some cases some members may share a common life in very small groups of two or three.

"Acknowledged communities": These communities live a traditional Christian life, including the taking of vows, but the traditional vows are adapted or changed. In many cases these communities admit both single and married persons as members, requiring celibacy on the part of those who are single, and unfailing commitment to their spouse on the part of married members. They also amend the vow of poverty, allowing personal possessions, but requiring high standards of tithing to the community and the wider church. These communities often have residential elements, but not full residential community life, as this would be incompatible with some elements of married family life.

"Other communities": This group contains communities that are ecumenical (including Anglicans) or that belong to non-Anglican churches that have entered into relationships of full communion with the Anglican Church (particularly, but not only, certain Lutheran churches).

In the United States (only), there is a clear distinction between "orders" and "communities", as the Episcopal Church has its own two-fold definition of "religious orders" (equivalent to the first two groups above) and "Christian communities" (equivalent to the third group above).

[ 45 ] The Anglican Religious Life directory affirms this, stating "This distinction in not used in other parts of the Anglican Communion where 'communities' is also used for those who take traditional vows." [ 46 ] In some Anglican orders, there are sisters who have been ordained and can celebrate the Eucharist.

[ 47 ] Presbyterian [ edit ] The Emmanuel Sisterhood in Cameroon, Africa, is part of the Presbyterian Church in Cameroon (PCC).

[ 48 ] [ better source needed ] Methodism [ edit ] The Saint Brigid of Kildare Benedictine Monastery is a United Methodist double monastery with both monks and nuns.

[ 49 ] Buddhism [ edit ] Main article: Bhikkhunī A Chinese nun ascending steps on Mount Putuo Shan island People of the Pāli Canon Pali English Sangha (the Buddhist community) Buddhist monasticism Bhikkhu , Bhikkhuṇī Monk , Nun Sikkhamānā Nun trainee Samaṇera , Samaṇērī Novice ( m., f.

) Laity Anagārika, Anagārikā lay renunciants ( m., f.

) Maechi , thilashin dasa sil mata , modern female lay renunciants ( f.

) Upāsaka and Upāsikā Lay devotee ( m., f.

) Gahattha, gahapati Householder Related religions Samaṇa Wanderer Ājīvika Ascetic Brāhmaṇa Brahmin Nigaṇṭha Jain monastics v t e All Buddhist traditions have nuns, although their status is different among Buddhist countries. The Buddha is reported to have allowed women into the sangha only with great reluctance, predicting that the move would lead to Buddhism's collapse after 500 years, rather than the 1,000 years it would have enjoyed otherwise. (This prophecy occurs only once in the Canon and is the only prophecy involving time in the Canon, leading some to suspect that it is a late addition.) [ 50 ] Fully ordained Buddhist nuns ( bhikkhunis ) have more Patimokkha rules than the monks ( bhikkhus ). The important vows are the same, however.

As with monks, there is quite a lot of variation in nuns' dress and social conventions between Buddhist cultures in Asia. Chinese nuns possess the full bhikkuni ordination, Tibetan nuns do not. In Theravada countries it is generally believed that the full ordination lineage of bhikkunis died out, though in many places they wear the "saffron" colored robes, observing only ten precepts like novices.

Thailand [ edit ] In Thailand , a country which never had a tradition of fully ordained nuns ( bhikkhuni ), there developed a separate order of non-ordained female renunciates called mae chi . However, some of them have played an important role in dhamma-practitioners' community. There are in Thai Forest Tradition foremost nuns such as Mae Ji Kaew Sianglam, the founder of the Nunnery of Baan Huai Saai, who is believed by some to be enlightened [ 51 ] as well as Upasika Kee Nanayon .

[ 52 ] At the beginning of the 21st century, some Buddhist women in Thailand have started to introduce the bhikkhuni sangha in their country as well, even if public acceptance is still lacking.

[ 53 ] Dhammananda Bhikkhuni , [ 54 ] formerly the successful academic scholar Dr. Chatsumarn Kabilsingh, established a controversial monastery for the training of Buddhist nuns in Thailand.

[ 55 ] Taiwan [ edit ] The relatively active roles of Taiwanese nuns were noted by some studies. Researcher Charles Brewer Jones estimates that from 1951 to 1999, when the Buddhist Association of the ROC organized public ordination, female applicants outnumbered males by about three to one. He adds: All my informants in the areas of Taipei and Sanhsia considered nuns at least as respectable as monks, or even more so. [...] In contrast, however, Shiu-kuen Tsung found in Taipei county that female clergy were viewed with some suspicion by society. She reports that while outsiders did not necessarily regard their vocation as unworthy of respect, they still tended to view the nuns as social misfits.

[ 56 ] Wei-yi Cheng studied the Luminary (Hsiang Kuang 香光) order in southern Taiwan. Cheng reviewed earlier studies which suggest that Taiwan's Zhaijiao tradition has a history of more female participation, and that the economic growth and loosening of family restriction have allowed more women to become nuns. Based on studies of the Luminary order, Cheng concluded that the monastic order in Taiwan was still young and gave nuns more room for development, and more mobile believers helped the order.

[ 57 ] Tibet [ edit ] The August 2007 International Congress on Buddhist Women's Role in the Sangha , with the support of the XIVth Dalai Lama , reinstated the Gelongma ( Dharmaguptaka vinaya bhikkhuni) lineage, having been lost, in India and Tibet, for centuries. Gelongma ordination requires the presence of ten fully ordained people keeping exactly the same vows. Because ten nuns are required to ordain a new one, the effort to establish the Dharmaguptaka bhikkhu tradition has taken a long time.

It is permissible for a Tibetan nun to receive bhikkhuni ordination from another living tradition, e.g., in Vietnam . Based on this, Western nuns ordained in Tibetan tradition, like Thubten Chodron , took full ordination in another tradition.

The ordination of monks and nuns in Tibetan Buddhism distinguishes three stages: rabjung-ma, getshül-ma and gelong-ma. The clothes of the nuns in Tibet are basically the same as those of monks, but there are differences between novice and gelong robes.

Japan [ edit ] Hokke-ji in 747 was established by Empress Consort Fujiwara Asukabehime (later Empress Dowager Kōmyō). It took charge of provincial convents, performed ceremonies for the protection of the state, and became the site of pilgrimages. Aristocratic Japanese women often became Buddhist nuns in the premodern period. Originally it was thought they could not gain salvation because of the Five Hindrances , which said women could not attain Buddhahood until they changed into men. However, in 1249, 12 women received full ordination as priests.

[ 58 ] See also [ edit ] Religion portal Catholic religious order Consecrated virgin Deaconess Monasticism Sādhvī Monjas coronadas Detention of Malayali Nuns in Chhattisgarh References [ edit ] ^ a b "What is a Nun? (with pictures)" .

www.wise-geek.com .

Archived from the original on 2021-09-26 . Retrieved 2021-09-10 .

^ The Oxford English Dictionary , vol. X, page 599.

^ "Sister" .

Merriam-Webster . 26 May 2024.

[A] member of a women's religious order (as of nuns or deaconesses); especially : one of a Roman Catholic congregation under simple vows ^ "What is the difference between a sister and a nun?" .

anunslife.org .

Archived from the original on 2019-05-31 . Retrieved 2019-03-04 .

^ Canon 648 Archived 2020-03-12 at the Wayback Machine , CIC 1983 ^ Canon 656 Archived 2017-07-06 at the Wayback Machine , CIC 1983 ^ Canon 655 Archived 2017-07-06 at the Wayback Machine , CIC 1983 ^ Canon 657 Archived 2017-07-06 at the Wayback Machine , CIC 1983 ^ a b "Mother Teresa, who becomes a saint on Sunday, began her life as a nun in Dublin" .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 2017-12-06 . Retrieved 2018-02-14 .

^ a b "Nun in iconic Italy quake photo shares her story of survival" .

Archived from the original on 2017-12-01 . Retrieved 2018-02-14 .

^ a b Canon 667 Archived 2020-03-12 at the Wayback Machine §3, CIC 1983, SCRIS instruction, "Venite seorsum" August 15, 1969, in AAS 61 (1969) 674–690 ^ "Sister Grace Corde Myerjack – Maryknoll Sisters" .

Maryknoll Sisters .

Archived from the original on 2018-05-24 . Retrieved 2018-05-24 .

^ "Vocation: Sister Disciples Of The Divine Master" .

www.pddm.us .

Archived from the original on 2018-05-24 . Retrieved 2018-05-24 .

^ "Code of Canon Law – IntraText" .

www.vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 2018-02-20 . Retrieved 2018-02-14 .

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Mary Ward" .

www.newadvent.org .

Archived from the original on 2021-09-04 . Retrieved 2018-02-14 .

^ a b Arthur Vermeersch,  "Religious Life" Archived 2012-01-15 at the Wayback Machine in The Catholic Encyclopedia , Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911. Accessed 18 July 2011.

^ "Illud solum votum debere dici solemne ... quod solemnizatum fuerit per suceptionem S. Ordinis aut per professionem expressam vel tacitam factam alicui de religionibus per Sedem Apostolicam approbatis" (C. unic. de voto, tit. 15, lib. III in 6, quoted in Celestine Anthony Freriks, Religious Congregations in Their External Relations , p. 17).

^ Constitution "Conditae a Christo" of 8 December 1900, cited in Mary Nona McGreal, Dominicans at Home in a New Nation , chapter 11 Archived 2011-09-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ Cited in Mary Nona McGreal, Dominicans at Home in a New Nation , chapter 11 Archived 2011-09-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ "CIC 1917: text – IntraText CT" .

www.intratext.com .

Archived from the original on 2019-05-15 . Retrieved 2018-02-14 .

^ "Verbi Sponsa (13 May 1999)" .

www.vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 2018-12-13 . Retrieved 2018-11-22 .

^ " "Cor Orans" – Implementing Instruction of the Apostolic Constitution "Vultum Dei quaerere" on women's contemplative life, of the Congregation for the Institutes of Consecrated Life and the Societies of Apostolic Life (1 April 2018)" .

www.vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 2018-11-02 . Retrieved 2018-11-22 .

^ "Contemplative nuns roll with the changes under Pope Francis" .

Crux . 2018-11-22. Archived from the original on 2018-11-22 . Retrieved 2018-11-22 .

^ "The Theresienne Sisters of Basankusu (La congrégation des soeurs thérésiennes de Basankusu)" .

Archived from the original on 2014-05-12 . Retrieved 2014-05-09 .

^ Margaret M. McGuinness, Called to Serve: A History of Nuns in America (2015) excerpt Archived 2017-02-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ O'Toole, James M. (2008).

The Faithful: A History of Catholics in America .

Harvard University Press . p.

104 .

ISBN 9780674034884 .

^ Margaret M. McGuinness, Called to Serve (2013), ch 8 ^ "Sisters of Mercy: Spirituality, Resources, Prayer and Action" .

Sisters of Mercy .

Archived from the original on 2017-01-31 . Retrieved 2018-02-14 .

^ Thomas Carr, Jr., "Writing the Convent in New France: The Colonialist Rhetoric of Canadian Nuns", Quebec Studies (2009), Issue 47, pp 3–23.

^ a b Schmitz, Timothy J. (2006-01-01). "The Spanish Hieronymites and the Reformed Texts of the Council of Trent".

The Sixteenth Century Journal .

37 (2): 375– 399.

doi : 10.2307/20477841 .

JSTOR 20477841 .

^ a b c d e Lehfeldt, Elizabeth A. (1999-01-01). "Discipline, Vocation, and Patronage: Spanish Religious Women in a Tridentine Microclimate".

The Sixteenth Century Journal .

30 (4): 1009– 1030.

doi : 10.2307/2544609 .

JSTOR 2544609 .

^ a b c d e f g Lehfeldt, Elizabeth A. (2000-01-01).

"Convents as Litigants: Dowry and Inheritance Disputes in Early-Modern Spain" .

Journal of Social History .

33 (3): 645– 664.

doi : 10.1353/jsh.2000.0027 .

JSTOR 3789215 .

S2CID 144464752 .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-09 . Retrieved 2019-12-14 .

^ Evangelisti, Silvia (2007).

Nuns: A history of convent life, 1450–1700 . Oxford; New York : Oxford University Press.

^ Taggard, Mindy Nancarrow (2000-01-01). "Art and Alienation in Early Modern Spanish Convents".

South Atlantic Review .

65 (1): 24– 40.

doi : 10.2307/3201923 .

JSTOR 3201923 .

^ Lavrin, Asuncion (2008).

Brides of Christ: Conventual life in colonial Mexico . Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2008. p. 49.

^ Lavrin, Asuncion (2008).

Brides of Christ: Conventual life in colonial Mexico . Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press. p. 48.

^ a b Evangelisti, Silvia (2007).

Nuns: A history of convent life, 1450–1700 . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 30.

^ Archpriest Seraphim Slobodskoy, The Law of God (Printshop of St. Job of Pochaev, Jordanville, NY, ISBN 0884650448 ), p. 618.

^ Histories, Medieval (8 August 2014).

"Kloster Ebstorf" .

Medieval Histories .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 20 November 2017 .

The monastery is mentioned for the first time in 1197. It belongs to the group of so-called Lüneklöstern (monasteries of Lüne), which became Lutheran convents following the Protestant Reformation. […] It is currently one of several Lutheran convents maintained by the Monastic Chamber of Hanover (Klosterkammer Hannover), an institution of the former Kingdom of Hanover founded by its Prince-Regent, later King George IV of the United Kingdom, in 1818, in order to manage and preserve the estates of Lutheran convents.

^ See CSA history here Archived 2011-06-10 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Cynthia A. Jurisson,  "The Deaconess Movement", in Rosemary Skinner Keller et al., eds.

Encyclopedia of Women and Religion in North America (Indiana U.P., 2006). pp. 821–33 online ^ One example of a Protestant religious order Archived 2014-07-16 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Israeli press report concerning one German Lutheran order Archived 2014-08-24 at the Wayback Machine of nuns.

^ Anglican Religious Life 2012–13, published Canterbury Press, Norwich, 2011, ISBN 978-1-84825-089-5 , pp. iii, iv, 19, 147, 151, 171.

^ See Title III, Canon 24, sections 1 and 2 of the Canons of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, also quoted at Anglican Communion Religious Communities Archived 2015-02-21 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Anglican Religious Life 2012–13 , Canterbury Press, Norwich, 2011, ISBN 978-1-84825-089-5 , p. 151.

^ What We Do Archived 2010-06-16 at the Wayback Machine sisters of St. Margaret, (Episcopal religious community of women) ^ "Ihre Homepage - HOME PAGE" .

www.emmanuel-sisterhood.org (in German). Archived from the original on 7 November 2023 . Retrieved 23 October 2023 .

^ Patricia Lefevere.

Methodist woman founds monastery . National Catholic Reporter.

Archived from the original on 3 November 2013 . Retrieved 1 October 2011 .

St. Brigid's oblate group has grown to 16 members since the dedication of the monastery on St. Brigid's feast in 2000. Besides Stamps, it counts another 13 United Methodists, one Catholic and one Disciples of Christ member. The ages of group members range from 23 to 82. One-third of them are men; half are ordained. The community continues to grow.

^ Hellmuth Hecker, [1] Archived 2007-03-28 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Mae Chee Kaew – Her Journey to Spiritual Awakening & Enlightenment e-book" (PDF) .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Upasika Kee Nanayon and the Social Dynamic of Theravadin Buddhist Practice" . Archived from the original on October 4, 2011.

^ "Issues | Authoritarianism of the holy kind" .

www.buddhistchannel.tv .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-14 . Retrieved 2022-12-14 .

^ "Bhikkhuni Dhammananda" . Archived from the original on 2007-09-28 . Retrieved 2007-06-22 .

^ Thai Bhikkhunis – Songdhammakalyani Monastery Archived December 26, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ Charles Brewer Jones, Buddhism in Taiwan: Religion and the State, 1660–1990 ; University of Hawaii Press, 1999; pp. 154–155 ^ Cheng, Wei-yi.

"Luminary Buddhist Nuns in Contemporary Taiwan: A Quiet Feminist Movement" .

Journal of Buddhist Ethics (V. 10 (2003)).

Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2013-06-05 .

^ Lori Meeks , Hokkeji and the Reemergence of Female Monastic Orders in Premodern Japan (2010) excerpt and text search Archived 2017-02-28 at the Wayback Machine Further reading [ edit ] Arai, Paula Kane Robinson (1999).

Women Living Zen: Japanese Soto Buddhist Nuns .

Bechert, Heinz ; Gombrich, Richard Francis (1991).

The World of Buddhism: Buddhist Monks and Nuns in Society and Culture .

Lohuis, Elles (2013).

Glocal Place, Lived Space: Everyday Life in a Tibetan Buddhist Monastery for Nuns in Northern India .

Catholics Chadwick, Owen (1981).

The Popes and European Revolution .

Clarendon Press . pp.

211– 52.

ISBN 9780198269199 .

also online Curtis, Sarah A. (2016). "The Double Invisibility of Missionary Sisters".

Journal of Women's History .

28 (4): 134– 143.

doi : 10.1353/jowh.2016.0037 .

S2CID 151828886 .

Deals with French nuns in the 19th century.

Kennedy, Teresa (1991).

Women Religious in the Church: a directory of individual orders / institutes . Southport: Gowland.

ISBN 1-872480-14-4 .

McGuinness, Margaret M. (2013).

Called to Serve: A History of Nuns in America .

New York University Press .

266 pages McNamara, Jo Ann Kay (1998).

Sisters in Arms: Catholic Nuns through Two Millennia .

Excerpt and text search O’Brien, Anne (2016). "Catholic nuns in transnational mission, 1528–2015".

Journal of Global History .

11 (3): 387– 408.

doi : 10.1017/S1740022816000206 .

Power, Eileen (1922).

Medieval English Nunneries c. 1275 to 1535 . Cambridge University Press – via Internet Archive .

Roberts, Rebecca (2013). "Le Catholicisme au féminin: Thirty Years of Women's History".

Historical Reflections .

39 (1): 82– 100.

On France, especially research on Catholic nuns by Claude Langlois Shank, Lillian Thomas; Nichols, John A., eds. (1987).

Medieval Religious Women: Peaceweavers .

Veale, Ailish (2016). "International and Modern Ideals in Irish Female Medical Missionary Activity, 1937–1962".

Women's History Review .

25 (4): 602– 618.

doi : 10.1080/09612025.2015.1114330 .

S2CID 148045770 .

Williams, Maria Patricia (2015). "Mobilising Mother Cabrini's educational practice: the transnational context of the London school of the Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart of Jesus 1898–1911".

History of Education .

44 (5): 631– 650.

doi : 10.1080/0046760X.2015.1063711 .

S2CID 148067468 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nuns .

Full text + illustrations, The Hermits and Anchorites of England by Rotha Mary Clay Nuns of Medieval England , full text + illustrations Religious Orders including Female Religious , full text + illustrations Medieval Shrines of British Saints, including sainted women religious , full text + illustrations Nuns article from The Catholic Encyclopedia Instruction on the Contemplative Life and on the Enclosure of Nuns Verbi Sponsa of the Vatican's Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and for Societies of Apostolic Life A Biography of a Vajrayana Buddhist Nun Martin Luther 's letter To Several Nuns, August 6, 1524 Archived December 7, 2009, at the Wayback Machine (two reasons life at the convent and vows may be forsaken) Sakyadhita – The International Association of Buddhist Women The Carmelite Sisters v t e Active Lutheran orders Men's orders Bekenntnisbruderschaft St. Peter und Paul Brethren of the Common Life Congregatio Canonicorum Sancti Augustini Evangelische Michaelsbruderschaft Hochkirchlicher Apostolat St. Ansgar Humiliatenorden Ordo Crucis Theologisk Oratorium St.-Jakobus-Bruderschaft Rogate Monastery St. Michael Women's orders Communität Casteller Ring Daughters of Mary Evangelical Sisterhood of Mary Ebstorf Abbey Fischbeck Abbey Isenhagen Abbey Lüne Abbey Medingen Abbey Wienhausen Abbey Walsrode Abbey Mixed orders Communität Christusbruderschaft Selbitz Evangelisch-Lutherische Gebetsbruderschaft Hochkirchliche St.-Johannes-Bruderschaft Order of Lutheran Franciscans Societas Sanctae Birgittae Society of the Holy Trinity Beta Sigma Psi Other topics Franciscan orders in Lutheranism v t e Religious orders and communities of the Anglican Communion For men Alton Abbey Brotherhood of the Ascended Christ Brotherhood of Saint Gregory Community of the Resurrection Company of Mission Priests Ewell Monastery Franciscan orders Korean Franciscan Brotherhood Little Brothers of Francis Melanesian Brotherhood Oratory of the Good Shepherd Benedictine orders Order of the Holy Cross Order of the Teachers of the Children of God Salisbury Priory St Gregory's Abbey Society of the Holy Cross Society of St. Francis Society of St John the Evangelist Society of St. Paul For women Augustinian orders Benedictine Sisters of Bethany Chama Cha Mariamu Mtakatifu Chita che Zita Rinoyera Chita che Zvipo Zve Moto Christa Sevika Sangha Community of All Hallows Community of Christ the King Community of Jesus' Compassion Community of Nazareth Community of St. Andrew Community of St. Clare Community of St. Denys Community of St. Francis Community of St. John Baptist Community of St. John the Divine Community of St. John the Evangelist Community of St. Laurence Community of St. Mary Community of St. Mary at the Cross Community of St. Mary the Virgin Community of St. Mary of Nazareth and Calvary Community of St. Michael & All Angels Community of St. Paul Community of St. Peter Community of St. Peter, Horbury Community of the Blessed Lady Mary Community of the Companions of Jesus the Good Shepherd Community of the Good Shepherd Community of the Holy Cross Community of the Holy Family Community of the Holy Name (Europe & Africa) Community of the Holy Name (Australia) Community of the Holy Spirit Community of the Resurrection of Our Lord Community of the Sacred Name Community of the Sacred Passion Community of the Servants of the Cross Community of the Sisters of Melanesia Community of the Sisters of the Church Community of the Sisters of the Love of God Community of the Transfiguration Congregation of the Sisters of the Visitation of Our Lady Daughters of St. Francis Fikambanan'ny Mpanompovavin l Jesoa Kristy Franciscan orders Malling Abbey Order of St. Anne Order of St. Anne at Bethany Order of St. Benedict Order of St. Helena Order of the Holy Paraclete Order of Julian of Norwich Order of Women (South India) Sisterhood of St. John the Divine Sisterhood of St. Mary, Bangladesh Sisterhood of the Epiphany Sisterhood of the Holy Nativity Sisters of Charity Sisters of the Good Shepherd Sisters of the Incarnation Sisters of Jesus Way Sisters of St Francis (Korea) Society of All Saints Sisters of the Poor Society of Our Lady of the Isles Society of Our Lady St. Mary Society of St. John the Divine Society of St. Margaret Society of the Franciscan Servants of Jesus & Mary Society of the Holy Cross Society of the Holy Trinity Society of the Precious Blood Society of the Sacred Advent Society of the Sacred Cross Society of the Sisters of Bethany Mixed Anglican Order of Preachers (Dominican) Community of the Glorious Ascension Community of the Holy Transfiguration Community of the Servants of the Will of God Companions of Saint Luke (OSB) Franciscan orders Mucknell Abbey Order of Christ the Saviour (OCS Dominicans) Benedictine orders Society of the Sacred Mission St Mark's Abbey Former Former religious orders in the Anglican Communion v t e Consecrated life in the Catholic Church Types Consecrated virgin Hermit Religious institute Orders Monastic Cenobitic Chapter Enclosed Idiorrhythmic Canons regular Mendicants Second orders Cleric regular Congregations Secular institute Society of apostolic life Vows Evangelical counsels Poverty Chastity Obedience Profession Solemn vow Vow of silence Vow of enclosure Monastery ( List ) Abbey Chapter house Cloister Convent Double Hermitage Priory Refectory Scriptorium Prayer Contemplation Liturgy of the Hours Mass Meditation Rosary Habit Clerical clothing Coif Cornette Scapular Vestment Members Superior General Provincial Abbot / Abbess Prior / Prioress Grand master Rector Brother Friar Monk Basilian Sister Nun Hermit Anchorite Novice Master Oblate Postulant Lay brother Porter Other Asceticism Foolishness for Christ Tonsure Vocational discernment Monastic cell List of religious institutes Catholicism portal v t e Catholic religious institutes Male and female Alexians Assumptionists (AA) Augustinian Recollects (OAR) Basilian Aleppians (BA) Basilian Chouerites (BC) Benedictines (OSB) Bridgettines (OSsS) Canossians (FDCC) Carmelites (OCarm) Carthusians (OCart) Cistercians (OCist) Congregation of Our Lady of Sion (NDS) Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary (SSCC) Discalced Carmelites (OCD) Dominicans (OP) Franciscans (OFM) Institute of the Incarnate Word (IVE) Mercedarians (O de M) Missionaries of Charity (MC) Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo (CS) Monastic Family of Bethlehem, of the Assumption of the Virgin and of Saint Bruno Premonstratensians (OPraem) Servants of Charity (SC) Servite Order (OSM) Society of the Atonement (SA) TOR Franciscans Trappists (OCSO) Trinitarian Order (OSST) Coat of arms of Vatican City Male Adorno Fathers (CRM) Albertine Brothers Augustinians (OSA) Barnabites (B) Basilians (CSB) Brothers of Our Lady of Mercy (FDM) Camillians (MI) Canons Regular of St. John Cantius (SJC) Capuchins (OFM Cap) Christian Brothers (Irish) (CFC) Congregatio Discipulorum Domini (CDD) Immaculate Heart of Mary (CICM) Congregation of the Blessed Sacrament (SSS) Claretians (CMF) Congregation of Saint Thérèse of Lisieux (CST) Conventual Franciscans (OFM Conv) Crosiers (OSC) De La Salle Brothers (FSC) Discalced Augustinians (OAD) Franciscan Friars of the Renewal (CFR) Franciscan Missionaries of the Eternal Word (MFVA) Gabrielites Heralds of Good News (HGN) Holy Cross (CSC) Holy Ghost Fathers (CSSp) Josephites (SSJ) Legionaries of Christ (LC) Little Brothers of Jesus Marians of the Immaculate Conception (MIC) Society of Jesus (Jesuits) (SJ) Society of Mary (Marianists) (SM) Society of Mary (Marists) (SM) Society of the Divine Word (SVD) Society of Saint Edmund (SSE) Marist Brothers (FMS) Mechitarists (CAM) Comboni Missionaries of the Heart of Jesus (MCCI) Missionaries of La Salette (MS) Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales (MSFS) Missionaries of the Poor (MOP) Missionaries of the Sacred Heart (MSC) Missionaries of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Oblates of Mary Immaculate (OMI) Oblates of the Virgin Mary (OMV) Oblates of St. Francis de Sales (OSFS) Order of Friars Minor (OFM) Passionists (CP) Pauline Fathers (OSPPE) Redemptorists (CSsR) Rogationists of the Heart of Jesus (RCJ) Sacred Heart Brothers Salesians (SDB) Servants of Jesus and Mary (SJM) Sons of the Most Holy Redeemer (FSSR) Stigmatines (CSS) Xaverian Brothers (CFX) Female Adorers of the Blood of Christ (ASC) Apostolic Carmel (AC) Basilian Aleppian Sisters Basilian Chouerite Sisters Brigidines Congregation of the Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary (CSIC) Carmelite Sisters of Saint Teresa (CSST) Congregation of the Franciscan Hospitaller Sisters of the Immaculate Conception (FHIC) Daughters of Divine Love Daughters of Mary of the Immaculate Conception (DM) Daughters of the Holy Heart of Mary Faithful Companions of Jesus Felicians (CSSF) Filippini Sisters (MPF) Handmaids of the Heart of Jesus Handmaids of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Hijas de Jesús Holy Spirit Adoration Sisters Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary Little Sisters Disciples of the Lamb Little Sisters of Jesus Little Sisters of the Poor Living the Gospel Community (LGC) Lovers of the Holy Cross Marianites of Holy Cross (MSC) Maryknoll Sisters (MM) Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God (SMIC) Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary (ICM) Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart of Jesus (MSC) Oblate Sisters of Providence (OSP) Oblates of Jesus the Priest Oblate Sisters of the Virgin Mary of Fatima (OMVF) Order of Our Lady of Charity (ODNC) Order of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary Poor Clares (OSC) Poor Clare Missionaries of the Blessed Sacrament (MC) Religious of the Sacred Heart of Jesus (RSCJ) Religious of the Virgin Mary (RVM) Servants of St. Joseph (SSJ) Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament Sisters of Charity Sisters of Maria Bambina (SCCG) Sisters of Christian Doctrine of Nancy (DC) Sisters of the Cross and Passion Sisters of the Destitute (SD) Sisters of the Good Shepherd (RGS) Sisters of Holy Cross Sisters of the Holy Cross Sisters of the Holy Family-Louisiana Sisters of the Holy Names of Jesus and Mary Sisters of the Immaculate Conception Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary Sisters of Life (SV) Sisters of Mercy (RSM) Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur (SNDdeN) Sisters of Providence of Saint Mary-of-the-Woods Sisters of the Sacred Heart Sisters of Saint Francis Sisters of Saint Joseph The Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace Sisters of St Joseph of the Sacred Heart (RSJ) Sisters of St. Paul of Chartres (SPC) Society of the Helpers of the Holy Souls Sisters of Social Service (sss) Servants of the Blessed Sacrament (SSS) Ursulines (OSU) White Sisters See also: Third orders of Catholic laity Catholicism portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qq8j6
Cached time: 20250814215531
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.167 seconds
Real time usage: 1.421 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4865/1000000
Revision size: 60411/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 254756/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3236/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 23/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 239678/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.691/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23778213/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1061.122      1 -total
 32.69%  346.842      1 Template:Reflist
 16.14%  171.281     16 Template:Cite_web
 10.29%  109.218      1 Template:Peoplepalicanon
  9.97%  105.784      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.18%   97.376      1 Template:Lang
  8.42%   89.363     15 Template:Cite_book
  6.50%   68.981      1 Template:Short_description
  6.30%   66.820     10 Template:Cite_journal
  4.82%   51.121      4 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:62984:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215531 and revision id 1303334414. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nun&oldid=1303334414 " Categories : Nuns Christian nuns Asceticism Gendered occupations Religious occupations Roman Catholic religious sisters and nuns Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Serbian-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from October 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 10:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nun 59 languages Add topic

