Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Work 2 Select works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Henry Smith Williams 3 languages العربية مصرى اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Henry Smith Williams Henry Smith Williams, MD , LL.B.

Born 4 March 1863 Durand, Illinois Died 4 July 1942 Los Angeles, California Occupation Author , doctor , lawyer Nationality American Education MD Alma mater Chicago Medical College, 1884 Genre Science , history , medicine Spouse Florence Whitney Williams (1889 -) Henry Smith Williams (1863-1943) was a medical doctor, lawyer, and author of a number of books on medicine, history, and science.

Work [ edit ] In the introductory the Author of his book Drug Addicts Are Human Beings published in 1938, it is stated that this is the author's 119th published book. In addition to his work as a writer, it is claimed that Williams had treated some 10,000 patients in his medical practice. It also announces that he was an expert on the "chemistry and biology of the blood cells" and had spent ten years intensively studying cancer. His brother was the doctor Edward Huntington Williams, with whom he wrote his " History of Science (31 volumes)".

[ 1 ] He authored articles for Harper's Magazine .

[ 2 ] In his book, Chasing the Scream , [ 3 ] Johann Hari describes how the 1931 arrest and subsequent imprisonment of Williams' brother, Edward, was orchestrated by Harry J. Anslinger , head of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics, and that Williams, after pleading for his brother's release, spent much of the rest of his life advocating, as his brother had, for the kinder treatment of addicts (which eventually led to his writing of the book, Drug Addicts Are Human Beings ), including prescribing addicts measured doses of the very drugs to which they were addicted, with surprising (anecdotal) success. In his 1938 book, Williams predicted with a high degree of accuracy that, fifty years later, drug-smuggling would grow to become a five-billion-dollar industry. Williams died still trying to end the drug war, his uncharacteristic book and his efforts at speaking out in favor of his brother's beliefs almost entirely suppressed and forgotten.

Select works [ edit ] The Historians' History of the World (editor) The Story of Modern Science A History of Science (10 volumes) Luther Burbank: His Methods and Discoveries and Their Practical Application Modern Warfare Drugs against men , ISBN 0405136234 The private lives of birds R.M. McBride & Co. (1939) Your glands and you R.M. McBride & Co. (1936) Alcohol : how it affects the individual, the community, and the race "Chronology (in part)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

305– 306.

"Civilization" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

403– 410.

Manuscripts, inscriptions and muniments, oriental, classical, medieval and modern, described, classified and arranged, comprehending the history of the art of writing.

Merrill & Baker (1902) Drugs Against Men . R.M. McBride & Co. (1935) Modern Warfare . Hearst's International Library Co. (1915) Witness of the Sun Doubleday, Page & Co. (1920) The Proteomorphic Theory and the New Medicine . Goodhue Co. (1918) "Wonder Book of the World's Progress", 10 Volume collection, copyright 1935, Funk & Wagnalls Co.

References [ edit ] ^ Williams, Henry Smith (1938).

Drug Addicts are Human Beings: The Story of Our billion-Dollar Drug Racket: How We Created It and How We Can Wipe It Out . p. iii.

^ "Harper's Magazine author page for Henry Smith Williams" .

Harper's Magazine . Retrieved 2008-03-28 .

^ Hari, Johann (January 15, 2015).

Chasing the Scream: The First and Last Days of the War on Drugs . Great Britain: Bloomsbury Publishing Plc. pp.

35– 41.

ISBN 9781620408902 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Henry Smith Williams Harper's Magazine author page Works by Henry Smith Williams at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Henry Smith Williams at the Internet Archive List of books at WorldCat Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Greece Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henry_Smith_Williams&oldid=1294429950 " Categories : 1863 births 1943 deaths American encyclopedists American addiction physicians American non-fiction writers American print editors American historians of science American hospital administrators Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 17:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Henry Smith Williams 3 languages Add topic

