Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Targets of varmint hunting 2 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 2.1 Blowgun 2.2 Airgun 2.3 Firearms 2.3.1 Examples 3 Impacts on varmint populations 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Varmint hunting 3 languages Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The practice of hunting vermin as a means of pest control This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Varmint hunting" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Varmint hunting or varminting is the practice of hunting vermin — generally small/medium-sized wild mammals or birds — as a means of pest control , rather than as games for food or trophy .  The targeted animals are culled because they are considered economically harmful pests to agricultural crops , livestocks or properties; pathogen -carrying hosts / vectors that transmit cross-species / zoonotic diseases ; or for population control as a mean of protecting other vulnerable species and ecosystems .

The term "varminter" may refer to a varmint hunter , or describe the hunting equipments (such as a varmint rifle ) either specifically designed or coincidentally suitable for the practice of varmint hunting.  Varmint hunters may hunt to exterminate a nuisance animal from their own property, to collect a bounty offered by another landowner or the government, or simply as a hobby .

Targets of varmint hunting [ edit ] A contemporary wood engraving of varmint hunters shooting passenger pigeons, at the time a bird known to damage crops.

The term varmint is a US colloquial term for vermin , though it refers more specifically to mammalian or avian pests, including: [ 1 ] Predators which can kill/maim domestic animals : badger , coyote , [ 2 ] foxes , mink , raccoons , snakes , snapping turtles , weasel , and wolverine .

Rodents and lagomorphs that can damage croplands or pastures : beaver , gophers , groundhogs , muskrat , coypu (also known as nutria) , prairie dogs , porcupine , and rabbits .

Urban wildlife that can cause damage to buildings and properties, create mess/ fecal pollutions, or carry disease : feral pigeons , rats , and squirrels .

Birds perceived as damaging to crops : crows and ravens , sparrows , as well as passenger pigeons and Carolina parakeets ,one of which was driven to extinction in part by pressure from indiscriminate hunting .

Invasive species , such as starlings and wild boar / hogs , that are preying on or displacing desirable native species .

Equipment [ edit ] Blowgun [ edit ] Shorter blowguns and smaller bore darts were used for varmint hunting by pre-adolescent boys in traditional North American Cherokees villages. They used the blowguns to cut down on smaller raiding rodents such as rats, mice, chipmunks and other mammals that cut or gnaw into food caches, seed and vegetable stores, or that are attracted to the planted vegetables.  While this custom gave the boys something to do around the village and kept them out of mischief, it also worked as an early form of pest control. Some food and skins were also obtained by the boys, who hunted squirrels with blowguns well into the 20th century.

[ 3 ] Airgun [ edit ] Air rifles are commonly used in built-up environments, where the targets might not be particularly far away but are high up on trees / structures or in obscure corners, and the risk of overpenetration , ricochets and stray shots need to be minimized.  Airguns are more powerful and accurate than blowguns, but much quieter and with less terminal damage than firearms , and thus more suitable in urban and suburban environments where noise complaint and ballistic safety can be an issue.

Firearms [ edit ] Main article: Varmint rifle Since varmint hunting is a form of pest control , and minimally regulated by law, the definition of what constitutes a varmint firearm tends to vary by regional pests. The definitive varmints are ground burrowing animals such as groundhogs and prairie dogs .  These animals are small, alert and difficult to approach closely, and hunting them requires a long-range, highly accurate rifle.  Because of this, models labelled "Varminter" will generally fit the following characteristics: [ citation needed ] high-velocity caliber , for a flat trajectory (see external ballistics ) lightweight projectile , designed for minimum overpenetration (see terminal ballistics ) extreme accuracy , for the ability to hit small targets at long range (see accurizing ) heavier barrel , for more consistent internal ballistics so the gun can be fired more frequently without its precision being detrimented by heat build-up To reduce noise, flash, and hearing damage , silencers are sometimes employed on varmint rifles.

[ 4 ] Examples [ edit ] Ruger No. 1 Varmint rifle in .223 Remington with heavy barrel, bipod rest, large telescopic sight, and "dope" sheet on the stock for windage Bushmaster AR-15 based Varminter model; includes extended heavy barrel, adjustable trigger, and no iron sights (being designed for dedicated use with telescopic sights ).

[ 5 ] Remington 700 SPS: Has a 26" heavy contour barrel with standard features that include a hinged floorplate magazine, sling swivel studs, and a drilled and tapped receiver.

[ 6 ] Ruger No. 1 Varminter single-shot rifle; equipped with scope base and rings for telescopic sight, available in high velocity calibers with extended heavy barrels.  While the trigger is factory set and locked, the trigger does include sear engagement and overtravel adjustment screws, which can be adjusted by a gunsmith .

Savage Model 12 Varminter ; includes adjustable trigger, and free floated extended heavy barrel, no iron sights, and a benchrest style stock.

[ 7 ] Sierra Varminter line of bullets; light weight, hollow point and soft point bullets designed for high velocities, minimal penetration, and maximum expansion needed for varmints.

[ 8 ] Henry Repeating Arms Varmint Express .17 HMR: Features a high-comb Monte Carlo style buttstock optimized for use with a scope, fiber optic sights, and an 11-round capacity.

[ 9 ] Henry Repeating Arms produces over a dozen different lever action rifles chambered for .22 WMR and .17 HMR, both of which are ideal cartridges for varminting.

Impacts on varmint populations [ edit ] Hunting of varmint has typically been to reduce crop loss and to stop predation of livestock .

[ 10 ] This hunting has imposed an artificial selection pressure on the organisms being hunted.

[ 11 ] The selection pressure on varmints is probably for younger reproduction ages and earlier maturity. Varmint hunting is also potentially selecting for behavioral changes that are desired, animals avoiding human populated areas, crops, and livestock.

See also [ edit ] Nuisance wildlife management Pest control Rat-catcher Vermin References [ edit ] ^ Ovington, Ray (1965).

The Compact Book of Small Game and Varmints . New York: J. Lowell Pratt & Company.

^ Pettigrew, Jashayla (2023-09-15).

"Oregon Fish and Wildlife Commission bans 'abhorrent' killing contests" .

KOIN . Retrieved 2023-09-16 .

^ Smith, Jim "Crow". 2017. "The Modern Blowgun." The Backwoodsman "The magazine for the twentieth century frontiersman specializing in trapping, woodslore, survival, gardening, muzzleloading & homesteading". Volume 38. September/October 2017. Pages 58-60.

^ Meitin, Patrick (2018).

The Predator and Varmint Hunter's Guidebook . F+W Media.

ISBN 9781440248528 .

^ Bushmaster AR-15 Archived October 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Remington 700 SPS Varmint Archived July 17, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Savage Model 12 Varminter" . Archived from the original on 2006-01-03 . Retrieved 2005-12-28 .

^ "Sierra Bullets – Varminter Bullets" .

sierrabullets.com . Sierra Bullets . Retrieved 13 October 2015 .

^ "Varmint Express .17 HMR | Henry Repeating Arms" .

www.henryusa.com . 13 January 2014 . Retrieved 2023-08-21 .

^ Tellman, Barbara. "Varmint control in Cochise County over the years." (2005).

^ Allendorf, Fred W., and Jeffrey J. Hard. "Human-induced evolution caused by unnatural selection through harvest of wild animals." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106.Supplement 1 (2009): 9987-9994.

v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Varmint_hunting&oldid=1248869284 " Categories : Hunting by game Manual agricultural practices Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2007 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017 This page was last edited on 1 October 2024, at 22:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Varmint hunting 3 languages Add topic

