Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of medical specialization 2 Classification of medical specialization 3 Specialties that are common worldwide 4 List of specialties recognized in the European Union and European Economic Area 5 List of North American medical specialties and others 6 Salaries 7 Specialties by country Toggle Specialties by country subsection 7.1 Australia and New Zealand 7.2 Canada 7.3 Germany 7.4 India 7.5 Sweden 7.6 United States 8 Demography 9 Satisfaction and burnout 10 See also 11 References Toggle the table of contents Medical specialty 45 languages العربية Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Sunda Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of medicine concerning a specific group of diseases or population This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may have too many section headers .

Please help consolidate the article.

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Medical specialty" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A medical specialty is a branch of medical practice that is focused on a defined group of patients, diseases, skills, or philosophy . Examples include those branches of medicine that deal exclusively with children ( pediatrics ), cancer ( oncology ), laboratory medicine ( pathology ), or primary care ( family medicine ). After completing medical school or other basic training, physicians or surgeons and other clinicians usually further their medical education in a specific specialty of medicine by completing a multiple-year residency to become a specialist.

[ 1 ] History of medical specialization [ edit ] To a certain extent, medical practitioners have long been specialized. According to Galen , specialization was common among Roman physicians.

[ 2 ] The particular system of modern medical specialties evolved gradually during the 19th century. Informal social recognition of medical specialization evolved before the formal legal system. The particular subdivision of the practice of medicine into various specialties varies from country to country, and is somewhat arbitrary.

[ 2 ] Classification of medical specialization [ edit ] Medical specialties can be classified along several axes. These are: Surgical or internal medicine Age range of patients Diagnostic or therapeutic Organ-based or technique-based Throughout history, the most important has been the division into surgical and internal medicine specialties. The surgical specialties are those in which an important part of diagnosis and treatment is achieved through major surgical techniques. The internal medicine specialties are the specialties in which the main diagnosis and treatment is never major surgery. In some countries, anesthesiology is classified as a surgical discipline, since it is vital in the surgical process, though anesthesiologists never perform major surgery themselves.

Many specialties are organ-based. Many symptoms and diseases come from a particular organ. Others are based mainly around a set of techniques, such as radiology , which was originally based around X-rays .

The age range of patients seen by any given specialist can be quite variable. Pediatricians handle most complaints and diseases in children that do not require surgery, and there are several subspecialties (formally or informally) in pediatrics that mimic the organ-based specialties in adults. Pediatric surgery may or may not be a separate specialty that handles some kinds of surgical complaints in children.

A further subdivision is the diagnostic versus therapeutic specialties. While the diagnostic process is of great importance in all specialties, some specialists perform mainly or only diagnostic examinations, such as pathology , clinical neurophysiology , and radiology. This line is becoming somewhat blurred with interventional radiology , an evolving field that uses image expertise to perform minimally invasive procedures.

Specialties that are common worldwide [ edit ] Specialty May be subspecialty of Age range of patients Diagnostic (D) or therapeutic (T) specialty Surgical (S) or internal medicine (I) specialty Organ-based (O) or technique-based (T) Allergy and immunology Internal medicine Pediatrics All Both I O Adolescent medicine Pediatrics Family medicine Pediatric Both I T Anesthesiology None All T Both Both Aerospace medicine Family Medicine All Both Neither Both Bariatrics Several All Both Both Both Cardiology Internal medicine Adults T I O Cardiothoracic surgery General surgery Adults T S O Child and adolescent psychiatry Psychiatry Pediatric T I T Clinical neurophysiology Neurology All D I Both Colorectal surgery General surgery All Both S O Dermatology None All T I O Developmental pediatrics Pediatrics Pediatric T I Neither Emergency medicine Family medicine All Both Both Both Endocrinology Internal medicine Adults Both I Multidisciplinary Family Medicine None All Both Both Multidisciplinary Forensic pathology Pathology All D Neither T Forensic psychiatry Psychiatry All D I T Gastroenterology Internal medicine Adults T I O General surgery None Adults T S T Surgical oncology General surgery Oncology Adults T S T Geriatrics Family medicine Internal medicine Geriatric T I Multidisciplinary Geriatric psychiatry Geriatrics Psychiatry Geriatric T I Neither Gynecologic oncology Obstetrics and gynecology All T S O Hematology Internal medicine Adults Both I Neither Hematologic pathology Hematology Pathology All D Neither T Infectious disease Internal medicine Pediatrics All Both I Neither Internal medicine None Adults Both I Neither Interventional radiology Radiology All Both - Multidisciplinary Intensive care medicine Anesthesiology Emergency medicine Internal medicine All T Both Both Maternal-fetal medicine Obstetrics and gynecology Adults T S Both Medical biochemistry Internal medicine All D I Neither Medical genetics None All D I Neither Medical oncology Internal medicine Adults Both I Neither Neonatology Pediatrics Neonatal T I Neither Nephrology Internal medicine All T I O Neurology Internal medicine All Both I O Neuropathology Pathology All D Neither T Neuropsychiatry Psychiatry All Both I T Neurosurgery None All T S O Nuclear medicine (nucleology) None All Both I T Obstetrics and gynecology Family medicine All T S O Occupational medicine Family medicine Internal medicine Adults T I Multidisciplinary Ophthalmology None All T S O Orthopedic surgery None All T S O Oral and maxillofacial surgery None All T S O Otorhinolaryngology None All T S O Palliative care Family Medicine Emergency medicine Internal medicine Pediatrics All Both Neither Neither Pathology None All D Neither T Pediatrics None Pediatric Both I Neither Pediatric allergy and immunology Pediatrics Allergy and immunology Pediatric T I O Pediatric cardiology Pediatrics Cardiology Pediatric T I O Pediatric emergency medicine Pediatrics Emergency medicine Pediatric Both Both Both Pediatric endocrinology Pediatrics Endocrinology Pediatric Both I Multidisciplinary Pediatric gastroenterology Pediatrics Gastroenterology Pediatric T I O Pediatric hematology and oncology Pediatrics Hematology Oncology Pediatric T I O Pediatric infectious disease Pediatrics Infectious disease Pediatric T I O Pediatric nephrology Pediatrics Nephrology Pediatric T I O Pediatric respiratory medicine Pediatrics Respiratory medicine Pediatric T I O Pediatric rheumatology Pediatrics Rheumatology Pediatric T I O Pediatric surgery General surgery Pediatric T S O Physical medicine and rehabilitation None All T I Multidisciplinary Plastic, reconstructive and aesthetic surgery General surgery All T S O Psychiatry Family medicine All Both I T Public health Family medicine All Neither Neither T Radiation oncology None All T Neither T Radiology None All Both I T Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Obstetrics and gynecology Adults T S T Pulmunology or Respiratory medicine Internal medicine Adults T I O Rheumatology Internal medicine Adults T I Neither Sports medicine Family medicine All Both Neither Multidisciplinary Thoracic surgery General surgery Adults T S T Toxicology Emergency Medicine All Both Neither O Transfusion Medicine Hematology All Both Neither Both Neuroradiology Radiology All Both I Both Urology None All T S O Vascular surgery General surgery All T S O List of specialties recognized in the European Union and European Economic Area [ edit ] The European Union publishes a list of specialties recognized in the European Union, and by extension, the European Economic Area.

[ 3 ] There is substantial overlap between some of the specialties and it is likely that for example "Clinical radiology" and "Radiology" refer to a large degree to the same pattern of practice across Europe.

Accident and emergency medicine Allergist Anaesthetics Cardiology Child psychiatry Clinical biology Clinical chemistry Clinical microbiology Clinical neurophysiology Craniofacial surgery Dermatology Endocrinology Family and General Medicine Gastroenterologic surgery Gastroenterology General Practice General surgery Geriatrics Hematology Immunology Infectious diseases Internal medicine Laboratory medicine Nephrology Neuropsychiatry Neurology Neurosurgery Nuclear medicine Obstetrics and gynaecology Occupational medicine Oncology Ophthalmology Oral and maxillofacial surgery Orthopaedics Otorhinolaryngology Paediatric surgery Paediatrics Pathology Pharmacology Physical medicine and rehabilitation Plastic surgery Podiatric surgery Preventive medicine Psychiatry Public health Radiation Oncology Radiology Respiratory medicine Rheumatology Stomatology Thoracic surgery Tropical medicine Urology Vascular surgery Venereology List of North American medical specialties and others [ edit ] In this table, as in many healthcare arenas, medical specialties are organized into the following groups: Surgical specialties focus on manually operative and instrumental techniques to treat disease.

Medical specialties that focus on the diagnosis and non-surgical treatment of disease.

Diagnostic specialties focus more purely on diagnosis of disorders.

Specialty Code Group Sub-specialties Focus Allergy and immunology Allergic reactions, asthma, and the immune system.

Anesthesiology AN, PAN Surgery [ 4 ] [ citation needed ] Pediatric anesthesia Pain management Intensive care Critical care Obstetrics and gynaecology Cardiothoracic anesthesiology Trauma care Pre- and Post-Operative Assessment and Care Generalist (covers all the sub-specialties) Anesthesia Bariatrics Deals with the causes, prevention, and treatment of obesity .

Cardiology Medicine Interventional cardiology Echocardiography Electrocardiography Sports cardiology Cardiogeriatrics Preventive cardiology and Cardiac Rehabilitation Pediatric cardiology Disease of the cardiovascular system .

Cardiovascular surgery Surgery The operation of heart and major blood vessels of the chest .

Clinical laboratory sciences Diagnostic Transfusion medicine is concerned with the transfusion of blood and blood component , including the maintenance of a " blood bank ".

Cellular pathology is concerned with diagnosis using samples from patients taken as tissues and cells using histology and cytology .

Clinical chemistry is concerned with diagnosis by making biochemical analysis of blood, body fluids, and tissues.

Hematology is concerned with diagnosis by looking at changes in the cellular composition of the blood and bone marrow as well as the coagulation system in the blood.

Clinical microbiology is concerned with the in vitro diagnosis of diseases caused by bacteria , viruses , fungi , and parasites .

Clinical immunology is concerned with disorders of the immune system and related body defenses. It also deals with diagnosis of allergy .

Application of diagnostic techniques in medical laboratories such as assays , microscope analysis.

Dermatology D, DS Medicine Dermatology, Mohs surgery Skin and its appendages ( hair , nails , sweat glands etc.).

Dietetics RD [ 5 ] Food and nutrition Emergency medicine EM Medicine Disaster medicine Emergency medical services Hospice and palliative medicine International Emergency Medicine and Global Health Medical toxicology Pediatric emergency medicine Research Simulation Sports medicine Toxicology Ultrasound Undersea and hyperbaric medicine Wilderness medicine The initial management of emergent medical conditions, often in hospital emergency departments or the field.

Endocrinology Medicine The endocrine system (i.e., endocrine glands and hormones ) and its diseases, including diabetes and thyroid diseases.

Family medicine FM Medicine Addiction medicine Adolescent medicine Anesthesia Emergency medicine Care of the elderly (geriatric medicine) Clinical environmental health Global health HIV care Hospital medicine Indigenous health Low-risk obstetrics Medical education Medical oncology Medical simulation Pain medicine Palliative care Point of Care Ultrasound (POCUS) Research Sleep medicine Sports and exercise medicine Women's health Continuing, comprehensive healthcare for the individual and family, integrating the biological, clinical and behavioral sciences to treat patients of all ages, sexes, organ systems, and diseases.

Forensic medicine Medicine Gastroenterology GI Medicine The alimentary tract General surgery GS Surgery Colorectal surgery Gastrointestinal surgery Transplant surgery Trauma surgery Geriatrics IMG Medicine [ 4 ] [ citation needed ] Elderly patients Gynecology Female reproductive health Hepatology Medicine The liver and biliary tract , usually a part of gastroenterology.

Hospital medicine Medicine Infectious disease ID Medicine Diseases caused by biological agents.

Intensive care medicine Medicine Life support and management of critically ill patients, often in an ICU .

Internal medicine Medicine Medical research Anatomy , Biochemistry , Embryology , Genetics , Pharmacology , Toxicology Care of hospitalized patients Nephrology Medicine Kidney diseases Neurology N Medicine Behavioral neurology Clinical neurophysiology Geriatric neurology Headache medicine Neuromuscular medicine Neurodevelopmental disabilities Neuro-oncology Neuroradiology Vascular neurology Hospice and palliative medicine Pain medicine Sleep medicine Diseases involving the central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous systems .

Neurosurgery NS Surgery Cerebrovascular Neurosurgical oncology Stereotactic and functional Spine Neurotrauma Skull base Peripheral nerve Pediatric neurosurgery Disease of the central nervous system , peripheral nervous system , and spinal column .

Obstetrics and gynecology OB/GYN Surgery [ 4 ] [ citation needed ] Maternal-fetal medicine Reproductive medicine Fertility medicine Gynecologic oncology Oncology ON Medicine Radiation oncology – pertains to the use of radiation therapy (the medical use of ionizing radiation ) as part of cancer treatment to control malignant cells (not to be confused with radiology ).

Cancer and other malignant diseases, often grouped with hematology.

Ophthalmology OPH Surgery Anterior segment surgery Cornea Glaucoma Neuro-ophthalmology Ocular oncology Oculoplastics and Orbital surgery Ophthalmic pathology Pediatric ophthalmology/strabismus Refractive surgery Medical retina Uveitis Vitreo-retinal surgery Diseases of the visual pathways, including the eyes, brain, etc.

Oral and maxillofacial surgery Maxfacs, OMS Surgery Oral and Craniofacial surgery (Head and neck) Facial cosmetic surgery Craniomaxillofacial trauma Disease of the head, neck, face, jaws and the hard and soft tissues of the oral and maxillofacial region.

Orthopedic surgery ORS Surgery Hand surgery , surgical sports medicine , adult reconstruction, spine surgery, foot and ankle, musculoskeletal oncology, orthopedic trauma surgery, pediatric orthopedic surgery Injury and disease of the musculoskeletal system .

Otorhinolaryngology , or ENT ORL, ENT Surgery Head and neck, facial cosmetic surgery, Neurotology , Laryngology Treatment of ear, nose, and throat disorders. The term head and neck surgery defines a closely related specialty that is concerned mainly with the surgical management of cancer of the same anatomical structures.

Palliative care PLM Medicine A relatively modern branch of clinical medicine that deals with pain and symptom relief and emotional support in patients with terminal illnesses including cancer and heart failure .

Pathology PTH Diagnostic Understanding disease through examination of molecules , cells , tissues and organs . The term encompasses both the medical specialty that uses tissues and body fluids to obtain clinically useful information and the related scientific study of disease processes.

Pediatrics PD Medicine Children. Like internal medicine, pediatrics has many sub-specialties for specific age ranges, organ systems, disease classes, and sites of care delivery. Most sub-specialties of adult medicine have a pediatric equivalent such as pediatric cardiology , pediatric emergency medicine , pediatric endocrinology , pediatric gastroenterology , pediatric hematology , pediatric oncology , pediatric ophthalmology , and neonatology .

Deals with the medical care of infants , children , and adolescents (from newborn to age 16–21, depending on the country).

Pediatric surgery Surgery Treats a wide variety of thoracic and abdominal (and sometimes urologic ) diseases of childhood.

Physical medicine and rehabilitation Or Physiatry PM&R Medicine Cancer Rehabilitation Pain Management Traumatic Brain Injury Spinal Cord Injury Sports Medicine Pediatrics Hospice & Palliative Medicine Concerned with functional improvement after injury, illness, or congenital disorders .

Plastic surgery PS Surgery Cosmetic surgery Burn Microsurgery Hand surgery Craniofacial surgery Elective cosmetic surgery as well as reconstructive surgery after traumatic or operative mutilation.

Podiatry POD Surgery Forefoot surgery Midfoot surgery Rearfoot surgery Ankle surgery Soft tissue leg surgery Elective podiatric surgery of the foot and ankle, lower limb diabetic wound and salvation, peripheral vascular disease limb preservation, lower limb mononeuropathy conditions. Reconstructive foot & ankle surgery .

Proctology PRO Medicine (or colorectal surgery ) treats disease in the rectum , anus , and colon .

Psychiatry P Medicine Addiction psychiatry focuses on substance abuse and its treatment.

Child and adolescent psychiatry focuses on the care of children and adolescents with mental, emotional, and learning problems including ADHD , autism , and family conflicts.

Consultation-Liaison psychiatry focuses on the interface between general medicine and psychiatry.

Forensic psychiatry focuses on the interface of psychiatry and law.

Geriatric psychiatry focuses on the care of elderly people with mental illnesses including dementias , post-stroke cognitive changes, and depression.

Neuropsychiatry focuses on affective, cognitive and behavioral disorders attributable to diseases of the nervous system Sleep medicine focuses on the diagnosis and treatment of sleep disorders.

Hospice and Palliative Medicine Pain medicine The bio-psycho-social study of the etiology , diagnosis , treatment and prevention of cognitive , perceptual , emotional and behavioral disorders. Related fields include psychotherapy and clinical psychology .

Pulmonology Medicine The lungs and respiratory system .

Pulmonology is generally considered a branch of internal medicine , although it is closely related to intensive care medicine when dealing with patients requiring mechanical ventilation .

Public Health Public health focuses on the health of populations. Physicians employed in this field work in policy, research or health promotion , taking a broad view of health that encompasses the social determinants of health .

Radiology R, DR Diagnostic and Therapeutic Interventional radiology is concerned with using expert imaging of the human body, usually via CT, ultrasound, fluoroscopy , or MRI to perform a breadth of intravascular procedures (angioplasty, arterial stenting, thrombolysis, uterine fibroid embolization), biopsies and minimally invasive oncologic procedures (radiofrequency and cryoablation of tumors & transarterial chemoembolization) Nuclear medicine uses radioactive substances for in vivo and in vitro diagnosis either using imaging of the location of radioactive substances placed into a patient or using in vitro diagnostic tests utilizing radioactive substances.

The use of expertise in radiation in the context of medical imaging for diagnosis or image guided minimally invasive therapy.

X-rays , etc.

Rheumatology RHU Medicine Autoimmune and inflammatory diseases of the joints and other organ systems, such as arthritis and other rheumatic diseases .

Surgical oncology SO Surgery Curative and palliative surgical approaches to cancer treatment.

Thoracic surgery TS Surgery Surgery of the organs of the thoracic cavity : the heart, lungs, and great vessels.

Transplant surgery TTS Surgery Transplantation of organs from one body to another.

Toxicology Diagnostic and Therapeutic Environmental Forensic Occupational Pediatric Poisonings, Overdoses; Environmental, and Occupational Exposures Urgent Care Medicine UCM Medicine Immediate medical care offering outpatient care for the treatment of acute and chronic illness and injury.

Urology U Surgery Urinary tracts of males and females, and the male reproductive system . It is often practiced together with andrology ("men's health").

Vascular surgery VS Surgery The peripheral blood vessels – those outside the chest (usually operated on by cardiovascular surgeons ) and outside the central nervous system (treated by neurosurgery ).

Salaries [ edit ] According to the 2022 Medscape Physician Compensation Report, physicians on average earn $339K annually. Primary care physicians earn $260K annually while specialists earned $368K annually.

[ 6 ] The table below details the average range of salaries for physicians in the US of medical specialties: [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Specialty Average salary (USD) Average hours work/week Average salary/hour (USD) Allergy and Immunology $298K Anesthesiology $405K 59 Dermatology $438K 44 103 Emergency medicine $373K 44 180 Endocrinology $257K Cardiac surgery 218,684 to $500,000 Cardiology $490K 55 Critical care $369K Infectious disease $260K Internal medicine $264K 55 58 Family medicine $255K 51 58 Nephrology $329K Neurology $301K 54 93 Obstetrics and gynecology $336K 59 83 Oncology $411K Ophthalmology $417K 45 Orthopedic surgery $557K 56 Otolaryngology $469K 52 Oral and maxillofacial surgery 360,000 to $625,210 53 Pathology $334K 44 Pediatrics 244K 52 69 Rheumatology $289K Physical medicine and rehabilitation $322K Preventative medicine $243K Pulmonary medicine $353K 55 Psychiatry $287K 46 72 Radiology $437K 56 General surgery $402K 58 Urology $461K 59 Neurosurgery 350,000 to $705,000 132 Plastic surgery $576K 114 Gastroenterology $453K 55 93 Specialties by country [ edit ] Australia and New Zealand [ edit ] There are 15 recognised specialty medical Colleges in Australia.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The majority of these are Australasian Colleges and therefore also oversee New Zealand specialist doctors. These Colleges are: Specialist college Major subspecialties Approximate number of specialist doctors/trainees Australasian College for Emergency Medicine Emergency medicine 5,000 Australasian College of Dermatologists 700 Australasian College of Sport and Exercise Physicians Exercise medicine 350 Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists Pain medicine 7,000 Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine 4,500 College of Intensive Care Medicine Intensive care 1,200 Royal Australasian College of Medical Administrators 800 Royal Australasian College of Physicians Addiction medicine, adolescent and young adult medicine, cardiology, clinical genetics, clinical haematology, clinical pharmacology, community child health, endocrinology, gastroenterology, general and acute care medicine, general paediatrics geriatric medicine, haematology, infectious diseases, immunology and allergy, neonatal and perinatal medicine, nephrology, neurology, nuclear medicine, occupational medicine, oncology, paediatric emergency medicine, palliative medicine, public health, rehabilitation, respiratory and sleep medicine, rheumatology, sexual health 28,000 Royal Australasian College of Surgeons Cardiothoracic, general surgery, head & neck, neurosurgery, orthopaedics, paediatric surgery, plastics, urology, vascular 9,000 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Obstetrics, gynaecology, fertility medicine, obstetric ultrasound, gynaecological oncology, urogynaecology 2,500 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Ophthalmologists 1,100 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists 5,000 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists Diagnostic, interventional, ultrasound, nuclear medicine 3,500 Royal Australian College of General Practitioners 40,000 Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia Anatomical, chemical, clinical, forensic, genetic, haematological, immunological, microbiological pathology 1,000 The Royal Australasian College of Dental Surgeons supervises training of specialist medical practitioners specializing in oral and maxillofacial surgery in addition to its role in the training of dentists . There are approximately 260 faciomaxillary surgeons in Australia.

[ 11 ] The Royal New Zealand College of General Practitioners is a distinct body from the Australian Royal Australian College of General Practitioners . There are approximately 5100 members of the RNZCGP.

Within some of the larger colleges, there are sub-faculties, such as: Australasian Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine Archived 2014-12-11 at the Wayback Machine within the Royal Australasian College of Physicians There are some collegiate bodies in Australia that are not officially recognised as specialties by the Australian Medical Council but have a college structure for members, such as: Australasian College of Physical Medicine There are some collegiate bodies in Australia of allied health non-medical practitioners with specialisation. They are not recognised as medical specialists, but can be treated as such by private health insurers, such as: Australasian College of Podiatric Surgeons Canada [ edit ] Specialty training in Canada is overseen by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada and the College of Family Physicians of Canada . For specialists working in the province of Quebec , the Collège des médecins du Québec also oversees the process.

Germany [ edit ] In Germany these doctors use the term Facharzt .

India [ edit ] Specialty training in India is overseen by the National Medical Commission (formerly Medical Council of India ), responsible for recognition of post graduate training and by the National Board of Examinations . Education of Ayurveda in overseen by Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM), the council conducts UG and PG courses all over India, while Central Council of Homoeopathy does the same in the field of Homeopathy.

Specialization and superspecialization in medicine and surgery are pursued after completing MBBS , for which higher medical ( MD, DM ) and surgical ( MS, MCh ) degrees are awarded. The following medical and surgical specialties and superspecialties are recognized by the National Medical Commission [ 12 ] (formerly Medical Council of India ) and National Board of Examinations in Medical Sciences [ 13 ] [ 14 ] : Aerospace medicine Allergy and clinical immunology Anaesthesiology Anatomy Biochemistry Cardiac anaesthesia Cardiology Cardiovascular and thoracic surgery Child and adolescent psychiatry Clinical haematology Clinical immunology and rheumatology Clinical pharmacology Critical care medicine Community medicine Dermatology , venereology and leprosy Emergency medicine Endocrine surgery Endocrinology Family medicine Forensic medicine and toxicology General medicine General surgery Geriatrics Geriatric mental health Gynaecologic oncology Hand surgery Head and neck surgery Health administration Health education Hepatology Hepatopancreatobiliary surgery Hospital administration Immunohematology Infectious diseases Interventional radiology Laboratory medicine Marine medicine Maternal and child health Medical gastroenterology Medical genetics Medical oncology Microbiology Neonatology Nephrology Nuclear medicine Neuroanaesthesia Neurology Neuroradiology Neurosurgery Obstetrics and gynaecology Occupational health Oncopathology Ophthalmology Organ transplant anaesthesia and critical care Orthopaedics Otorhinolaryngology Palliative medicine Paediatric and neonatal anaesthesia Paediatric cardiology Paediatric cardiothoracic and vascular surgery Paediatric critical care Paediatric hepatology Paediatric gastroenterology Paediatric nephrology Paediatric neurology Paediatric oncology Paediatric orthopaedics Paediatric surgery Paediatrics Pathology Pharmacology Physical medicine and rehabilitation Physiology Plastic and reconstructive surgery Psychiatry Pulmonary medicine Radiodiagnosis Radiotherapy Reproductive medicine and surgery Sports medicine Surgical gastroenterology Surgical oncology Thoracic surgery Traumatology and surgery Tropical medicine Urology Vascular surgery Virology Sweden [ edit ] In Sweden, a medical license is required before commencing specialty training. Those graduating from Swedish medical schools are first required to do a rotational internship of about 1.5 to 2 years in various specialties before attaining a medical license. The specialist training lasts 5 years.

[ 15 ] United States [ edit ] There are three agencies or organizations in the United States that collectively oversee physician board certification of MD and DO physicians in the United States in the 26 approved medical specialties recognized in the country. These organizations are the American Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) and the American Medical Association (AMA); the American Osteopathic Association Bureau of Osteopathic Specialists (AOABOS) and the American Osteopathic Association ; the American Board of Physician Specialties (ABPS) and the American Association of Physician Specialists (AAPS). Each of these agencies and their associated national medical organization functions as its various specialty academies, colleges and societies.

Certifying board National organization Physician type ABMS AMA MD and DO ABPS AAPS MD and DO AOABOS AOA DO only All boards of certification now require that medical practitioners demonstrate, by examination, continuing mastery of the core knowledge and skills for a chosen specialty. Recertification varies by particular specialty between every seven and every ten years.

In the United States there are hierarchies of medical specialties in the cities of a region. Small towns and cities have primary care, middle sized cities offer secondary care, and metropolitan cities have tertiary care. Income, size of population, population demographics, distance to the doctor, all influence the numbers and kinds of specialists and physicians located in a city.

[ 16 ] Demography [ edit ] A population's income level determines whether sufficient physicians can practice in an area and whether public subsidy is needed to maintain the health of the population. Developing countries and poor areas usually have shortages of physicians and specialties, and those in practice usually locate in larger cities. For some underlying theory regarding physician location, see central place theory .

[ 16 ] The proportion of men and women in different medical specialties varies greatly.

[ 17 ] Such sex segregation is largely due to differential application.

[ 18 ] Satisfaction and burnout [ edit ] A survey of physicians in the United States came to the result that dermatologists are most satisfied with their choice of specialty followed by radiologists , oncologists , plastic surgeons , and gastroenterologists .

[ 19 ] In contrast, primary care physicians were the least satisfied, followed by nephrologists , obstetricians/gynecologists , and pulmonologists .

[ 19 ] Surveys have also revealed high levels of depression among medical students (25 - 30%) as well as among physicians in training (22 - 43%), which for many specialties, continue into regular practice.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] A UK survey conducted of cancer-related specialties in 1994 and 2002 found higher job satisfaction in Theo's specialties with more patient contact. Rates of burnout also varied by specialty.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Branches of medicine Interdisciplinary sub-specialties of medicine , including Occupational medicine – branch of clinical medicine that provides health advice to organizations and individuals concerning work-related health and safety issues and standards.

See occupational safety and health .

Disaster medicine – branch of medicine that provides healthcare services to disaster survivors; guides medically related disaster preparation , disaster planning , disaster response and disaster recovery throughout the disaster life cycle and serves as a liaison between and partner to the medical contingency planner , the emergency management professional, the incident command system , government and policy makers.

Preventive medicine – part of medicine engaged with preventing disease rather than curing it. It can be contrasted not only with curative medicine, but also with public health methods (which work at the level of population health rather than individual health).

Medical genetics – the application of genetics to medicine . Medical genetics is a broad and varied field. It encompasses many different individual fields, including clinical genetics , biochemical genetics , cytogenetics , molecular genetics , the genetics of common diseases (such as neural tube defects ), and genetic counseling .

Specialty Registrar Federation of National Specialty Societies of Canada Society of General Internal Medicine References [ edit ] ^ "Different Types of Doctors: Find the Specialist You Need" .

webmd.com . Retrieved 17 March 2018 .

^ a b Weisz G (Fall 2003). "The Emergence of Medical Specialization in the Nineteenth Century".

Bull Hist Med .

77 (3): 536– 574.

doi : 10.1353/bhm.2003.0150 .

PMID 14523260 .

S2CID 23694173 .

^ "Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on the recognition of professional qualifications" . European Parliament and Council. 7 September 2005 . Retrieved 19 April 2011 .

^ a b c Regeringen.se – new grouping of the medical specialties Archived April 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Becoming a Registered Dietitian" .

Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition . University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign . Retrieved 21 April 2016 .

^ a b "Medscape Physician Compensation Report 2022: Incomes Gain, Pay Gaps Remain" .

Medscape . Retrieved 2022-07-23 .

^ Katzowitz, Josh (2022-02-02).

"How Much Do Doctors Make? [Salary by Specialty 2022] | White Coat Investor" .

The White Coat Investor - Investing & Personal Finance for Doctors . Retrieved 2022-07-23 .

^ Council of Presidents of Medical Colleges, https://cpmc.edu.au/ ^ Medical Board of Australia, https://www.medicalboard.gov.au/registration/types/specialist-registration/medical-specialties-and-specialty-fields.aspx ^ "What sort of doctor do you want to be? Medical specialties in Australia" . 15 May 2014.

^ "What is ANZAOMS? - ANZAOMS" .

^ https://www.nmc.org.in/information-desk/for-colleges/pg-curricula-2/ ^ https://natboard.edu.in/dnbbroad ^ https://natboard.edu.in/dnbsuper ^ "Specialty training / residency" .

Lund University , Faculty of Medicine . 2015-05-20 . Retrieved 2016-11-26 .

^ a b Smith, Margot Wiesinger (1979).

"A guide to the delineation of medical care regions, medical trade areas, and hospital service areas" .

Public Health Reports .

94 (3): 248– 254.

JSTOR 4596085 .

PMC 1431844 .

PMID 582210 .

^ "These medical specialties have the biggest gender imbalances" . American Medical Association . Retrieved 17 July 2020 .

^ Woolf, Katherine; Jayaweera, Hirosha; Unwin, Emily; Keshwani, Karim; Valerio, Christopher; Potts, Henry (2019).

"Effect of sex on specialty training application outcomes: A longitudinal administrative data study of UK medical graduates" .

BMJ Open .

9 (3): e025004.

doi : 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-025004 .

PMC 6429837 .

PMID 30837254 .

^ a b "Medscape: Medscape Access" .

^ Rotenstein, Lisa S.; Ramos, Marco A.; Torre, Matthew; Segal, J. Bradley; Peluso, Michael J.; Guille, Constance; Sen, Srijan; Mata, Douglas A. (2016-12-06).

"Prevalence of Depression, Depressive Symptoms, and Suicidal Ideation Among Medical Students: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis" .

JAMA .

316 (21): 2214– 2236.

doi : 10.1001/jama.2016.17324 .

ISSN 1538-3598 .

PMC 5613659 .

PMID 27923088 .

^ Mata, Douglas A.

; Ramos, Marco A.

; Bansal, Narinder ; Khan, Rida ; Guille, Constance ; Angelantonio, Emanuele Di ; Sen, Srijan (2015).

"Prevalence of Depression and Depressive Symptoms Among Resident Physicians: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis" .

JAMA .

314 (22): 2373– 2383.

doi : 10.1001/jama.2015.15845 .

PMC 4866499 .

PMID 26647259 .

^ Taylor, Cath; Graham, Jill; Potts, Henry WW; Richards, Michael A.; Ramirez, Amanda J. (2005). "Changes in mental health of UK hospital consultants since the mid-1990s".

The Lancet .

366 (9487): 742– 744.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67178-4 .

PMID 16125591 .

S2CID 11391979 .

Medical specialty at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata v t e Medicine Specialties and subspecialties Surgery Cardiac surgery Cardiothoracic surgery Endocrine surgery Eye surgery General surgery Colorectal surgery Digestive system surgery Neurosurgery Oral and maxillofacial surgery Orthopedic surgery Hand surgery Otolaryngology ENT Pediatric surgery Plastic surgery Reproductive surgery Surgical oncology Transplant surgery Trauma surgery Urology Andrology Vascular surgery Internal medicine Allergy / Immunology Angiology Cardiology Interventional Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hepatology Geriatrics Hematology Hospital medicine Infectious diseases Nephrology Oncology Pulmonology Rheumatology Obstetrics and gynaecology Gynaecology Gynecologic oncology Maternal–fetal medicine Obstetrics Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Urogynecology Diagnostic Radiology Interventional radiology Neuroradiology Nuclear medicine Pathology Anatomical Clinical pathology Clinical chemistry Cytopathology Medical microbiology Transfusion medicine Other Addiction medicine Adolescent medicine Anesthesiology Obstetric anesthesiology Neurosurgical anesthesiology Aviation medicine Dermatology Disaster medicine Diving medicine Emergency medicine Mass gathering medicine Evolutionary medicine Family medicine / General practice Hospital medicine Intensive care medicine Medical genetics Narcology Neurology Clinical neurophysiology Occupational medicine Ophthalmology Oral medicine Pain management Palliative care Pediatrics Neonatology Phlebology Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R) Preventive medicine Prison healthcare Psychiatry Addiction psychiatry Radiation oncology Reproductive medicine Sexual medicine Venereology Sleep medicine Sports medicine Transplantation medicine Tropical medicine Travel medicine Medical education Medical school Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery Bachelor of Medical Sciences Master of Medicine Master of Surgery Doctor of Medicine Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine MD–PhD Medical Scientist Training Program Related topics Allied health Molecular oncology Nanomedicine Personalized medicine Public health Rural health Therapy Veterinary medicine Physician Chief physician History of medicine Category Commons Wikiproject Portal Outline Portal : Medicine NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cfb6f7b64‐n4bv6
Cached time: 20250812192447
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.709 seconds
Real time usage: 0.860 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3011/1000000
Revision size: 47503/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 109613/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13398/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84986/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.401/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7014942/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  649.029      1 -total
 37.09%  240.732      1 Template:Reflist
 23.15%  150.256     10 Template:Cite_web
 15.34%   99.560      2 Template:Navbox
 15.16%   98.361      1 Template:Medicine
 13.47%   87.407      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 10.06%   65.307      1 Template:Sisterlinks
  9.79%   63.511      1 Template:Short_description
  8.84%   57.396      6 Template:Cite_journal
  8.65%   56.139      3 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3172179:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812192447 and revision id 1305556207. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Medical_specialty&oldid=1305556207 " Categories : Medical specialties Lists of salaries Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from May 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing cleanup from October 2024 All pages needing cleanup Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 19:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Medical specialty 45 languages Add topic

