Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Protofeminism 1.2 First wave feminism 1.3 Second wave feminism and beyond 1.4 Anti-gender campaigns 2 Feminist influence Toggle Feminist influence subsection 2.1 Women policy makers 2.2 Gender mainstreaming 2.3 Prostitution laws 2.4 Military 2.5 Domestic violence law 2.6 Rape law 2.7 Gender and policy 2.8 Swedish Feminist Foreign Policy 2.8.1 The Three R's 2.8.2 Rights 2.8.3 Representation 2.8.4 Resources 2.8.5 Criticism 3 References Toggle the table of contents Feminism in Sweden 9 languages Беларуская Ελληνικά فارسی Italiano Português Русский Suomi Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia See also: Women in Sweden Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Part of a series on Women in society Society Women's history ( legal rights ) Woman Animal advocacy Business Female entrepreneurs Gender representation on corporate boards of directors Combat Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Economic development Explorers and travelers Education Feminism Womyn Government Conservatives in the US Heads of state or government Legislators Queen regnant List Health Journalism Law Law enforcement Military Mother Nobel Prize laureates Piracy Positions of power Reproductive rights Sex segregation Feminist In Islam Venture capital Violence and abuse Voting rights Workforce Exchange of women Science Technology Computing Engineering Geology Medicine dentistry in the United States Organizations Science Science, technology, engineering and mathematics Space Telegraphy Arts Humanities Architecture Arts Art history field Women's cinema Dance Film "Chick flicks" Fine arts Literature Science fiction Philosophy Feminist philosophy Photographers Music Jazz Punk rock In Shakespeare's works Religion Theological figures Baháʼí Faith Bible Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Opus Dei Hinduism Islam Imams Mahr Segregation Women's testimony Judaism Sikhism Taoism Zoroastrianism Popular culture Comics Portrayal in American comics Film industry Music Fictional pirates Speculative fiction Video games Gender representation in video games Women in the video game industry Sports Auto racing Baseball Basketball Boxing Cricket Curling Cycling Fastpitch softball Football / soccer Golf Gymnastics Ice hockey Lacrosse Mixed martial arts Netball Paralympic Games Rodeo Roller derby Rowing Surfing Swimming Tennis Track and field Volleyball Winter sports See also: List of sports By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Belgium Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Croatia Cuba Cyprus ( North ) Denmark DR Congo Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Ethiopia FS Micronesia Fiji Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Iceland Italy India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Ivory Coast Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Libya Madagascar Malaysia Maldives Mali Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal New Zealand Niger Nigeria North Korea Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Spain Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Sudan Suriname Sri Lanka Sweden Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Tonga Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Trinidad and Tobago Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yemen v t e Feminism in Sweden is a significant social and political influence within Swedish society.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Swedish political parties across the political spectrum commit to gender-based policies in their public political manifestos .

[ 3 ] The Swedish government assesses all policy according to the tenets of gender mainstreaming .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Women in Sweden are 45% of the political representatives in the Swedish Parliament. Women make up 43% of representatives in local legislatures as of 2014.

[ 1 ] In addition, in 2014, newly sworn in Foreign Minister Margot Wallström announced a feminist foreign policy.

[ 6 ] Swedish feminism dates back to the 17th century and was discussed in intellectual circles throughout the 18th century. Since the publication Samtal emellan Argi Skugga och en obekant Fruentimbers Skugga by Margareta Momma in 1738, followed by Hedvig Charlotta Nordenflycht 's famous poem Fruntimrens försvar (To the Defense of Women, 1761) debate on gender roles and gender equality has become a mainstream topic.

Women had conditional suffrage during the Age of Liberty in 1718–1772. With a relatively high level of education, in 1862, unmarried Swedish women were the first worldwide to be granted conditional right to vote in municipal elections. Universal women suffrage followed in 1921. Since then, Sweden has remained a forerunner of gender equality driven by a both intellectual and practical feminist movement. In the 21st century, Sweden has seen the rise of anti-gender campaigns targeting transgender people , gender studies , and intersectional feminist and queer movements, reflecting a broader transnational backlash against gender justice and inclusion. Among these are so-called " gender-critical " actors who present themselves as radical feminists while advancing trans-exclusionary positions.

[ 7 ] In 2014, Sweden's Feminist Initiative became the first feminist political party to win a mandate in the European parliament , rediscussing feminism from a decisively antiracist perspective that includes the perspectives of people of color .

History [ edit ] Hedvig Charlotta Nordenflycht by Ulrika Pasch Sophie Sager was one of the first Swedish feminist activists of the modern era.

Protofeminism [ edit ] During the 17th century, questions around gender roles, gender equality and women's rights were raised by individuals such as Sophia Elisabet Brenner and Beata Rosenhane , but these were rare exceptions.

During the 18th century, gender roles, gender equality and reform in women's social and legal status were discussed in public debate and literature. Many anonymous female journalists and writers participated under pseudonyms in temporary periodicals, often in the form of a fictions correspondence, questioning the status of women, only a minority of whom, however, has been identified.

[ 8 ] Among them were Margareta Momma , Catharina Ahlgren and Anna Maria Rückerschöld . In 1761, Hedvig Charlotta Nordenflycht wrote her famous poem Fruntimrens försvar (To the Defense of Women).

First wave feminism [ edit ] The first civil-society organisation founded by women in Sweden was the charitable society Välgörande fruntimmerssällskapet , which was founded in Stockholm in 1819 by a group of upper-class women under the leadership of Princess Sophie Albertine of Sweden . Its purpose was to support poor women. This was the first time in Sweden women organized to achieve and reform something in society by a public voice. Though the subject may seem non controversial, the act of women organizing to change society was in itself radical. This was to be followed by numerous other charitable women's societies during the 19th century.

In 1839, Carl Jonas Love Almqvist started a long literary debate regarding gender roles through his famous novel Det går an , in which he argued for free love and the right of Cohabitation without the restrictions of marriage and the right for women to experience love without losing their independence.

In 1848, Sophie Sager aroused considerable controversy after reporting a rape attempt and going on to win her case. She became the perhaps first woman in Sweden to make public speeches in favor of feminism, which made her famous but also ridiculed as a feminist figure.

[ 9 ] Hers was, however, an isolated attempt, and did not start any organized movement.

In 1855, Josefina Deland founded the Svenska lärarinnors pensionsförening (The Society for Retired Female Teachers) to provide for retired female teachers and governesses . Being an educator was at the time one of the few professions available for an educated woman to support herself, which was at the time an important question for women.

[ 10 ] This was arguably the first time women organized themselves to deal with a wider women's issue in Sweden.

In 1856, Fredrika Bremer published the novel Hertha , which aroused great controversy and created the "Hertha Debate". The two foremost questions were the abolition of coverture for unmarried women, and for the state to provide women an equivalent to a university. Social change arrived: in 1858, a reform granted unmarried women the right to apply for legal majority by a simple procedure, and in 1861, Högre lärarinneseminariet was founded as a "Women's University". In 1859, the first women's magazine in Sweden and the Nordic countries, the Tidskrift för hemmet , was founded by Sophie Adlersparre and Rosalie Olivecrona . This has been referred to as the starting point of a women's movement in Sweden.

The second half of the 19th century saw the creation of several women's rights organisations and a considerable activity within both active organisations as well as intellectual debate.
The organized women's movement begun in 1873, when the Married Woman's Property Rights Association was co-founded by Anna Hierta-Retzius and Ellen Anckarsvärd . The prime task of the organization was to fully abolish coverture . 
In 1884, the Fredrika Bremer Association was founded by Sophie Adlersparre to work for the improvement in women's rights. 
The Swedish Dress reform Association worked to liberate women from the contemporary Victorian dress fashion and thus improve their health and give them more freedom of movement.

The 1880s saw the so-called Sedlighetsdebatten ('Virtue Debate'), where gender roles were discussed in literary debates in regards to sexual double standards, as opposed to sexual equality. One of the organs for this was the Svenska Federationen , who worked to put a stop to the regulation system of prostitutes and questioned the contemporaneous sexual double standards by which this system was justified. 
Women organized prominently in the Woman's Christian Temperance Union , whose Swedish section Vita bandet ("White ribbon") was founded in 1897.

1902 meeting of the Committee for Women's Agitation, the precursor of the Women's Trade Union . The meeting was held at the Anna Sterky residence.

Kata Dahlström is seen of the left.

Women also started to organize politically via the Swedish work- and union movement, where they were early inducted in to the movement and came to play an important role. 
In 1888 the first 'Women's Worker's Club' was founded in Malmö, which was followed by its Stockholm eqvivalent and a number of local women's workers club, which eventually united to form the Social Democratic Women in Sweden , and via the women's worker's club, women were in parallel included in the trade unions, uniting in the Women's Trade Union ; and Alina Jägerstedt ensured that women were included as party members at the very foundation of the Swedish Social Democratic Party .

[ 11 ] The well organized Swedish working women came to play a vital part in the integration of women in the public political ad professional sphere, and there were more women active within the Social Democratic movement than any other policial party.

In 1902 the Swedish Society for Woman Suffrage was founded, supported by the Social Democratic women's Clubs .

[ 12 ] Women's suffrage was introduced in 1919-1921, followed by the Behörighetslagen in 1923, with women being formally awarded equal rights as male citizens.
Between 1921 and 1971, the successor of the suffrage movement, the Svenska Kvinnors Medborgarförbund , worked to ensure that the formal laws of gender equality was enforced in practice and not remain on paper only. 
From 1921 to 1954, Kvinnliga medborgarskolan vid Fogelstad ('Fogelstad Citizen School for Women') held courses to educate women about their new rights as full and equal citizens and encouraged them to use their new rights.

During the interwar period , various women's magazines and organizations existed for women of all political views and classes. Women  organized in the women's wings of the political parties, such as the Social Democratic Women in Sweden , Centerkvinnorna , Liberala kvinnor and the Moderate Women , through which they channeled their demands in to politics, entering the political life and voicing their interests in Parliament, and during the Interwar period both the Föreningen Kvinnolistan (Literary: 'The Women's List Association') of 1927 and the Kommittén för ökad kvinnorepresentation (Literary: 'The committee for increased women's representation') of 1937 lobbied the political parties to appoint more women to political office.

[ 13 ] Second wave feminism and beyond [ edit ] Gudrun Schyman speaks on behalf of the Feminist Initiative (Fi), 2014, in Stockholm.

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( October 2015 ) During the 1960s- and 1970s, Sweden experienced a new wave of feminism: in 1968, the Group 8 was founded and raised a number of issues within gender equality. In 1973, Women of Labour was split from Group 8. Popular culture included feminism values, such as Röda bönor .

The campaign for increased political representation of women by Kommittén för ökad kvinnorepresentation in 1937-1948 was followed by the Samarbetskommittén för ökad kvinnorepresentation (Literary: 'The Cooperation Committee for increased women's representation') in 1968 [ 14 ] and in 1991 by the campaign of the Stödstrumporna (Literary: 'The Support stockings'), resulting in almost half of the elected officials to the Parliament being women in the 1994 Swedish general election .

[ 15 ] The late 1990s saw a renewal of feminism activity in Sweden, which was given great encouragement by the government.

Left Party was particularly active to raise the question under Gudrun Schyman .

In 1997 Swedish Women's Lobby was founded by the Government of Sweden. During the 2000s, it led to feminist campaigns such as Bara Bröst and Dirty Diaries , as well as reactions such as The Gender War , a critical SVT documentary by Evin Rubar on radical feminism in Sweden.

In 2005, the Feminist Initiative was founded as a political force, centered around Gudrun Schyman , who has since the 1990s been a leading figure within Swedish feminism.

In 2017 Maria Teresa Rivera became the first woman in the world granted asylum because of being wrongly jailed for disregarding a ban on abortion.

[ 16 ] She disregarded the ban in El Salvador and was given asylum in Sweden.

[ 16 ] Anti-gender campaigns [ edit ] Sweden has increasingly seen the influence of anti-gender campaigns, which scholars identify as part of a transnational trend aimed at undermining gender equality , delegitimizing transgender rights , and attacking feminist, queer, and intersectional understandings of social justice .

[ 7 ] A key element of this development is gender-critical rhetoric, which researchers describe as a core component of anti-gender politics in Sweden.

[ 7 ] Scholars argue that this rhetoric functions to exclude trans and queer people, oppose the recognition of gender identity , and seek to delegitimize academic fields such as gender studies .

[ 7 ] According to Karlberg, Korolczuk, and Sältenberg (2025), these developments form part of what they call "insidious de-democratization ," a gradual process through which discursive and political shifts marginalize already vulnerable groups, including trans people, migrants, and racialized minorities, while eroding liberal democratic norms.

[ 7 ] Anti-gender views have been promoted by a range of actors in Sweden, including the far-right Sweden Democrats and the Christian Democrats , who have opposed legal reforms strengthening transgender rights.

[ 17 ] These parties often frame their opposition in terms of national values or the protection of women. Other actors have also played a role in promoting anti-gender rhetoric. One example is the Swedish Women's Lobby (SWL), which has been criticized by scholars and advocacy groups for adopting trans-exclusionary positions and contributing to the spread of anti-gender rhetoric in Swedish public discourse.

[ 18 ] [ 17 ] [ 7 ] In 2025, SWL launched the Women's Platform for Action International (WoPAI), a transnational network promoting so-called " sex-based rights " and opposing what it refers to as a "pro-gender movement," a " queer agenda ," and the concept of gender identity.

[ 19 ] This shift aligns with what Claire House has identified as a broader international trend beginning in the mid-2010s, where (radical) feminist actors increasingly participate in anti-gender and regressive politics, often with particularly harmful consequences for trans rights, a trend she illustrates, in part, by referencing the case of Sweden.

[ 20 ] The increasing normalization of anti-gender discourse has coincided with growing political violence and intimidation, particularly directed at trans advocates, feminist scholars, and racialized activists. This includes online harassment, threats, and public vilification. Researchers argue that such violence, both symbolic and physical, plays a central role in silencing dissent and undermining democratic participation.

[ 7 ] Feminist influence [ edit ] Women policy makers [ edit ] In 2014, women constituted 45% of the political representatives in the Swedish Parliament. Women furthermore made up 43% of representatives in local legislatures.

[ 1 ] Women are 52% of the Ministers in the Swedish Government (November 2015).

[ 21 ] While there are no legal quotas for female candidates in Sweden, most parties have internal policies to promote the participation of women. Some political parties have voluntary quotas. Explanations for levels of women’s political participation include that women’s organisations and community activists have been instrumental in pressing for greater female representation.

[ 1 ] Gender mainstreaming [ edit ] The Swedish government assesses all policy according to the tenets of gender mainstreaming .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Gender mainstreaming is used in government offices, central government agencies, regional governments, municipalities and local government.

[ 4 ] This has been the case since 1994, with gender mainstreaming meaning that gender, in a stakeholder sense as members of society, is taken into account when government considers new policies.

[ 22 ] Prostitution laws [ edit ] Main article: Prostitution in Sweden Since 1999, it has been illegal to pay for sex in Sweden.

[ 23 ] The purchaser of prostitution is criminalized, not the prostitute.

[ 1 ] This is also called the Nordic model approach to prostitution .

The law is in accordance with Sweden's gender equality program.

[ 24 ] Theoretically, the gender of the seller and buyer are immaterial under the law, that is, it is gender neutral. However, the law is politically constructed, discussed, and enforced in the context of men buying sex from women. The Swedish Government believes that men buying sex from prostituted women constitutes a form of violence against women , which should be thus eliminated by reducing demand. Demand for women's "sexual services" is constructed as a form of male dominance over women, and as a practice which maintains patriarchal hegemony.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] (see Feminist views on prostitution ).

A policy position of the Swedish Social Democratic Party and the Swedish Left Party is to criminalize the purchase of sexual acts bought overseas by Swedish citizens.

[ 27 ] Military [ edit ] Since 1989, all military branches and positions (including combat) are open to women. Beginning in 2018, both women and men are conscripted.

[ 28 ] Domestic violence law [ edit ] Incidents of domestic violence and abuse are assessed cumulatively in Sweden, so that each incidence is taken into account.

[ 23 ] There is specific reference to abuse by a man against a woman with whom he is in a close personal relationship, who can then be liable to a charge of "gross violation of a woman’s integrity".

[ 29 ] [ 23 ] Rape law [ edit ] In 1965, Sweden made marital rape illegal.

[ 30 ] In 2018, Sweden passed a law defining sex without consent in clear body language or words as rape, even if no force or threats are used; previously a rape conviction had required proof that the offender used force or that the victim was in a vulnerable state.

[ 31 ] Gender and policy [ edit ] Sweden has a Minister for Gender Equality . The Swedish government allocates money specifically to gender equality in the annual budget. In 2014 the Swedish government allocated 252 million Krona for gender equality.

[ 32 ] Swedish political parties across the political spectrum commit to gender-based policies in their public political manifestos .

[ 3 ] Swedish Feminist Foreign Policy [ edit ] In October 2014 Foreign Minister Margot Wallström announced that their country would henceforth follow a Feminist Foreign Policy as the first country globally. Throughout their foreign policy the Swedish Government has since applied a systematic gender equality perspective.

[ 33 ] In 2018 the Swedish Government published a handbook outlining the details of their feminist approach.

[ 33 ] The Swedish Feminist Foreign Policy is based on the "three R's", meaning they focus on Rights, Representation and Resources, basing their approach on the Reality in which women live today. Strongly reflecting an intersectional approach to feminism, Sweden's Feminist Foreign Policy is a transformative agenda, aiming at changing structures and enhancing the visibility of women and girls, not just as passive audience but as actors in foreign affairs.

[ 34 ] The Three R's [ edit ] The Feminist Foreign Policy is structured around Rights, Representation and Resources and based on the different Realities in which women live.

Rights [ edit ] Concerning the first "R", Rights, the Swedish Government is committed to promoting women's and girl's human rights, highlighting especially the combatting of all forms of violence and discrimination which restrict their freedoms. In order to implement these commitments, the Swedish Government drew up an Action Plan, which has six objectives: the full enjoyment of human rights, freedom from physical, psychological and sexual violence, participation in preventing and resolving conflicts, and post-conflict peacebuilding, political participation and influence in all areas of society, economic rights and empowerment and sexual and reproductive health and rights (SRHR) representation. Their rights' approach is based on a number of international frameworks including: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women , the declarations and actions plans from the UN World Conference on Women in Beijing and the International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo, as well as the final documents from the follow-up conferences, the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security, and subsequent resolutions, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the agreements from the conferences on financing for development, the EU action plan for gender equality and women’s empowerment in EU’s external relations (2016–2020) [ 34 ] Representation [ edit ] A survey from 2017 shows that there are only 17 women who are heads of state globally. Additionally, a study of 31 major peace processes between 1992 and 2011 revealed that only 9% of negotiators were women. Of those who signed peace agreements, more than 96 per cent were men. This is why Representation is another focus point for the Swedish Government, promoting women's participation and influence in all decision-making processes on all levels and areas.

[ 34 ] Resources [ edit ] The Swedish Feminist Foreign policy works to ensure that government resources are allocated with a gender sensitive lens to promote equality and equal opportunities for all women and girls while also promoting targeted measured for the various target groups.

Criticism [ edit ] Margot Wallström's endeavour raised many eyebrows in the beginning. Today, it is especially human rights groups pointing to the hypocrisy of a feminist foreign policy in a country which is among the world's largest arms exporter per capita, exporting arms to autocratic regimes which are known for human rights abuses.

[ 35 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "The Swedish General Election 2014 and the Representation of Women" , Northern Ireland Assembly, Research and Information Service Research Paper, 1 October 2014, p. 1.

^ Viola Gad, "Feminism Comes to the Forefront of Swedish Politics" , Time , 12 September 2014.

^ a b "The Swedish General Election 2014 and the Representation of Women" , Northern Ireland Assembly, Research and Information Service Research Paper, 1 October 2014, p. 21.

^ a b c "The Swedish General Election 2014 and the Representation of Women" , Northern Ireland Assembly, Research and Information Service Research Paper, 1 October 2014, p. 9.

^ a b Sadaf Ahsan, "How Sweden is trying to turn every 16-year-old into a feminist" , National Post , 7 December 2015.

^ "Wallström lovar feministisk politik" .

Sydsvenskan . Retrieved 2019-05-24 .

^ a b c d e f g Karlberg, Eva; Korolczuk, Elżbieta; Sältenberg, Hansalbin (2025).

"Insidious de-democratization: Conceptualizing anti-gender politics in Sweden" .

Journal of Gender Studies .

34 (1).

doi : 10.1080/09589236.2024.2446345 .

^ Jakob Christensson (in Swedish): Signums svenska kulturhistoria. Gustavianska tiden (English: Swedish culture history by signum. The Gustavian age) (2007).

^ Kyle, Gunhild ; Krusenstjerna, Eva von (1993). Kvinnoprofiler. Panorama ( Natur & Kultur ), 99-0913791-7   . Stockholm: Natur & Kultur.

^ Chief editor: Nils Bohman, Svenska män och kvinnor. 2, C-F (Swedish Men and Women. 2, C-F) dictionary (1944) (in Swedish) ^ Anne-Marie Lindgren & Marika Lindgren Åsbrink: Systrar kamrater! Arbetarrörelsens kvinnliga pionjärer. Stockholm 2007 ^ Barbro Hedwall (2011). Susanna Eriksson Lundqvist. red.. Vår rättmätiga plats. Om kvinnornas kamp för rösträtt.. (Our Rightful Place. About women's struggle for suffrage) Förlag Bonnier.

ISBN 978-91-7424-119-8 (Swedish) ^ Rönnbäck, Josefin, '"Utan kvinnor inget folkstyre": en historisk exposé över kampen för ökad kvinnorepresentation i Sverige', Tidskrift för genusvetenskap., 2010:3, s. 61-89, 2010 ^ Rönnbäck, Josefin, '"Utan kvinnor inget folkstyre": en historisk exposé över kampen för ökad kvinnorepresentation i Sverige', Tidskrift för genusvetenskap., 2010:3, s. 61-89, 2010 ^ Törnqvist, Maria (2019). ”Varannan damernas eller hela makten? Kommentar till Maria-Pia Boëthius, "Krav på kvinnoparti"”. i Klara Arnberg, Fia Sundevall, David Tjeder. Könspolitiska nyckeltexter. Från Det går an till #metoo. p. 422–426 ^ a b Moloney, Anastasia (5 April 2017).

"Sweden welcomes Salvadoran woman wrongly jailed for abortion in asylum first" .

Reuters . Retrieved 2017-04-05 .

^ a b Grahn, Michal; Holm, Malin (2025). "Trans inclusive no more? Allies and adversaries of gender self-identification in Sweden".

European Journal of Politics and Gender .

8 (1): 234– 241.

doi : 10.1332/25151088Y2024D000000052 .

^ Alm, Erika; Engebretsen, Elisabeth Lund (2020). "Gender Self-identification".

Lambda Nordica .

25 (1): 48– 56.

doi : 10.34041/ln.v25.613 .

hdl : 11250/3048285 .

^ "Why WoPAI is needed" . Women's Platform for Action International (WoPAI). 5 February 2025. Archived from the original on 2025-02-20.

^ House, Claire C. A. (2023).

" 'I'm Real, Not You': Roles and Discourses of Trans Exclusionary Women's and Feminist Movements in Anti-Gender and Right-Wing Populist Politics" .

DiGeSt: Journal of Diversity and Gender Studies .

10 (2): 14– 32.

doi : 10.21825/digest.85755 .

Special Issue: Varieties of TERFness ^ "Here’s What Happens When You Put More Women in Government" , Time , Charlotte Alter, 5 November 2015.

^ "Sweden aims for higher gender equality despite impressive record" Archived March 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , Today's Zaman , 19 February 2013.

^ a b c "The Swedish General Election 2014 and the Representation of Women" , Northern Ireland Assembly, Research and Information Service Research Paper, 1 October 2014, p. 8.

^ Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality ^ "Sweden Treating Prostitution as Violence Against Women" . Sisyphe.org. 20 December 2004 . Retrieved 31 December 2009 .

^ Casciani, Dominic (16 July 2004).

"Prostitution: International answers" .

BBC News . Retrieved 19 June 2007 .

^ "The Social Democrats, Our policies A-Z" Archived 2017-02-10 at the Wayback Machine , accessed January 2016.

^ Persson, Alma; Sundevall, Fia (2019-12-17).

"Conscripting women: gender, soldiering, and military service in Sweden 1965–2018" .

Women's History Review .

28 (7): 1039– 1056.

doi : 10.1080/09612025.2019.1596542 .

ISSN 0961-2025 .

^ "Violation of peace and integrity – Chapter 4, Section 4a of the Swedish Penal Code" Archived 2016-02-02 at the Wayback Machine , European Crime Prevention Network.

^ Elman, R Amy (1996).

Sexual subordination and state intervention: comparing Sweden and the United States . Berghahn Books. p. 90.

ISBN 978-1-57181-071-7 .

^ Deutsche Welle Published 7:39 a.m. ET May 25, 2018.

"Sweden scraps an outdated rape law that said threats or force must be used" . Usatoday.com . Retrieved 2018-05-25 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "The Swedish General Election 2014 and the Representation of Women" , Northern Ireland Assembly, Research and Information Service Research Paper, 1 October 2014, p. 10.

^ a b Regeringskansliet, Regeringen och (2018-08-23).

"Handbook Sweden's feminist foreign policy" .

Regeringskansliet . Retrieved 2019-05-24 .

^ a b c "Handbook Sweden's Feminist Foreign Policy" .

^ "Hiding Behind the F-Word: the Failures of Sweden's Feminist Foreign Policy" .

CFFP . Archived from the original on 2021-04-23 . Retrieved 2019-05-24 .

v t e Feminism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria v t e Sweden articles History Prehistory 800–1521 Kalmar Union 1523–1611 Rise to become Great Power Swedish Empire Great Northern War Age of Liberty Coup of 1756 December Crisis (1768) Revolution of 1772 Gustavian era Coup of 1809 Sweden–Norway union Famine of 1867–1869 Modernization Industrialization World War I World War II timeline 1945–1967 1967–1991 Since 1991 Geography Cities Counties Extreme points Forests Islands Lakes Lands Metropolitan areas National parks Provinces Rivers Wildlife Politics Administrative division Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT rights Government State agencies Judiciary Law Law enforcement Legislature Military Monarchy Neutrality Political parties Economy Agriculture Automotive industry Energy Income inequality Krona (currency) Labour unions Nordic model Rehn–Meidner model Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Transport Rail Tourism Society Abortion Censorship Crime Demographics Education Healthcare Homelessness Human trafficking Immigration Languages Life expectancy People Prostitution Welfare Women Culture Anthem Architecture Art Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine Wine Coffee Fashion Flag Irreligion Literature Media Music National Day Public holidays Religion Sport World Heritage Sites Outline Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminism_in_Sweden&oldid=1305167503 " Categories : Feminism in Sweden Women in Sweden Social history of Sweden Feminism by country Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles to be expanded from October 2015 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 12:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminism in Sweden 9 languages Add topic

