Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Explanations 2 Perspectives 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Involuntary unemployment 3 languages Français 日本語 Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Condition in which a person is unemployed despite being willing to work Involuntary unemployment occurs when a person is unemployed despite being willing to work at the prevailing wage. It is distinguished from voluntary unemployment, where a person chooses not to work because their reservation wage is higher than the prevailing wage. In an economy with involuntary unemployment, there is a surplus of labor at the current real wage.

[ 1 ] This occurs when there is some force that prevents the real wage rate from decreasing to the real wage rate that would equilibrate supply and demand (such as a minimum wage above the market-clearing wage).

[ citation needed ] Structural unemployment is also involuntary.

Economists have several theories explaining the possibility of involuntary unemployment including implicit contract theory , disequilibrium theory , staggered wage setting, and efficiency wages .

[ 1 ] The officially measured unemployment rate is the ratio of involuntary unemployment to the sum of involuntary unemployment and employment (the denominator of this ratio being the total labor force ).

Explanations [ edit ] In the Shapiro-Stiglitz model workers are paid at a level where they do not shirk. This prevents wages from dropping to market clearing levels. Full employment cannot be achieved because workers would slack off if they were not threatened with the possibility of unemployment. The curve for the no-shirking condition (labeled NSC) goes to infinity at full employment.

Models based on implicit contract theory, like that of Costas Azariadis , [ 2 ] are based on the hypothesis that labor contracts make it difficult for employers to cut wages. Employers often resort to layoffs rather than implement wage reductions. Azariadis argued that given risk-averse workers and risk-neutral employers, contracts with the possibility of layoff would be the optimal outcome.

[ 3 ] Efficiency wage models suggest that employers pay their workers above market-clearing wages in order to enhance their productivity.

[ 1 ] In efficiency wage models based on shirking, employers are worried that workers may shirk knowing that they can simply move to another job if they are caught. Employers make shirking costly by paying workers more than the wages they would receive elsewhere, incentivising them not to shirk.

[ 1 ] When all firms behave this way, an equilibrium is reached where there are unemployed workers willing to work at prevailing wages.

[ 4 ] Chart representing Malinvaud's typology includes a region with Keynesian unemployment, where there is an excess supply of goods and labor, and a region of classical unemployment, where there is an excess supply of labor and excess demand for goods.

[ 5 ] Following earlier disequilibrium research including that of Robert Barro and Herschel Grossman , work by Edmond Malinvaud made a distinction between classical unemployment, where real wages are too high for markets to clear, and Keynesian unemployment, involuntary unemployment due to inadequate aggregate demand.

[ 1 ] In Malinvaud's model, classical unemployment is remedied by cutting the real wage while Keynesian unemployment requires an exogenous stimulus in demand.

[ 6 ] Unlike implicit contrary theory and efficiency wages, this line of research does not rely on a higher than market-clearing wage level. This type of involuntary unemployment is consistent with Keynes' definition while efficiency wages and implicit contract theory do not fit well with Keynes' focus on demand deficiency.

[ 7 ] Perspectives [ edit ] See also: Shapiro–Stiglitz theory For many economists, involuntary unemployment is a real-world phenomenon of central importance to economics. Many economic theories have been motivated by the desire to understand and control involuntary unemployment.

[ 8 ] However, acceptance of the concept of involuntary unemployment is not universal among economists; some do not accept it as a real or coherent aspect of economic theory.

[ who?

] Shapiro and Stiglitz, developers of an influential shirking model, stated "To us, involuntary unemployment is a real and important phenomenon with grave social consequences that needs to be explained and understood." [ 9 ] Mancur Olson argued that real world events like the Great Depression could not be understood without the concept of involuntary unemployment. He argued against economists who denied involuntary unemployment and put their theories ahead of "common sense and the observations and experiences of literally hundreds of millions of people... that there is also involuntary unemployment and that it is by no means an isolated or rare phenomenon".

[ 10 ] Other economists do not believe that true involuntary unemployment exists [ 11 ] or question its relevance to economic theory.

Robert Lucas claims "...there is an involuntary element in all unemployment in the sense that no one chooses bad luck over good; there is also a voluntary element in all unemployment, in the sense that, however miserable one's current work options, one can always choose to accept them" [ 12 ] and "the unemployed worker at any time can always find some job at once".

[ 12 ] Lucas dismissed the need for theorists to explain involuntary unemployment since it is "not a fact or a phenomenon which it is the task of theorists to explain. It is, on the contrary, a theoretical construct which Keynes introduced in the hope it would be helpful in discovering a correct explanation for a genuine phenomenon: large-scale fluctuations in measured, total unemployment." [ 13 ] Along those lines real business cycle and other models from Lucas's new classical school explain fluctuations in employment by shifts in labor supply driven by changes in workers' productivity and preferences for leisure.

[ 1 ] Involuntary unemployment is also conceptually problematic with search and matching theories of unemployment. In these models, unemployment is voluntary in the sense that a worker might choose to endure unemployment during a long search for a higher paying job than those immediately available; however, there is an involuntary element in the sense that a worker does not have control of the economic circumstances that force them to look for new work in the first place.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Identity (social science) Full employment Social rejection Unemployment Job guarantee Social stigma Social stress References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Taylor 2008 .

^ Azariadis 1975 .

^ De Vroey 2002 , p. 384.

^ Shapiro & Stiglitz 1984 .

^ Tsoulfidis 2010 , p. 294.

^ De Vroey 2002 , p. 383.

^ De Vroey 2002 , p. 383-385.

^ McCombie 1987 , p. 203.

^ Shapiro & Stiglitz 1985 , p. 1217.

^ Olson 1982 , p. 195.

^ Mayer 1997 , p. 94.

^ a b Lucas 1978 , p. 354.

^ Lucas 1978 , p. 354-355.

^ Andolfatto 2008 .

Sources [ edit ] Library resources about Involuntary unemployment Resources in your library Andolfatto, David (2008), "Search models of unemployment." , in Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.), The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics (Second ed.), Palgrave Macmillan, pp.

349– 355, CiteSeerX 10.1.1.552.4934 , doi : 10.1057/9780230226203.1497 , ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5 , retrieved 21 April 2013 Azariadis, C. (1975). "Implicit contracts and underemployment equilibria".

Journal of Political Economy .

83 (6): 1183– 202.

doi : 10.1086/260388 .

S2CID 154745887 .

De Vroey, Michel (2002). "Involuntary unemployment in Keynesian economics". In Snowdon, Brian; Vane, Howard (eds.).

An Encyclopedia of Macroeconomics . Northampton, Massachusetts: Edward Elgar Publishing. pp.

381–385 .

ISBN 978-1-84542-180-9 .

Lucas, Robert E. (May 1978), "Unemployment policy", American Economic Review , 68 (2): 353– 357, JSTOR 1816720 Mayer, Thomas (1997), "What Remains of the Monetarist Counter-Revolution?", in Snowdon, Brian; Vane, Howard R. (eds.), Reflections on the Development of Modern Macroeconomics , Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp.

55– 102, ISBN 978-1-85898-342-4 McCombie, John S. (1987). "Keynes and the Nature of Involuntary Unemployment".

Journal of Post Keynesian Economics .

10 (2): 202– 215.

doi : 10.1080/01603477.1987.11489673 .

JSTOR 4538065 .

Olson, Mancur (1982).

The rise and decline of nations : economic growth, stagflation, and social rigidities . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0300030792 .

Shapiro, C.; Stiglitz, J. E. (1984). "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device".

The American Economic Review .

74 (3): 433– 444.

JSTOR 1804018 .

Shapiro, Carl; Stiglitz, Josephy E. (December 1985), "Can Unemployment Be Involuntary? Reply", The American Economic Review , 75 (5): 1215– 1217, JSTOR 1818667 Taylor, John B. (2008), "Involuntary Unemployment." , in Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.), The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics (Second ed.), Palgrave Macmillan, pp.

566– 570, doi : 10.1057/9780230226203.0850 , ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5 , retrieved 20 April 2013 Tsoulfidis, Lefteris (2010).

Competing schools of economic thought . London: Springer.

ISBN 978-3-540-92692-4 .

v t e Employment Classifications Academic tenure Casual Contingent work Full-time job Gig worker Job sharing Part-time job Self-employment Side job Skilled worker Journeyman Technician Tradesperson Independent contractor Labour hire Temporary work Laborer Wage labour Hiring Application Background check Business networking Cover letter Curriculum vitae Drug testing Employment contract Employment counsellor Executive search list Induction programme Job fair Job fraud Job hunting Job interview Letter of recommendation Onboarding Overqualification Person–environment fit Personality–job fit theory Personality hire Probation Realistic job preview Recruitment Résumé Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates Underemployment Work-at-home scheme Roles Cooperative Employee Employer Internship Job Labour hire Permanent employment Supervisor Volunteering Working class Blue-collar Green-collar Grey-collar Pink-collar Precariat White-collar Red-collar New-collar No-collar Orange-collar Scarlet-collar Black-collar Gold-collar Career and training Apprenticeship Artisan Master craftsman Avocation Career assessment Career counseling Career development Coaching Creative class Education Continuing education E-learning Employability Further education Graduate school Induction training Knowledge worker Licensure Lifelong learning Overspecialization Practice-based professional learning Professional association Professional certification Professional development Professional school Reflective practice Retraining Vocational education Vocational school Vocational university Mentorship Occupational Outlook Handbook Practice firm Profession Operator Professional Tradesman Vocation Attendance Break Break room Career break Furlough Gap year Leave of absence Long service leave No call, no show Sabbatical Sick leave Stress leave Time clock Schedules 35-hour workweek Four-day week Eight-hour day 996 working hour system Flextime On-call Overtime Remote work Six-hour day Shift work Working time Workweek and weekend Wages and salaries Frisch elasticity of labor supply Global labor arbitrage Labour economics Labor share Labour supply Living wage Maximum wage National average salary World Europe Minimum wage Canada Hong Kong Europe United States Price elasticity of demand Progressive wage Singapore Overtime rate Paid time off Performance-related pay Remuneration Salary cap Benefits Annual leave Casual Friday Child care Disability insurance Health insurance Life insurance Marriage leave Parental leave Pension By country Sick leave United States Take-home vehicle Taxes Payroll tax Tax bracket Income tax Negative Disposable income Salary packaging Unreported employment Safety and health Crunch Epilepsy and employment Human factors and ergonomics Karoshi List of countries by rate of fatal workplace accidents Occupational burnout Occupational disease Occupational exposure limit Occupational health psychology Occupational injury Occupational noise Occupational stress Personal protective equipment Repetitive strain injury Right to sit United States Sick building syndrome Work accident Occupational fatality Workers' compensation Workers' right to access the toilet Workplace health promotion Workplace phobia Workplace wellness Equal opportunity Affirmative action Discrimination Equal pay for equal work Gender pay gap Glass ceiling Infractions Corporate collapses and scandals Accounting scandals Control fraud Corporate behaviour Corporate crime Exploitation of labour Dress code Employee handbook Employee monitoring Evaluation Labour law Sexual harassment Sleeping while on duty Wage theft Whistleblower Workplace bullying Workplace harassment Workplace incivility Willingness Boreout Careerism Civil conscription Conscription Critique of work Dead-end job Job satisfaction McJob Organizational commitment Refusal of work Slavery Bonded labour Human trafficking Labour camp Penal labour Peonage Truck wages Unfree labour Wage slavery Work ethic Work–life interface Downshifting Slow living Workaholic Termination At-will employment Dismissal Banishment room Constructive dismissal Wrongful dismissal Employee offboarding Exit interview Layoff Notice period Pink slip Resignation Letter of resignation Restructuring Retirement Mandatory retirement Microretirement Retirement planning Retirement spend-down Severance package Golden handshake Golden parachute Turnover Unemployment Barriers to entry Discouraged worker Economic depression Great Depression Long Depression Frictional unemployment Full employment Graduate unemployment Involuntary unemployment Jobless recovery Phillips curve Recession Great Recession Job losses caused by the Great Recession Lists of recessions Recession-proof job Reserve army of labour Structural unemployment Technological unemployment Types of unemployment Unemployment benefits Unemployment Convention, 1919 Unemployment extension List of countries by unemployment rate Employment-to-population ratio List Wage curve Youth unemployment Public programs Workfare Unemployment insurance Make-work job Job creation program Job creation index Job guarantee Employer of last resort Guaranteed minimum income Right to work Historical: U.S.A.: Civil Works Administration Works Progress Administration Comprehensive Employment and Training Act See also Bullshit job Busy work Credentialism and educational inflation Emotional labor Evil corporation Going postal Kiss up kick down Labor rights Make-work job Narcissism in the workplace Post-work society Presenteeism Psychopathy in the workplace Sunday scaries Slow movement (culture) Toxic leader Toxic workplace Wage compression Working poor Workhouse See also templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of occupations Aspects of organizations Aspects of workplaces Corporate titles Critique of work Organized labor Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Involuntary_unemployment&oldid=1303681644 " Categories : Unemployment Forced labour Economic inequality Economic problems Personal financial problems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2018 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 12:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Involuntary unemployment 3 languages Add topic

