Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Translation studies Toggle Translation studies subsection 1.1 Usage 1.2 Cribs 1.3 Poetry to prose 2 Bad practice Toggle Bad practice subsection 2.1 Examples 2.2 Machine translation 2.3 Pidgins 3 Translator's humor 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Literal translation 43 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский Саха тыла සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Word-for-word translation of a text Not to be confused with Literary translation or Loan translation .

Part of a series on Translation Types Legal Literary Bible Quran Kural Linguistic validation Medical Regulatory Technical Interpretation Cultural Word-for-word Sense-for-sense Homophonic Theory Translation studies Skopos theory Translation project Translation criticism Equivalence Contrastive linguistics Polysystem theory Technologies CAT Machine translation Mobile translation Translation management system Dubbing Subtitling Pre-editing Postediting Multimedia translation Localization Glocalization Internationalization and localization Language localization Video game localization Dub localization Website localization Software localization Institutional Associations Awards Organizations Schools Related topics Untranslatability Transcription Transliteration Video relay service (VRS) Telephone interpreting Language barrier Fan translation ( of video games ) Fansub Fandub Scanlation Journalistic translation Books and magazines on translation Bible translations by language Translated books List of most translated works Translators Kural translations by language v t e Literal translation , direct translation , or word-for-word translation , or word-by-word translation , or word-to-word translation is the translation of a text done by translating each word separately without analysing how the words are used together in a phrase or sentence.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In translation theory , another term for literal translation is metaphrase (as opposed to paraphrase for an analogous translation). It is to be distinguished from an interpretation (done, for example, by an interpreter ).

[ 3 ] Literal translation leads to mistranslation of idioms , which can be a serious problem for machine translation .

[ 4 ] Translation studies [ edit ] Usage [ edit ] The term "literal translation" often appeared in the titles of 19th-century English translations of the classical Bible and other texts.

[ 5 ] Cribs [ edit ] Word-for-word translations ("cribs", "ponies", or "trots") are sometimes prepared for writers who are translating a work written in a language they do not know. For example, Robert Pinsky is reported to have used a literal translation in preparing his translation of Dante 's Inferno (1994), as he does not know Italian. Similarly, Richard Pevear worked from literal translations provided by his wife, Larissa Volokhonsky, in their translations of several Russian novels.

Poetry to prose [ edit ] Literal translation can also denote a translation that represents the precise meaning of the original text but does not attempt to convey its style, beauty, or poetry. There is, however, a great deal of difference between a literal translation of a poetic work and a prose translation. A literal translation of poetry may be in prose rather than verse but also be error-free. Charles Singleton's 1975 translation of the Divine Comedy is regarded as a prose translation.

[ 6 ] Bad practice [ edit ] The term literal translation implies that it is probably full of errors, since the translator has made no effort to (or is unable to) convey correct idioms or shades of meaning, for example, but it can also be a useful way of seeing how words are used to convey meaning in the source language.

Examples [ edit ] Example of broken English and German directly translated from French The literal translation of the German phrase " Ich habe Hunger " into English is "I have hunger". This is not typical phrasing used in English, even though its meaning might be clear enough to be understood. A more meaningful (but no longer literal) translation of the phrase would be "I am hungry".

Literal translations in which individual components within words or compounds are translated to create new lexical items in the target language (a process also known as "loan translation") are called calques , e.g., beer garden from German Biergarten .

The literal translation of the Italian sentence, " So che questo non va bene " is "[I] know that this not [it] goes well", which has English words but Italian grammar , making it difficult to understand. A more accurate translation is "I know that this is not good".

Machine translation [ edit ] Early machine translations (as of 1962 [ 4 ] at least) were notorious for this type of translation, as they simply employed a database of words and their translations. Later attempts utilized common phrases , which resulted in better grammatical structure and the capture of idioms, but with many words left in the original language. For translating synthetic languages , a morphosyntactic analyzer and synthesizer are required.

The best systems today use a combination of the above technologies and apply algorithms to correct the "natural" sound of the translation. In the end, though, professional translation firms that employ machine translation use it as a tool to create a rough translation that is then tweaked by a human, professional translator.

Douglas Hofstadter gave an example of a failure of machine translation: the English sentence "In their house, everything comes in pairs. There's his car and her car, his towels and her towels, and his library and hers." might be translated into French as " Dans leur maison, tout vient en paires. Il y a sa voiture et sa voiture, ses serviettes et ses serviettes, sa bibliothèque et les siennes.

" That does not make sense because it does not distinguish between "his" car and "hers".

[ 7 ] Pidgins [ edit ] Often, first-generation immigrants create something of a literal translation in how they speak their parents' native language. This results in a mix of the two languages that is something of a pidgin . Many such mixes have specific names, e.g., Spanglish or Denglisch . For example, American children of German immigrants are heard using "rockingstool" from the German word Schaukelstuhl instead of "rocking chair".

Translator's humor [ edit ] Literal translation of idioms is a source of translators' jokes. One such joke, often told about machine translation , translates "The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak" (an allusion to Mark 14:38 ) into Russian and then back into English, getting "The vodka is good, but the meat is rotten". This is not an actual machine-translation error, but rather a joke which dates back to 1956 or 1958. Another joke in the genre transforms "out of sight, out of mind" to "blind idiot" or "invisible idiot".

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] All your base are belong to us – Internet meme from a video game Dynamic and formal equivalence – Two dissimilar translation approaches Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Literal Standard Version – Modern English translation of the Bible Semantic translation Transliteration Young's Literal Translation – 1862 translation of the Bible into English English as She Is Spoke References [ edit ] ^ "LITERAL | meaning in the Cambridge English Dictionary" .

dictionary.cambridge.org .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 21 September 2019 .

^ Lu, Wei; Fang, Hong (April 2012).

Reconsidering Peter Newmark's Theory on Literal Translation (PDF) (Thesis).

Finland : Academy Publications.

ISSN 1799-2591 . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ "Multilingual LLM Translation: Evaluating Cultural Nuance in Generative AI" .

Appen . 18 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ a b c Hutchins, John (June 1995).

" "The whisky was invisible", or Persistent myths of MT" (PDF) .

MT News International (11): 17– 18. Archived from the original on 3 January 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2022 .

^ Vargas-Sierra, Chelo; Candel-Mora, Miguel Angel; et al. ( Procedia ) (October 2013).

An Analysis of Research Production in Corpus Linguistics Applied to Translation .

ResearchGate (Thesis).

Elsevier . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ Reicher, Vartina (August 2019).

Literal translation: A study with several translation techniques to get a good translation result (Thesis).

Egypt : ResearchGate .

ISSN 2768-0193 . Retrieved 18 July 2025 .

^ Hofstadter, Douglas (30 January 2018).

"The Shallowness of Google Translate" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2020 . Retrieved 16 February 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Olive Classe, Encyclopedia of literary translation into English , vol. 1, Taylor & Francis, 2000, ISBN 1-884964-36-2 , p. viii.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Literal_translation&oldid=1306158125 " Categories : Translation studies Error Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2023 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing French-language text Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 07:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Literal translation 43 languages Add topic

