Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Career 2 Positions and theories Toggle Positions and theories subsection 2.1 Romanticism 2.2 Economics 3 Writings 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Adam Müller 15 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar مصرى Polski Русский Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German publicist, literary critic, political economist, and theorist of the state For other people named Adam Müller, see Adam Müller (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Adam Müller" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Adam Müller Adam Müller in his youth Born Adam Heinrich Müller ( 1779-06-30 ) 30 June 1779 Berlin , Brandenburg Died 17 January 1829 (1829-01-17) (aged 49) Vienna , Austria Occupation(s) Critic, theorist, economist Academic background Influences Burke Schlözer Heeren Gentz Hugo Schlegel Academic work School or tradition German Romanticism Counter-Enlightenment Conservatism Notable ideas Criticism of Adam Smith 's economic theory Adam Heinrich Müller (30 June 1779 – 17 January 1829; after 1827 Ritter [ 1 ] von Nitterdorf ) was a German-Austrian conservative philosopher, literary critic, and political economist, working within the romantic tradition.

Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Müller was born in Berlin. It was intended that he should study Protestant theology, but from 1798 he devoted himself in Göttingen to the study of law, philosophy, and natural science. He was a student of Gustav Hugo . Returning to Berlin, he was persuaded by his friend Friedrich von Gentz to take up political science . He had early formed a close intimacy with Gentz, his elder by 15 years; and this connection exercised an important influence both on his material circumstances and his mental development in after life. The two men differed widely in character and in their fundamental principles, but agreed, at least in their later period, in their practical political aims, and the friendship was only terminated by death.

Müller worked for some time as referendary in the Kurmärkische Kammer in Berlin. Müller's relations with the Junker party and his co-operation with them in their opposition to Hardenberg 's reforms made any public employment in Prussia impossible for him. He travelled in Sweden and Denmark, spent about two years in Poland, and then went to Vienna , where he was converted to the Catholic faith on 30 April 1805.

[ 2 ] Through Gentz he became acquainted with Metternich , to whom he was useful in the preparation of state papers.

Via Poland, Müller traveled to Dresden, where he held lectures on German science and literature (1806), in which he showed himself to be a follower of Schlegel's romanticism.

Career [ edit ] From 1806 to 1809, he lived at Dresden occupied in the political education of Prince Bernhard of Saxe-Weimar and lecturer on German literature , dramatic art, and political science. In 1808 he edited with Heinrich von Kleist the periodical Phoebus .

[ 2 ] In 1809, he returned to Berlin, and in 1811 to Vienna, where he lived in the house of Archduke Maximilian of Austria-Este and became the friend of Clemens Maria Hofbauer .

He developed his central political ideas in his 1808/09 lectures, which he published in 1809 under the title The Elements of Statecraft . In accordance with his motto that the "state scholar" must stand by the statesman, Müller propagated the basic ideas of political romanticism, of which the elements are to be regarded as the main work: he opposed the modern contract theory to the idea of the organically grown monarchical corporate state, combining tradition and the present; against the modern economic theory of Adam Smith (whom Müller hated throughout his life), he propagated the idea of a strict social bond of property. Even later he repeatedly criticized modern economic life. His admired as well as hostile definition of the state is: The state is not a "manufactory ... or mercantile society, it is the most intimate connection of all physical and spiritual needs, all physical and spiritual wealth, all inner and outer life nation, into a great, energetic, infinitely moving and living whole." Adam Heinrich Müller c. 1810 In 1809, after marrying Sophie von Haza-Radlitz, Müller went to Berlin, where he gave further historical-political lectures and published articles in the Berliner Abendblatt newspaper (1810/11) edited by Heinrich von Kleist . Müller, now back in the Prussian civil service, rejected the reform efforts of Karl August von Hardenberg , the state chancellor who had been in office since 1810, and tried to trigger a public discussion about the reform policy with his articles critical of the government. In 1811 he also acted as a close political adviser to the leader of the Prussian nobility opposition, Friedrich August Ludwig von der Marwitz . But Hardenberg smashed the opposition: Marwitz was imprisoned, the “Abendblatt” had to cease publication and Müller was deported to Vienna as a diplomatic reporter.

Driven back to Berlin by the war, Müller drafted a bill of indictment against the state chancellor von Hardenberg on behalf of the Kurbrandenburgische Ritterschaft after the latter had refused Müller's request for employment in the civil service. In this indictment, intended for the king, he accused the chancellor of revolutionary principles.

In 1813, he entered the Austrian service, and was appointed imperial commissioner and major of the rifle corps in Tyrol . He took part in the wars for liberation , and later on, as counsellor of the government, in the reorganization of the country. In 1815 he was called to Vienna, and went to Paris with the imperial staff.

On the conclusion of peace, he became Austrian consul-general for Saxony at Leipzig , and agent for Anhalt and Schwarzburg . He edited here the periodicals Deutscher Staatsanzeiger (1816–1818) and Unparteiischer Literatur- und Kirchenkorrespondent . He attended the ministerial conferences at Carlsbad and Vienna (1819–1820), where, being one of the principal literary instruments of the reaction , he took part in framing the Carlsbad resolutions . In 1826, at the instance of Prince von Metternich , he was ennobled as Ritter von Nittersdorf , was recalled to Vienna (1827), appointed imperial counsellor, and employed in the service of the chancellery . He died in Vienna in 1829, aged 49.

Positions and theories [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Germany Ideologies Agrarian Christian democracy Liberal Ordo Ritter School Monarchism Nationalist Neue Rechte Völkisch Paternalistic Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Romanticism Right-Hegelianism Historical School Value Principles Authority Christian values Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Federalism Gemeinschaft Geopolitik Germanisation Heimat Imperialism In Treue fest Kultur Medievalism Monarchism Organicism Patriotism Political theology Prussian virtues Sittlichkeit Social market economy Sonderweg Subsidiarity Volk Volksgeist History Holy Roman Empire The Junkers German Confederation Carlsbad Decrees Anti-Socialist Laws German Reich German Empire State Socialism Völkisch movement George-Kreis Leipzig school Freikorps Monarchism in Bavaria after 1918 Perceived Weimar decadence Conservative Revolution Oster conspiracy 20 July plot Historikerstreit Heidelberg Manifesto German reunification Erklärung 2018 Intellectuals Fichte Freyer Gadamer von Galen George Gehlen Gogarten Görres Hamann Hartmann Heidegger Hegel Herder Hielscher von Hildebrand Hoppe Jünger (Ernst) Jünger (Friedrich) Kantorowicz Klages Kommerell Koselleck Langbehn von Lilienfeld Lorenz Löwith Lübbe Mann (early) Maschke Moeller van den Bruck Müller Nolte Novalis Otto Pieper Plessner von Ranke Reck-Malleczewen Ritter (Gerhard) Ritter (Joachim) Röpke Rüstow von Salomon Scheler Schelsky Schlegel Schmitt Sieferle Sloterdijk Sombart Spaemann Spengler Steinbuch von Treitschke Voegelin Weber Literature Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) The National System (1837) Degeneration (1892) Ressentiment (1912) Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Ideology and Utopia (1929) Man and Technics (1931) The Concept of the Political (1932) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Man (1940) Diary of a Man in Despair (1947) Man in the Age of Technology (1949) The Questionnaire (1951) Fascism in Its Epoch (1963) Envy (1966) Moral und Hypermoral (1969) Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Finis Germania (2017) Commentators Anrich Aust Bolz Broder Deschner Thomas Fasbender Herman Höhler Hoven Joffe Krause Landt Kuby Hermann Löns Löwenthal Mann (Golo) Maurer Nagel Nebel Noelle-Neumann Otte Pirinçci Röhl Safranski Sarrazin von Schrenck-Notzing Schwilk Stein Strauss (Botho) Stürmer Tichy Weißmann Zehrer Zitelmann Politicians Adenauer Ancillon Barschel von Bismarck von Bose Brüning Fehrenbach Filbinger von Gerlach Goerdeler Held von Hindenburg Hugenberg Jongen Jung Kapp Kohl Krah Lengsfeld Maaßen von Merkatz Merz Michaelis von Papen Petry von Radowitz Rauschning Ritter von Kahr von Roon Schäffer Schäffler von Schleicher Stresemann vom Stein Stoecker von Storch Strauss Wagener Weidel von Westarp Wilhelm II Winnig Jurists Böckenförde von Gierke Möser Quabbe von Savigny Schmitt Stahl Wackenroder Wagener Activists Kohlmann Kubitschek Seibt Billy Six von Stauffenberg Stürzenberger von Thurn und Taxis (Elisabeth) von Thurn und Taxis (Gloria) Parties Active Alternative for Germany (AfD) Bavaria Party (BP) Bündnis Deutschland (BD) Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) Centre Party Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Family Party of Germany The Republicans (REP) Values Union (WU) We Citizens (WB) Defunct Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Conservative Party Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) German Freedom Party German National People's Party (DNVP) German Party (DP) German People's Party (DVP) Organizations Aufbau Vereinigung Bibliothek des Konservatismus Desiderius-Erasmus-Stiftung Die Deutschen Konservativen Forum of German Catholics Gerhard Löwenthal Prize German Burschenschaft German Taxpayers Federation Citizens' Movement Pax Europa Hanns Seidel Foundation Hans Filbinger Foundation Identitäre Aktion Institut für Staatspolitik Konrad Adenauer Foundation PEGIDA Studienzentrum Weikersheim Tradition und Leben Defunct Der Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten Germany Foundation Queen Louise League Media Die Achse des Guten Antaios (Defunct) Bild Cato Cicero COMPACT Deutsche Rundschau Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Junge Freiheit Kreuzzeitung (Defunct) Politically Incorrect Preußische Allgemeine Zeitung Süddeutsche Monatshefte Der Türmer Verlag Antaios Die Welt Welt am Sonntag Related topics Alternative Mitte Bavarian nationalism Böckenförde dilemma European New Right Conservatism in Austria Conservatism in Switzerland Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural pessimism Freischwebende Intelligenz Immigration to Germany Criminality Remigration Metapolitics Politics of Germany Liberalism Stahlhelm-Fraktion Conservatism portal Germany portal v t e Part of a series on Conservatism in Austria Ideologies Austrian nationalism Christian democracy Conservative corporatism Green conservatism Liberal conservatism Principles Austrian culture Catholic social teaching Class collaboration Clericalism Duty Family values Imperialism Liberty Monarchism Organicism Political Catholicism Subsidiarity Tradition History Austria-Hungary Austrian Civil War Austrian Empire Carlsbad Decrees Congress of Vienna Federal State of Austria Habsburg monarchy Intellectuals Berger Burger von Gentz von Hayek Höbelt von Hofmannsthal Kaltenbrunner von Kuehnelt-Leddihn Mannheim Müller Schoeck Spann von Vogelsang Winter Literature Sex and Character (1903) The Menace of the Herd (1943) Envy: A Theory of Social Behavior (1966) Politicians von Coudenhove-Kalergi Dollfuss Figl von Gentz von Habsburg Haider von Hohenwart Kickl Klaus Kurz Nehammer Schuschnigg von Metternich de Paula Maria Raab Rosenkranz Seipel Schüssel Stadler Starhemberg Strache Taaffe von Vogelsang Waldheim Activists Dichand Feigl Sabaditsch-Wolff Schönfeld Tschugguel Winter Parties Active Alliance for the Future of Austria Austrian People's Party Christian Party of Austria Freedom Party of Austria Defunct Catholic People's Party Christian Social Party Fatherland Front The Reform Conservatives Team Stronach Organisations Black-Yellow Alliance Heimwehr Identitäre Bewegung Österreich Viennese Association of Academics Media Kleine Zeitung Neues Volksblatt Salzburger Nachrichten Tiroler Tageszeitung Wiener Zeitung Österreich Related topics Austrian nobility Conservatism in Germany German nationalism in Austria Pan Germanism Remigration Überfremdung Conservatism portal Austria portal v t e Müller was distinguished as a writer not only on politics and economics, but on literature and aesthetics.

His chief work is the Elemente der Staatskunst ( Elements of Statecraft ), originating in lectures delivered before Prince Bernhard of Saxe-Weimar and an assembly of politicians and diplomats at Dresden in the winter, 1808–09. It treats in six books of the state, of right, of the spirit of legislation in antiquity and in the Middle Ages , of money and national wealth, of the economical factors of the state and trade, of the relation between the state and religion.

Müller was a conservative writer whose vision of the state was one of an absolute power, in contrast to theorists who emphasized the rights of man such as Montesquieu and Rousseau .

[ 3 ] Müller endeavoured to comprehend the connection between political and social science, and, while using the historical method , to base them upon philosophy and religion.

[ 4 ] With Edmund Burke , Friedrich von Gentz , Joseph de Maistre , and Karl Ludwig von Haller , he must be reckoned among the chief opponents of revolutionary ideas in politics.

In his work, Von der Notwendigkeit einer theologischen Grundlage der gesamten Staatswissenschaften ( On the necessity of a comprehensive theological foundation for political science , 1820), Müller rejects, like Haller ( Restauration der Staatswissenschaften , 1816), the distinction between constitutional and civil law (common law) , which rests entirely on the idea of the state's omnipotence. His ideal is medieval feudalism , on which the reorganization of modern political institutions should be modelled.

Romanticism [ edit ] In the field of literature and aesthetics , Müller belongs to the Romantic school. He is a Romanticist even in his specialty, politics and political economy. As Eichendorff says in his Geschichte der poetischen Literatur Deutschlands (new ed., by W. Kosch, Kempten, 1906, p. 352), Müller "mapped out a domain of his own, the application of Romanticism to the social and political conditions of life." Carl Schmitt presented the view that "it is impossible to judge Müller's theory of the state as anything but a matter of aesthetics and style." [ 5 ] Müller himself declares: "The reconciliation of science and art and of their noblest ideas with serious political life was the purpose of my larger works" ( Vermischte Schriften , I, p. iii).

Economics [ edit ] His position in political economy is defined by his strong opposition to Adam Smith 's system of materialistic- liberal (so-called classical) political economy, or the so-called industry system . He censures Smith as presenting a one-sidedly material and individualistic conception of society, and as being too exclusively English in his views. Müller opposed free trade and strongly supported autarky.

[ 6 ] In contrast with the economical individualism of Adam Smith, he emphasizes the ethical element in national economy, the duty of the state toward the individual, and the religious basis which is also necessary in this field. Müller's importance in the history of political economy is acknowledged even by the opponents of his religious and political point of view. His reaction against Adam Smith, says Roscher ( Geschichte der National-Ökonomik , p. 763), "is not blind or hostile, but is important, and often truly helpful." Some of his ideas, freed from much of their alloy, are reproduced in the writings of the historical school of German economists .

One of Müller's main contributions to economic theory was his book "Versuch einer neuen Theorie des Geldes" (Attempt at a New Theory of Money), published in 1816. In this book, Müller defended paper money over metallic money, on the grounds that the "word" or stamp is what gives something a status as money, not the value of the material of which it is composed.

[ 7 ] Müller called this legitimating word or stamp "ideal money", and believed it to be the "'condition of possibility' of money as such".

[ 8 ] The reactionary and feudalistic thought in Müller's writings, which agreed so little with the spirit of the times, prevented his political ideas from exerting a more notable and lasting influence on his age, while their religious character prevented them from being justly appreciated. However, Müller's teachings had long-term effects in that they were taken up again by 20th century theorists of corporatism and the corporate state , for example Othmar Spann ( Der wahre Staat. Vorlesungen über Abbruch und Neubau der Gesellschaft , Vienna, 1921).

Writings [ edit ] Müller is the main representative of political romanticism. His work is predominantly characterized by an enlightened-romantic mixed style, which proves to be particularly fruitful in his economic-theoretical writing Elements of Statecraft .

In it, he examines the intellectual foundations of economically developed nations, how they can use their wealth to benefit all classes of society and create a just world order. Central to this is his criticism of liberalism and the writings of Adam Smith. Philosophically, Müller starts from his theory of opposites - a kind of early dialectic view that revolves around the idea of mediation and balance.

Müller was a man of great and versatile talents, an excellent orator, and a suggestive writer. Several of his works were based upon his own lectures; the most important (besides the above-mentioned periodicals) are: Die Lehre vom Gegensatz ( The Doctrine of Contrasts, Berlin, 1804) Vorlesungen über die deutsche Wissenschaft und Literatur ( Lectures on German science and literature, Dresden, 1806, 2nd ed., 1807) Von der Idee der Schönheit ( On the idea of beauty, lectures; Berlin, 1809) Die Elemente der Staatskunst ( The Elements of Statecraft, lectures; 3 parts, Berlin, 1809) Über König Friedrich II.

und die Natur, Würde und Bestimmung der preußischen Monarchie (lectures; Berlin, 1810) Die Theorie der Staatshaushaltung und ihre Forschritte in Deutschland und England seit Adam Smith ( The theory of state budgeting, 2 vols., Vienna, 1812) Vermischte Schriften über Staat, Philosophie und Kunst (2 vols., Vienna, 1812; 2nd ed., 1817) Versuch einer neuen Theorie des Geldes, mit besonderer Rücksicht auf Großbritannien ( Attempt at a new theory of money, Leipzig, 1816) Zwölf Reden über die Beredsamkeit und deren Verfall in Deutschland ( Twelve speeches on eloquence and its decline in Germany, Leipzig, 1817) Die Fortschritte der nationalökonomischen Wissenschaft in England (Leipzig, 1817) Von der Notwendigkeit einer theologischen Grundlage der gesamten Staatswissenschaften und der Staatswirtschaft insbesondere ( Of the need for a theological basis for all political science, Leipzig, 1820; new ed., Vienna, 1898) Die Gewerbe-Polizei in Beziehung auf den Landbau (Leipzig, 1824) Vorschlag zu einem historischen Ferien-Cursus (Vienna, 1829) A critical pamphlet, which was written in 1817 on the occasion of the Protestant jubilee of the Reformation and entitled, Etwas, das Goethe gesagt hat. Beleuchtet von Adam Müller. Leipzig, den 31 Oktober 1817 , was printed but not published (reprinted in Vienna, 1910). Nevertheless, Traugott Krug 's reply, entitled Etwas, das Herr Adam Müller gesagt hat über etwas, das Goethe gesagt hat, und noch etwas, das Luther gesagt hat (Leipzig, 1817), appeared in two editions.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Regarding personal names: Ritter was originally a title, translated approximately as 'Sir' (denoting a knight ). In 1919 all titles of nobility were abolished in Germany and Ritter , together with the noble particles von and zu , became part of the surname.

^ a b Schmitt, Carl (2011).

Political Romanticism . tr. Guy Oakes. Transaction. pp.

42– 44.

ISBN 9781412814720 .

^ Eastern Europe: An Historical Geography, 1815-1945 p23 ^ Cf. the preface to the first volume of the Elemente , where he treats exhaustively the differences between his work and Montesquieu 's De l'esprit des lois ; cf. also the sixth book of this work, and the above-mentioned work of 1820.

^ Schmitt, Carl (2011).

Political Romanticism . tr. Guy Oakes. Transaction. p. 141.

ISBN 9781412814720 .

^ Suesse, Marvin, ed. (2023), "The Birth of the National Economy in Europe, 1789–1860" , The Nationalist Dilemma: A Global History of Economic Nationalism, 1776–Present , Cambridge University Press, pp.

44– 75, doi : 10.1017/9781108917087.003 , ISBN 978-1-108-83138-3 ^ Richard T. Gray, Hypersign, Hypermoney, Hypermarket: Adam Müller's Theory of Money and Romantic Semiotics, "New Literary History", Vol. 31, No. 2, Economics and Culture: Production, Consumption, and Value (Spring, 2000), pg. 298 ^ Richard T. Gray, Hypersign, Hypermoney, Hypermarket: Adam Müller's Theory of Money and Romantic Semiotics, "New Literary History", Vol. 31, No. 2, Economics and Culture: Production, Consumption, and Value (Spring, 2000), pg. 299 References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Adam Heinrich Müller ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920).

"Müller, Adam Heinrich" .

Encyclopedia Americana .

This work in turn cites: Ernst Mischler (1885). " Müller, Adam Heinrich ".

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 22. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

501– 511.

External links [ edit ] Correspondence between Müller and Gentz 1807/08 Works by or about Ritter von Nitterdorf at the Internet Archive Works by or about Adam Müller at the Internet Archive v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Greece Argentina Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐tmhsq
Cached time: 20250817063947
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.917 seconds
Real time usage: 1.160 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6414/1000000
Revision size: 18353/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 299979/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11437/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 70510/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.525/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23400220/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  845.900      1 -total
 28.04%  237.228      1 Template:Conservatism_in_Germany
 21.05%  178.078      1 Template:Infobox_economist
 16.98%  143.660     46 Template:Lang
 12.22%  103.348      1 Template:Reflist
  9.11%   77.085      2 Template:Cite_book
  7.53%   63.725      1 Template:Short_description
  6.00%   50.729      1 Template:Conservatism
  5.70%   48.199      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  5.23%   44.214      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1267277:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817063947 and revision id 1300478518. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adam_Müller&oldid=1300478518 " Categories : 1779 births 1829 deaths 18th-century Roman Catholics 19th-century Roman Catholics Writers from Berlin German literary critics German opinion journalists German political philosophers German philosophers of law German Roman Catholic writers German monarchists Catholic philosophers Converts to Roman Catholicism from Protestantism German expatriates in Austria 19th-century German male writers 18th-century German philosophers 19th-century German philosophers German male non-fiction writers Conservatism in Austria Right-wing anti-capitalism Corporatism 19th-century Austrian philosophers Hidden categories: Articles containing French-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards Articles containing German-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from Encyclopedia Americana CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 15:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adam Müller 15 languages Add topic

