Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subjects Toggle Subjects subsection 1.1 On literature 1.2 On the Enlightenment 1.3 On truth and objectivity 2 Influences 3 Postmodern philosophers Toggle Postmodern philosophers subsection 3.1 Michel Foucault 3.2 Jean Baudrillard 3.3 Jean François Lyotard 3.4 Jacques Derrida 3.4.1 Gilles Deleuze on productive difference 3.5 Richard Rorty 3.6 Douglas Kellner 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 Notes 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Postmodern philosophy 20 languages العربية Català Čeština Español فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Македонски Nederlands Português Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical movement Postmodernism Preceded by Modernism Postmodernity Deconstruction Hypermodernity Hyperreality Posthumanism Post-structuralism Fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Criminology Dance Feminism Film Television Literature ( Picture books ) Music International relations Philosophy Anarchism Marxism Postpositivism Psychology Political science Theatre Theology and Religion Reactions Criticism Metamodernism Post-postmodernism Remodernism v t e Postmodern philosophy is a philosophical movement that arose in the second half of the 20th century as a critical response to assumptions allegedly present in modernist philosophical ideas regarding culture, identity, history, or language that were developed during the 18th-century Age of Enlightenment .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Postmodernist thinkers developed concepts like différance , repetition, trace , and hyperreality to subvert " grand narratives ", univocity of being , and epistemic certainty.

[ 3 ] Postmodern philosophy questions the importance of power relationships, personalization, and discourse in the "construction" of truth and world views. Many postmodernists appear to deny that an objective reality exists, and appear to deny that there are objective moral values.

[ 1 ] Jean-François Lyotard defined philosophical postmodernism in The Postmodern Condition , writing "Simplifying to the extreme, I define postmodern as incredulity towards meta narratives...." [ 4 ] where what he means by metanarrative is something like a unified, complete, universal, and epistemically certain story about everything that is. Postmodernists reject metanarratives because they reject the conceptualization of truth that metanarratives presuppose. Postmodernist philosophers in general argue that truth is always contingent on historical and social context rather than being absolute and universal and that truth is always partial and "at issue" rather than being complete and certain.

[ 3 ] [ failed verification ] Postmodern philosophy is often particularly skeptical about simple binary oppositions characteristic of structuralism , emphasizing the problem of the philosopher cleanly distinguishing knowledge from ignorance, social progress from reversion, dominance from submission, good from bad, and presence from absence.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Subjects [ edit ] On literature [ edit ] Postmodern philosophy has had strong relations with the substantial literature of critical theory , [ 7 ] although some critical theorists such as Jürgen Habermas [ 8 ] have opposed postmodern philosophy.

On the Enlightenment [ edit ] Many postmodern claims are critical of certain eighteenth-century Enlightenment values. Postmodern writings often focus on deconstructing the role that power and ideology play in shaping discourse and belief. Postmodern philosophy shares ontological similarities with classical skeptical and relativistic belief systems.

[ 1 ] On truth and objectivity [ edit ] According to David Novitz , philosophical postmodernism challenges the notion that truth can be achieved.

[ 9 ] The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy states that "The assumption that there is no common denominator in 'nature' or 'truth' ... that guarantees the possibility of neutral or objective thought" is a key assumption of postmodernism.

[ 10 ] The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy describes it as "a set of critical, strategic and rhetorical practices employing concepts such as difference, repetition, the trace, the simulacrum, and hyperreality to destabilize other concepts such as presence, identity, historical progress, epistemic certainty, and the univocity of meaning." [ 11 ] The National Research Council has characterized the belief that "social science research can never generate objective or trustworthy knowledge" as an example of a postmodernist belief.

[ 12 ] Jean-François Lyotard 's seminal 1979 The Postmodern Condition stated that its hypotheses "should not be accorded predictive value in relation to reality, but strategic value in relation to the questions raised". Lyotard's statement in 1984 that "I define postmodern as incredulity toward meta-narratives" extends to incredulity toward science.

Jacques Derrida , who is generally identified as a postmodernist, stated that "every referent, all reality has the structure of a differential trace".

[ 3 ] There are strong similarities with post-modernism in the work of Paul Feyerabend ; Feyerabend held that modern science is no more justified than witchcraft, and has denounced the "tyranny" of "abstract concepts such as 'truth', 'reality', or 'objectivity', which narrow people's vision and ways of being in the world".

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Defenders of postmodernism state that many descriptions of postmodernism exaggerate its antipathy to science; for example, Feyerabend denied that he was "anti-science", accepted that some scientific theories are superior to other theories (even if science itself is not superior to other modes of inquiry), and attempted conventional medical treatments during his fight against cancer.

[ 13 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Influences [ edit ] Postmodern philosophy was greatly influenced by the writings of Søren Kierkegaard and Friedrich Nietzsche in the 19th century and other early-to-mid 20th-century philosophers, including the phenomenologist Martin Heidegger , the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan , cultural critic Roland Barthes , theorist Georges Bataille , and the later work of Ludwig Wittgenstein .

[ 18 ] Postmodern philosophy also drew from the world of the arts and architecture, particularly Marcel Duchamp , John Cage , and artists who practiced collage .

[ citation needed ] Postmodern philosophers [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Postmodern philosophy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Michel Foucault [ edit ] Michel Foucault is often cited as an early postmodernist although he personally rejected that label. Following Nietzsche, Foucault argued that knowledge is produced through the operations of power , and changes fundamentally in different historical periods.

[ 19 ] Jean Baudrillard [ edit ] Baudrillard, known for his simulation theory , argued that the individual's experience and perception of reality derives its basis entirely from media-propagated ideals and images. The real and fantasy become indistinguishable, leading to the emergence of a wide-spread simulation of reality.

[ 20 ] Jean François Lyotard [ edit ] The writings of Lyotard were largely concerned with the role of narrative in human culture, and particularly how that role has changed as we have left modernity and entered a "postindustrial" or postmodern condition .  He argued that modern philosophies legitimized their truth-claims not (as they themselves claimed) on logical or empirical grounds, but rather on the grounds of accepted stories (or " metanarratives ") about knowledge and the world—comparing these with Wittgenstein's concept of language-games .  He further argued that in our postmodern condition, these metanarratives no longer work to legitimize truth-claims.  He suggested that in the wake of the collapse of modern metanarratives, people are developing a new "language-game"—one that does not make claims to absolute truth but rather celebrates a world of ever-changing relationships (among people and between people and the world).

[ 21 ] Jacques Derrida [ edit ] Derrida, the father of deconstruction , practiced philosophy as a form of textual criticism .  He criticized Western philosophy as privileging the concept of presence and logos , as opposed to absence and markings or writings.

[ 22 ] Gilles Deleuze on productive difference [ edit ] The work of Gilles Deleuze developed a concept of difference as a productive mechanism, rather than as a merely negative phenomenon. He advocated for a critique of reason that emphasizes sense and affect over rational judgment. Following Nietzsche, Deleuze argued that philosophical critique is an encounter between thought and what forces it into action, and that this requires training, discipline, inventiveness, and even a certain "cruelty". He believed that thought cannot activate itself, but needs external forces to awaken and move it. Art, science, and philosophy can provide such activation through their transformative and experimental nature.

[ 23 ] Richard Rorty [ edit ] In the United States, a well-known pragmatist and self-proclaimed postmodernist was Richard Rorty .  An analytic philosopher, Rorty believed that combining Willard Van Orman Quine 's criticism of the analytic-synthetic distinction with Wilfrid Sellars 's critique of the " Myth of the Given " allowed for an abandonment of the view of the thought or language as a mirror of a reality or an external world.  Further, drawing upon Donald Davidson 's criticism of the dualism between conceptual scheme and empirical content, he challenges the sense of questioning whether our particular concepts are related to the world in an appropriate way, whether we can justify our ways of describing the world as compared with other ways.  He argued that truth was not about getting it right or representing reality, but was part of a social practice and language was what served our purposes in a particular time; ancient languages are sometimes untranslatable into modern ones because they possess a different vocabulary and are unuseful today.  Donald Davidson is not usually considered a postmodernist, although he and Rorty have both acknowledged that there are few differences between their philosophies.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Douglas Kellner [ edit ] Douglas Kellner insists that the "assumptions and procedures of modern theory" must be forgotten. Kellner analyzes the terms of this theory in real-life experiences and examples.

[ 26 ] Kellner uses science and technology studies as a major part of his analysis; he urges that the theory is incomplete without it. The scale is larger than just postmodernism alone; it must be interpreted through cultural studies where science and technology studies play a large role. The reality of the 11 September attacks on the United States of America is the catalyst for his explanation. In response, Kellner continues to examine the repercussions of understanding the effects of the 11 September attacks. He questions if the attacks are only able to be understood in a limited form of postmodern theory due to the level of irony.

[ 27 ] The conclusion he depicts is simple: postmodernism, as most use it today, will decide what experiences and signs in one's reality will be one's reality as they know it.

[ 28 ] Criticism [ edit ] Main article: Criticism of postmodernism Some criticism responds to postmodernist skepticism towards objective reality and claims that truth and morality are relative, including the argument that this relativism is self-contradictory. In part in reference to postmodernism, conservative English philosopher Roger Scruton wrote, "A writer who says that there are no truths, or that all truth is 'merely relative,' is asking you not to believe him. So don't." [ 29 ] In 2014, the philosophers Theodore Schick and Lewis Vaughn wrote: "the statement that 'No unrestricted universal generalizations are true' is itself an unrestricted universal generalization. So if relativism in any of its forms is true, it's false." [ 30 ] Some responses to postmodernist relativism argue that, contrary to its proponents' usual intentions, it does not necessarily benefit the political left .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] For example, the historian Richard J. Evans argued that if relativism rejects truth, it can legitimize far-right pseudohistory such as Holocaust denial .

[ 31 ] Further lines of criticism are that postmodernist discourse is characterized by obscurantism , that the term itself is vaguely defined, and that postmodernism lacks a clear epistemology . The linguist and philosopher Noam Chomsky accused postmodernist intellectuals of failing to meaningfully answer questions such as "what are the principles of their theories, on what evidence are they based, what do they explain that wasn't already obvious, etc.?" [ 32 ] The French psychotherapist and philosopher, Félix Guattari , rejected its theoretical assumptions by arguing that the structuralist and postmodernist visions of the world were not flexible enough to seek explanations in psychological, social, and environmental domains at the same time.

[ 33 ] In an interview with Truls Lie , Jean Baudrillard noted: "[ Transmodernism , etc.] are better terms than "postmodernism". It is not about modernity; it is about every system that has developed its mode of expression to the extent that it surpasses itself and its own logic. This is what I am trying to analyze." "There is no longer any ontologically secret substance. I perceive this to be nihilism rather than postmodernism." [ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Hyperreality Natural philosophy Ontological pluralism Physical ontology Postmaterialism Postmodern art Postmodernism Postmodernity Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Duignan, Brian.

"postmodernism (philosophy) (Encyclopædia Britannica)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 19 April 2016 .

^ "Definition of POSTMODERN" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ a b c Aylesworth, Gary (2015).

"Postmodernism" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2015 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Lyotard, J.-F. (1979).

The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge . University of Minnesota Press.

^ Sim, Stuart.

Routledge Companion to Postmodernism ^ Taylor, Victor and Charles Winquist.

Encyclopedia of Postmodernism "Binary Opposition" ^ Problematizing Global Knowledge . Theory, Culture & Society. Vol. 23 (2–3). Sage, 2006 ^ https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/postmodernism/ https://web.archive.org/web/20211201023207/https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/postmodernism/ ^ The Poverty of Anti-realism Critical Perspectives on Postmodernist Philosophy of History . Lexington Books. p. 13.

^ Ermarth, Elizabeth Deeds. Postmodernism, 1998, doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-N044-1 . Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Taylor and Francis, https://www.rep.routledge.com/articles/thematic/postmodernism/v-1 Archived 19 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Aylesworth, Gary.

"Postmodernism" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . sep-postmodernism (Spring 2015 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 18 October 2024 .

^ Council, National Research; Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and; Education, Center for; Research, Committee on Scientific Principles for Education (2002).

Scientific Research in Education . National Academies Press. pp. 20, 25.

ISBN 9780309082914 .

^ a b Preston, John (2016).

"Paul Feyerabend" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ Phillips, Denis Charles; Burbules, Nicholas C. (2000).

Postpositivism and Educational Research . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 1.

ISBN 9780847691227 .

^ Kidd, Ian James (21 December 2016). "Was Feyerabend a Postmodernist?".

International Studies in the Philosophy of Science .

30 (1): 55– 68.

doi : 10.1080/02698595.2016.1240463 .

S2CID 151746255 .

This article asks whether the philosophy of Paul K. Feyerabend can be reasonably classified as postmodernist, a label applied to him by friends and foes alike.

^ Horgan, John .

"Was Philosopher Paul Feyerabend Really Science's "Worst Enemy"?" .

Scientific American Cross-check (blog) . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ Pierre, Elizabeth Adams St (July 2016). "Comment: "Science" Rejects Postmodernism".

Educational Researcher .

31 (8): 25– 27.

doi : 10.3102/0013189X031008025 .

S2CID 145216107 .

^ Aylesworth, Gary (5 February 2015) [1st pub. 2005].

"Postmodernism" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . sep-postmodernism (Spring 2015 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 12 May 2019 .

^ "Michel Foucault - Philosopher, Postmodernism, Power | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 26 March 2025 . Retrieved 8 April 2025 .

^ Hannay, Alastair (2005). "Baudrillard, Jean". In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 81.

^ Lyotard, Jean François, The Postmodern Condition, 1979, translated 1984, [1] ^ Derrida, Jacque, Of Grammatology, 1967, translated 1976, [2] ^ Aylesworth, Gary (5 February 2015) [1st pub. 2005].

"Postmodernism" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . sep-postmodernism (Spring 2015 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 12 May 2019 .

, §4. Productive Difference ^ "An interview with Rorty" .

unc.edu . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ Davidson, D., 1986, "A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge," Truth And Interpretation, Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson, ed. Ernest LePore, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, afterwords.

^ Kellner, Douglas (1988). "Postmodernism as Social Theory: Some Challenges and Problems".

Theory, Culture & Society .

5 ( 2– 3): 239– 269.

doi : 10.1177/0263276488005002003 .

ISSN 0263-2764 .

S2CID 144625142 .

^ Lule, Jack (2001). " The Postmodern Adventure [Book Review]".

Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly .

78 (4): 865– 866.

doi : 10.1177/107769900107800415 .

S2CID 221059611 .

^ Danto, A. C.

(1990). "The Hyper-Intellectual".

The New Republic . Vol. 203, no. 11/12. pp.

44– 48.

^ Scruton, Roger (1996).

Modern philosophy: an introduction and survey . New York: Penguin Books.

ISBN 0-14-024907-9 .

^ a b Sidky, H. (2018).

"The War on Science, Anti-Intellectualism, and 'Alternative Ways of Knowing' in 21st-Century America" .

Skeptical Inquirer .

42 (2): 38– 43. Archived from the original on 6 June 2018 . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

^ a b Evans, Richard (1997).

In Defence of History . London: Granta Books. pp.

232– 3, 238– 9.

ISBN 9781862073951 .

^ "Noam Chomsky on Post-Modernism" .

bactra.org .

^ Guattari, Felix (1989).

"The three ecologies" (PDF) .

New Formations (8): 34.

Structuralism, and subsequently postmodernism, have accustomed us to a vision of the world in which human interventions - concrete politics and micropolitics - are no longer relevant. The withering away of social praxis is explained in terms of the death of ideologies, or of some supposed return to universal values. Yet those explanations seem to me highly unsatisfactory. The decisive factor, it seems to me, is the general inflexibility of social and psychological praxes - their failure to adapt - as well as a widespread incapacity to perceive the erroneousness of partitioning off the real into a number of separate fields. It is quite simply wrong to regard action on the psyche, the socius, and the environment as separate. Indeed, if we continue - as the media would have us do - to refuse squarely to confront the simultaneous degradation of these three areas, we will in effect be acquiescing in a general infantilization of opinion, a destruction and neutralization of democracy. We need to 'kick the habit' of sedative consumption, of television discourse in particular; we need to apprehend the world through the interchangeable lenses of the three ecologies.

^ "The art of disappearing – BAUDRILLARD NOW" . 22 January 2021. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021 . Retrieved 2 March 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Charles Arthur Willard Liberalism and the Problem of Knowledge: A New Rhetoric for Modern Democracy.

University of Chicago Press. 1996.

John Deely "Quid sit Postmodernismus?," in Roman Ciapalo (ed.) Postmodernism and Christian philosophy , 68–96, Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press. 1997.

External links [ edit ] Aylesworth, Gary (2005).

"Postmodernism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Modern Philosophical Discussions (archived 14 July 2011) v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postmodern_philosophy&oldid=1296069822 " Categories : Postmodernism Postmodern theory Philosophical schools and traditions Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2025 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from July 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 16:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postmodern philosophy 20 languages Add topic

