Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Role of the IJC 2 Mission and mandates 3 Authorities Toggle Authorities subsection 3.1 Orders of approval 3.2 References 4 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 4.1 Regulating shared water uses 4.2 Improving water quality 4.3 Improving air quality 4.4 Investigating issues and recommending solutions 5 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 5.1 Current commissioners 6 Boards 7 Locations 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents International Joint Commission 3 languages Français Igbo 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organisation managing waters on the Canada-US border This article is about the US-Canada commission that oversees boundary water use and conservation. For the commission that deals with mapping and marking the border, see International Boundary Commission .

International Joint Commission International Joint Commission Commission mixte internationale Abbreviation IJC CMI Formation 11 January 1909 ; 116 years ago ( 11 January 1909 ) Legal status Active Purpose Approving projects that affect water, water levels, and flows across the boundary and investigating transboundary issues and recommending solutions Headquarters Ottawa , Ontario , Canada Washington, D.C.

, USA Official languages English and French Chairperson (Canadian section) Pierre Baril Chairperson (US section) Gerald Acker Website ijc .org Sections of Canada and the United States (including in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness , above) are separated by a boundary that is in water.  A particularly extensive section of the Canada–US border is in the Great Lakes .

The International Joint Commission ( French : Commission mixte internationale ) is a bi-national organization established by the governments of the United States and Canada under the Boundary Waters Treaty of 1909 . Its responsibilities were expanded with the signing of the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement of 1972 (later amended 1987 and 2012).

[ 1 ] The commission deals with issues affecting the extensive waters and waterways along the Canada–United States border .

A six member commission, it has multiple sub-commissions, which deal with particular sections of the border-waters, or topics, and a technical staff to organize and inform task-forces.

In a report published in January 2025, called on the U.S. and Canadian governments to take action to monitor microplastics in the lakes, and to designate microplastics a "chemical of mutual concern".

[ 2 ] Scientists in the group's advisory board would like to see new policies to help reduce plastic production and consumption. They also recommend individual actions such as single-use plastic products, and installing filters on washing machines and dryers so that plastic fibers are not released with wastewater.

[ 3 ] Role of the IJC [ edit ] Further information: Canada–United States border Canada and the United States created the International Joint Commission because they recognized that each country is affected by the other's actions in lake and river systems along the border. The two countries cooperate to manage these waters and to protect them for the benefit of today's citizens and future generations.

The IJC is guided by the Boundary Waters Treaty, signed by Britain in right of Canada and the United States in 1909. The treaty provides general principles, rather than detailed prescriptions, for preventing and resolving disputes over waters shared between the two countries and for settling other transboundary issues. The specific application of these principles is decided on a case-by-case basis.

The IJC has two main responsibilities: approving projects that affect water levels and flows across the boundary and investigating transboundary issues and recommending solutions. The IJC's recommendations and decisions take into account the needs of a wide range of water uses, including drinking water, commercial shipping, hydroelectric power generation, agriculture, ecosystem health, industry, fishing, recreational boating and shoreline property.

Mission and mandates [ edit ] The International Joint Commission prevents and resolves disputes between the United States and Canada under the 1909 Boundary Waters Treaty and pursues the common good of both countries as an independent and objective advisor to the two governments.

In particular, the IJC rules upon applications for approval of projects affecting boundary or transboundary waters and may regulate the operation of these projects; it assists the two countries in the protection of the transboundary environment, including the implementation of the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement and the improvement of transboundary air quality; and it alerts the governments to emerging issues along the boundary that may give rise to bilateral disputes.

Authorities [ edit ] Orders of approval [ edit ] The IJC has the authority to issue orders of approval. These orders place conditions on the application and operation of projects, such as dams, diversions or bridges that would affect the natural level of boundary waters. The application process for an order of approval is outlined in the IJC guide to applications.

References [ edit ] The IJC studies and recommends solutions to transboundary issues when asked to do so by the national governments. When the IJC receives a government request, called a reference, it appoints a board with equal numbers of experts from each country. Board members are chosen for their professional abilities, not as representatives of a particular organization or region.

[ 4 ] Activities [ edit ] The movement of the water near Niagara Falls on the border, is used to generate substantial hydroelectricity Regulating shared water uses [ edit ] The IJC makes decisions on applications for projects, such as dams and diversions, that affect the natural level and flow of water across the boundary. Changing water levels can affect drinking water intakes, commercial shipping, hydroelectric power generation, agriculture, shoreline property, recreation, fisheries, wildlife, wetlands and other interests.

If the IJC approves a project, it may impose conditions on project design or operation to protect interests on either side of the boundary. The IJC may also appoint a board to monitor compliance of operational requirements, such as flows through a dam. Projects approved by the IJC include hydroelectric power projects in the Great Lakes and on the St. Lawrence River , the St. Croix River and the Columbia River . The IJC is also responsible for maintaining emergency water levels in the Lake of the Woods basin and for apportioning water among various uses in the Souris River, St. Mary River and Milk River basins.

Improving water quality [ edit ] In the Boundary Waters Treaty, Canada and the United States agreed that neither country will pollute boundary waters, or waters that flow across the boundary, to an extent that would cause injury to health or property in the other country. When asked by governments, the IJC investigates, monitors and recommends actions regarding the quality of water in lakes and rivers along the Canada-United States border. The IJC has water quality responsibilities for the St. Croix River, the Rainy River and the Red River. Much of the Commission's work focuses on helping governments clean up the Great Lakes and prevent further pollution.

Improving air quality [ edit ] As well as damaging rivers and lakes, air pollution affects human health, especially for people with respiratory illnesses such as chronic bronchitis and asthma. Over the years, the American and Canadian governments have asked the IJC to bring to their attention, or to investigate, air pollution problems in boundary regions. To support these activities, the IJC created the International Air Quality Advisory Board. As well, under the 1991 Canada-United States Air Quality Agreement, the IJC is required to collect and synthesize public comments on the air quality progress report published by the governments every two years.

Investigating issues and recommending solutions [ edit ] The IJC studies and recommends solutions to transboundary issues when asked to do so by the national governments. When the IJC receives a government request, called a reference, it appoints a board with equal numbers of experts from each country. Board members are chosen for their professional abilities, not as representatives of a particular organization or region.

References to the IJC have focused mostly on water and air quality and on the development and use of shared water resources. For example, one reference led to the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement (1972), in which the two countries agreed to control pollution and to clean up wastewater from industries and communities. In 1978, a new agreement added a commitment to rid the Great Lakes of persistent toxic substances, which remain in the environment for a long time and can poison food sources for animals and people.

Although IJC reference recommendations are not binding, they are usually accepted by the Canadian and American governments.

[ 5 ] Organization [ edit ] The Commission is headed by six commissioners, three from each country. The Commissioners are appointed by the government of Canada and the United States. Commissioners do not represent their governments. The Canadian Commissioners appointed in 2019 are Pierre Béland (Canadian Chair), Merrel-Ann Phare and F. Henry Lickers. The American Commissioners appointed in 2019 are Jane Corwin (American Chair), Robert C. Sisson, and Lance V. Yohe.

[ 6 ] The Commission has three offices, in Ottawa , Washington, D.C.

, and Windsor, Ontario . The Windsor Great Lakes Regional Office (GLRO) was created under the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement (GLWQA). It is staffed by a bi-national team of American and Canadian scientists and support staff.

[ citation needed ] Current commissioners [ edit ] The current commissioners as of December 22, 2024 [update] : [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Position Name Section Term start Term end Home State/Province Appointed by Canadian co-chair Pierre Baril Canada 24 June 2024 23 June 2028 Quebec Mary Simon on advice of Justin Trudeau Commissioner Merrell-Ann Phare Canada 9 May 2019 20 December 2027 Manitoba Julie Payette , Mary Simon on advice of Justin Trudeau Commissioner Susan Chiblow Canada 21 December 2023 20 December 2027 Ontario Mary Simon on advice of Justin Trudeau U.S. co-chair Gerald Acker United States 27 July 2023 None Michigan Joe Biden Commissioner Lance Yohe United States 16 May 2019 None North Dakota Donald Trump Commissioner Robert Gioia United States 2 May 2024 None New York Joe Biden Boards [ edit ] Separate boards are responsible for particular boundary waters issues. When there are special issues, a Task Force is assigned to make a report or recommendations. The various standing bodies are: Accredited Officers of the St. Mary and Milk Rivers Great Lakes Science Advisory Board Great Lakes Water Quality Board Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Adaptive Management Committee Health Professionals Advisory Board International Columbia River Board of Control International Kootenay Lake Board of Control International Lake Champlain-Richelieu River Study Board International Lake of the Woods Control Board International Lake Ontario-St. Lawrence River Board International Lake Superior Board of Control International Niagara Board of Control International Osoyoos Lake Board of Control International Rainy-Lake of the Woods Watershed Board International Red River Board International Souris River Board International Souris River Study Board International St. Croix River Watershed Board Nutrient Loading and Impacts in Lakes Champlain and Memphremagog Locations [ edit ] IJC Canadian Section – 234 Laurier Avenue West, 22nd Floor Ottawa, Ontario IJC United States Section – 1717 H Street NW, Suite 835, Washington, D.C.

Great Lakes Regional Office – 100 Ouellette Ave., 8th Floor, Windsor, Ontario See also [ edit ] Commission for Environmental Cooperation Great Lakes Fishery Commission International Boundary and Water Commission (US and Mexico) International Boundary Commission Title 22 of the Code of Federal Regulations References [ edit ] ^ "Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement - 2012" . Archived from the original on 5 April 2014 . Retrieved 1 May 2014 .

^ "Monitoring, Ecological Risk Assessment, and Management of Microplastics in the Laurentian Great Lakes" .

International Joint Commission . 17 January 2025 . Retrieved 25 February 2025 .

^ "Great Lakes warning as watchdog calls on US to act" .

Newsweek . 19 February 2025 . Retrieved 25 February 2025 .

^ https://www.ijc.org/en/who/role This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bolton, Aaron (1 April 2024).

"A new deal may help reduce water pollution in Montana, Idaho" .

NPR News .

^ Macfarlane, Daniel (2020).

The First Century of the International Joint Commission . Calgary: University of Calgary Press. pp.

573– 576.

ISBN 9781773851075 .

^ "Board of Directors & Senior Executives" .

IJC.org . International Joint Commission . Retrieved 22 December 2024 .

^ "Organization Profile - International Joint Commission" .

IJC.org . International Joint Commission. 14 January 2023 . Retrieved 22 December 2024 .

External links [ edit ] International Joint Commission Accredited Officers for the St. Mary-Milk Rivers International Columbia River Board of Control Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Adaptive Management Committee Great Lakes Science Advisory Board Great Lakes Water Quality Board Health Professionals Advisory Board International Kootenay Lake Board of Control International Lake Superior Board of Control International Niagara Board of Control International Osoyoos Lake Board of Control International Rainy-Lake of the Woods Watershed Board International Red River Board International Souris River Board International St. Croix Watershed Board International Lake Ontario-St. Lawrence River Board International Lake Champlain-Richelieu River Study Board International Souris River Study Board Nutrient Loading and Impacts in Lakes Champlain and Memphremagog v t e Great Lakes of North America Main lakes Erie Huron Michigan Ontario Superior Secondary lakes Nipigon Nipissing Simcoe St. Clair Winnebago Bays and channels Erie Chadwick Bay Maumee Bay Presque Isle Bay Sandusky Bay Huron Georgian Bay Matchedash Bay Nottawasaga Bay Parry Sound Lake George Little Pike Bay Munuscong Lake North Channel Potagannissing Bay Saginaw Bay St. Joseph Channel Thunder Bay Michigan Detroit Harbor Grand Traverse Bay Green Bay Big Bay de Noc Little Bay de Noc Porte des Morts Sturgeon Bay Little Traverse Bay Manitou Passage Ontario Bay of Quinte Braddock Bay Hamilton Harbour Humber Bay Irondequoit Bay Sodus Bay Toronto Bay Wellers Bay Superior Au Train Bay Chequamegon Bay Chicago Bay Huron Bay Little Trout Bay Keweenaw Bay Oronto Bay Pokegama Bay Superior Bay Thunder Bay Whitefish Bay Ashmun Bay Batchawana Bay Goulais Bay St. Clair Anchor Bay Simcoe Cook's Bay Kempenfelt Bay Lake Couchiching Nipissing Callander Bay Waterways Chicago River Detroit River Erie Canal French River Great Lakes Waterway Niagara River Fall Nipigon River St. Clair River St. Lawrence River St. Lawrence Seaway St. Marys River Sault Ste. Marie Canal Soo Locks Straits of Mackinac Sturgeon Bay Ship Canal Trent–Severn Waterway Welland Canal First canal Islands Apostle Islands Detroit River Islands Isle Royale National Park Islands Isle Royale Lake Erie Islands Manitoulin Island Lake Kagawong Lake Manitou Lake Mindemoya Treasure Island Province of Ontario Islands State of Michigan Islands Lake Huron Islands Populated Potawatomi Islands Historic geology Lake Admiralty Lake Agassiz Lake Algonquin Lake Arkona Champlain Sea Lake Chicago Lake Chippewa Lake Coleman Lake Duluth Early Lake Erie Lake Frontenac Glacial Lake Iroquois Lake Maumee Nipissing Great Lakes Lake Saginaw Lake Stanley Lake Tonawanda Lake Warren Lake Wayne Lake Whittlesey Last Glacial Maximum Midcontinent Rift System Niagara Escarpment Scotch Bonnet Ridge Wisconsin glaciation Organizations Alliance for the Great Lakes Great Lakes and St. Lawrence Governors and Premiers Great Lakes Areas of Concern Great Lakes Basin Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Program Great Lakes Charter Great Lakes Commission Great Lakes Compact Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory Great Lakes Fishery Commission Great Lakes–Saint Lawrence River Basin Sustainable Water Resources Agreement International Joint Commission Municipalities Cities Related topics Basin Chicago Yacht Club Race to Mackinac Circle Tour Crossings Great Loop Lake breeze Lake-effect snow Lake freighter Lake Michigan–Huron Lake Michigan Triangle Lake surfing Marine protected areas Marysburgh vortex Megalopolis Museum and historic ships Ports Region Laurentia Shipwrecks Storms Third Coast Treaties Lakes portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wfcnd
Cached time: 20250817085709
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.614 seconds
Real time usage: 0.774 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4514/1000000
Revision size: 17265/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 66091/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6400/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37134/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.387/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17647814/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  673.051      1 -total
 18.94%  127.476      1 Template:Infobox_organization
 17.86%  120.189      1 Template:Infobox
 15.72%  105.824      5 Template:Cite_web
 14.62%   98.374      1 Template:Langx
 11.74%   79.049      1 Template:Greatlakes
  9.43%   63.494      1 Template:Short_description
  7.38%   49.657     12 Template:Flagicon
  5.29%   35.581      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.99%   33.554      1 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:516934:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817085709 and revision id 1297419071. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Joint_Commission&oldid=1297419071 " Categories : 1909 establishments in North America Canada–United States border Environmental organizations established in 1909 Intergovernmental environmental organizations Intergovernmental organizations established by treaty Water and the environment Water law Hidden categories: Source attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2024 Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 02:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Joint Commission 3 languages Add topic

