Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works 2 See also 3 External links 4 References Toggle the table of contents Sulaiman Al Mahri 5 languages العربية فارسی Français Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arab navigator Sulaymān al-Mahrī Native name سليمان المهري Born 1480 Shihr , Hadhramaut , Yemen Died 1550 Occupation Navigator, Writer Language Arabic Notable works al-ʿUmda al-mahriyya fī ḍabṭ al-ʿulūm al-baḥriyya Sulaymān ibn Aḥmad ibn Sulaymān al-Mahrī ( Arabic : سليمان بن أحمد بن سليمان المهري ) (ca. 1480–1550) was a 16th-century Arab navigator .

[ 1 ] He came from Shihr , in Hadhramaut , eastern Yemen , and he was called “al-Mahrī” because he was a descendant of the Arabic tribe of Mahra . His work continues and expands the work of Ibn Majid , though there is no explicit relation between them in any of their works.

[ 2 ] Works [ edit ] al-ʿUmda al-mahriyya fī ḍabṭ al-ʿulūm al-baḥriyya (Al-Mahrī’s Pillar on the Exactitude of Maritime Sciences) al-Minhāj al-Fākhir fī ʿIlm al-Baḥr al-Zākhir (The Precious Method on the Science of the Rising Sea) Tuḥfat al-Fuḥūl fī Tamhīd al-Uṣūl ʿIlm al-Baḥr (The Worthy Men’s Gift on the Introduction to the Principles of Maritime Science) Sharḥ Tuḥfat al-Fuḥūl fī Tamhīd al-Uṣūl ʿIlm al-Baḥr (A Commentary to The Worthy Men’s Gift on the Introduction to the Principles of Maritime Science) Qilādat al-Shumūs wa-Istikhrāj Qawāʾid al-Usūs (Necklace of Suns and the Calculation of the Rules of the Bases) Mirʾāt al-Salāk li-Kurāt al-Aflāk (Mirror of Travellers into the Heavenly Spheres) Al-Mahrī is known for reducing Ibn Majids 's list of stars for navigation from 70 to 15.

[ 3 ] Combinations of these lists of stars were used by Arab navigators and mariners up to the early 16th century.

[ 4 ] In his treatises, al-Mahri noted the islands off the west coast of Siam ( Malaya ). The most important destination covered by these navigational texts is Malacca , which had become the region's principal trading center for Arab navigators during the 15th century.

[ citation needed ] Singapore , parts of Samarra , Java , China, the coasts of Burma and Andaman and Nicobar Islands were the focal points of his texts.

[ citation needed ] He grouped the shores of Malaya with Siam, and the mainland to the east with China as a single kingdom. This passage from al-Mahri’s book illustrates the limits of Arab navigators: Know that to the south of the Island of Java are found many Islands called Timor and that to the east of Timor are the Islands of Bandam, also a large number. The latter are places of sandalwood , aloeswood and mace . These islands are called Isles of Clove as airs of Jawa are called Maluku islands .

Since many of the islands have not been identified with confidence, the extent of his travel and familiarity with the region is not known.

[ 5 ] Al Mahri's division of Andaman and Nicobar Islands into two parts helped Arab and Portuguese navigators.

[ 6 ] Even in the mid-16th century Sidi Ali Çelebī translated parts of al-Mahri’s texts into Turkish .

[ 7 ] With the exception oh his astronomical treatise, Mir’at al-salāk li-kurāt al-aflāk , [ 8 ] all his works were first published in Arabic by Ibrahim Khoury in Damascus , 1971, as part of the four-volume collection Al-ʿUlūm al-baḥrīyah ʿinda al-ʿarab ( Maritime Sciences Among the Arabs ).

See also [ edit ] Islamic scholars List of Arab scientists and scholars External links [ edit ] Conspectus of Works of Sulaymān al-Mahrī ( Muḥtawayāt mu’allafāt Sulaymān al-Mahrī ), a full detailed list of the contents of al-Mahrī’s works.

Technical note on Indian Ocean Arab Navigation Studies by J. Acevedo and I. Bénard of the RUTTER Project , listing all known manuscripts, editions and works of Sulayman al-Mahri.

References [ edit ] ^ History of Islam, Volume 1 By Masudul Hasan p. 642 ^ Ibrahim Khoury, Al-ʿUlūm al-baḥrīyah ʿinda al-ʿarab ( Maritime Sciences Among the Arabs ), Vol. 1, p. 7.

^ Medieval Arab Navigation on the Indian Ocean: Latitude Determinations Journal article by Alfred Clark; The Journal of the American Oriental Society , Vol. 113, 1993 ^ Between east and west: the Moluccas and the traffic in spices up to the Arrival of Europeans. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society by R. A. Donkin ^ Early mapping of Southeast Asia , by Thomas Suárez p. 52 ^ Al-Hind: the making of the Indo-Islamic world by André Wink p. 214 ^ The Persian Gulf States: a general survey , by Alvin J. Cottrell p. 16 ^ For which work, see the article by Staples, Acevedo and Bénard .

v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Vatican Academics CiNii Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sulaiman_Al_Mahri&oldid=1294601109 " Categories : 16th-century explorers 1480s births 1550 deaths 15th-century Arab people 16th-century Arab people Maritime navigators 16th-century geographers Explorers of Asia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013 This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 18:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sulaiman Al Mahri 5 languages Add topic

