Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 History 3 Structure of technological revolution 4 Potential future technological revolutions 5 List of intellectual, philosophical and technological revolutions 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Technological revolution 10 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Español Euskara فارسی हिन्दी Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Period of rapid technological change For the event sometimes called the Technological Revolution, see Second Industrial Revolution .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Technological revolution" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) History of technology By technological eras Premodern / Pre-industrial Prehistoric Stone Age ( lithic ) First Agricultural Revolution Copper Age Urban revolution Bronze Age Iron Age Ancient Modern Proto-industrialization Second Agricultural Revolution First Industrial Revolution Standardization Second Industrial Revolution Machine Age Jet Age Third Agricultural Revolution Atomic Age Space Age Third Industrial Revolution Digital transformation Information Age Fourth Industrial Revolution Imagination Age Future Post-industrial Singularity Emerging technologies By historical regions Ancient Africa Ancient Egypt Indian subcontinent Ancient China Maya civilization Hellenistic world Roman Empire Byzantine Empire Medieval Islamic world Arab Agricultural Revolution Medieval Europe Renaissance Europe By type of technology History of agriculture History of biotechnology History of communication History of computer hardware History of electrical engineering History of manufacturing History of maritime History of materials science History of measurement History of medicine History of simple machine History of nuclear technology History of transport Technology timelines Timeline of historic inventions Technological revolution Complete list by category Article indices Outline of technology Outline of prehistoric technology v t e An axe made of iron, dating from the Swedish Iron Age , found at Gotland , Sweden : Iron—as a new material—initiated a dramatic revolution in technology, economy, society, warfare and politics.

A technological revolution is a period in which one or more technologies is replaced by another new technology in a short amount of time. It is a time of accelerated technological progress characterized by innovations whose rapid application and diffusion typically cause an abrupt change in society.

Description [ edit ] The Spinning Jenny and Spinning Mule (shown) greatly increased the productivity of thread manufacturing compared to the spinning wheel .

A Watt steam engine —the steam engine , fuelled primarily by coal , propelled the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain and the world.

IBM Personal Computer XT in 1988—personal computers were an innovation that dramatically changed professional life and personal life as well.

A technological revolution may involve material or ideological changes caused by the introduction of a device or system. It may potentially impact business management, education, social interactions, finance and research methodology, and is not limited to technical aspects. It has been shown to increase productivity and efficiency . A technological revolution often significantly changes the material conditions of human existence and has been seen to reshape culture.

[ 1 ] A technological revolution can be distinguished from a random collection of technology systems by two features: 1. A strong interconnectedness and interdependence of the participating systems in their technologies and markets.

2. A potential capacity to greatly affect the rest of the economy (and eventually society).

[ 2 ] On the other hand, negative consequences have also been attributed to technological revolutions. For example, the use of coal as an energy source have negative environmental impacts, including being a contributing factor to climate change and the increase of greenhouse gases [ 3 ] in the atmosphere, and have caused technological unemployment .

Joseph Schumpeter described this contradictory nature of technological revolution as creative destruction .

[ 4 ] The concept of technological revolution is based on the idea that technological progress is not linear but undulatory . Technological revolution can be: Relation revolution [ neologism?

] (social relations [ clarification needed ] , phones) Sectoral (more technological changes in one sector, e.g.

Green Revolution and Commercial Revolution ) Universal (interconnected radical changes in more than one sector, the universal technological revolution can be seen as a complex of several parallel sectoral technological revolutions, e.g.

Second Industrial Revolution and Renaissance technological revolution ) The concept of universal technological revolutions is a "contributing factor in the Neo-Schumpeterian theory of long economic waves/cycles", [ 5 ] according to Carlota Perez , Tessaleno Devezas , Daniel Šmihula and others.

History [ edit ] Some examples of technological revolutions were the Neolithic Revolution , the Industrial Revolution in the mid 1800s, the scientific-technical revolution about 1950–1960, and the Digital Revolution . The distinction between universal technological revolution and singular revolutions have been debated. One universal technological revolution may be composed of several sectoral technological revolutions (such as in science , industry , or transport ).

There are several universal technological revolutions during the modern era in Western culture : [ 6 ] Financial-agricultural revolution (1600–1740) Industrial Revolution (1760–1840) Technical Revolution or Second Industrial Revolution (1870–1920) Scientific-technical revolution (1940–1970) Information and telecommunications revolution, also known as the Digital Revolution or Third Industrial Revolution (1975–2021) Comparable periods of well-defined technological revolutions in the pre-modern era are seen as highly speculative.

[ 7 ] One such example is an attempt by Daniel Šmihulato to suggest a timeline of technological revolutions in pre-modern Europe : [ 8 ] Indo-European technological revolution (1900–1100 BC) Celtic and Greek technological revolution (700–200 BC) Germano-Slavic technological revolution (300–700 AD) Medieval technological revolution (930–1200 AD) Renaissance technological revolution (1340–1470 AD) Structure of technological revolution [ edit ] Each revolution comprises the following engines for growth: New cheap inputs New products New processes Technological revolutions has historically been seen to focus on cost reduction. For instance, the accessibility of coal at a low cost during the Industrial Revolution allowed for iron steam engines which led to production of Iron railways , and the progression of the internet was contributed by inexpensive microelectronics for computer development.

[ citation needed ] A combination of low-cost input and new infrastructures are at the core of each revolution to achieve their all pervasive impact.

[ 9 ] Potential future technological revolutions [ edit ] Further information: Emerging technologies and Fourth Industrial Revolution Since 2000, there has been speculations of a new technological revolution which would focus on the fields of nanotechnologies , alternative fuel and energy systems , biotechnologies , genetic engineering , new materials technologies and so on.

[ 10 ] The Second Machine Age is the term adopted in a 2014 book by Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee . The industrial development plan of Germany began promoting the term Industry 4.0 . In 2019, at the World Economic Forum meeting in Davos , Japan promoted another round of advancements called Society 5.0 .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The phrase Fourth Industrial Revolution was first introduced by Klaus Schwab , the executive chairman of the World Economic Forum , in a 2015 article in Foreign Affairs .

[ 13 ] Following the publication of the article, the theme of the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2016 in Davos-Klosters, Switzerland was "Mastering the Fourth Industrial Revolution". On October 10, 2016, the Forum announced the opening of its Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution in San Francisco .

[ 14 ] According to Schwab, fourth era technologies includes technologies that combine hardware, software , and biology ( cyber-physical systems ), [ 15 ] and which will put an emphases on advances in communication and connectivity . Schwab expects this era to be marked by breakthroughs in emerging technologies in fields such as robotics , artificial intelligence , nanotechnology , quantum computing , biotechnology , the internet of things , the industrial internet of things (IIoT) , decentralized consensus, fifth-generation wireless technologies (5G) , 3D printing and fully autonomous vehicles .

[ 16 ] Jeremy Rifkin includes technologies like 5G , autonomous vehicles, Internet of Things , and renewable energy in the Third Industrial Revolution.

[ 17 ] Some economists do not think that technological growth will continue to the same degree it has in the past.

Robert J. Gordon holds the view that today's inventions are not as radical as electricity and the internal combustion engine were. He believes that modern technology is not as innovative as others claim, and is far from creating a revolution.

[ 18 ] List of intellectual, philosophical and technological revolutions [ edit ] Technological revolution can cause the production-possibility frontier to shift outward and initiate economic growth.

Pre-Industrialization The Upper Paleolithic Revolution : the emergence of "high culture" [ further explanation needed ] , new technologies and regionally distinct cultures (50,000–40,000 years ago).

The Neolithic Revolution (around 13,000 years ago), which formed the basis for human civilization to develop.

The Renaissance technological revolution : the set of inventions during the Renaissance period, roughly the 14th through the 16th century.

The Commercial Revolution : a period of European economic expansion, colonialism and mercantilism which lasted from approximately the 16th century until the early 18th century.

The Price Revolution : a series of economic events from the second half of the 15th century to the first half of the 17th, the price revolution refers most specifically to the high rate of inflation that characterized the period across Western Europe .

The Scientific Revolution : a fundamental transformation in scientific ideas around the 16th century.

The British Agricultural Revolution (18th century), which spurred urbanization and consequently helped launch the Industrial Revolution .

Industrialization The First Industrial Revolution : the shift of technological, socioeconomic and cultural conditions in the late 18th century and early 19th century that began in Britain and spread throughout the world.

The Market Revolution : a change in the manual labour system originating in the Southern United States (and soon moving to the Northern United States ) and later spreading to the entire world (about 1800–1900).

The Second Industrial Revolution (1871–1914).

The Green Revolution (1945–1975): the use of industrial fertilizers and new crops largely increased the world's agricultural output.

The Third Industrial Revolution : the changes brought about by computing and communication technology , starting from around 1950 with the creation of the first general-purpose electronic computers .

The Information Revolution : the economic, social and technological changes resulting from the Digital Revolution (after 1960) [ citation needed ] .

See also [ edit ] Accelerating change Automation Electrification Kondratiev wave Kranzberg's laws of technology List of emerging technologies Mass production Machine tool Mechanization Post-work society Productivity-improving technologies Innovation Technological change Technological unemployment The War on Normal People The Future of Work and Death References [ edit ] ^ Klein, Maury (2008): The Technological Revolution, in The Newsletter of Foreign Policy Research Institute, Vol.13, No. 18.

[1] ^ Perez, Carlota (2009): Technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms.

,  in Working Papers in Technology Governance and Economic Dynamics, Working Paper No. 20, (Norway and Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn) [2] Archived 2013-08-10 at the Wayback Machine ^ Akpan, Usenobong Friday; Akpan, Godwin Effiong (2012-03-01).

"The Contribution of Energy Consumption to Climate Change: A Feasible Policy Direction" .

International Journal of Energy Economics and Policy .

2 (1): 21– 33.

ISSN 2146-4553 .

^ Perez, Carlota (2002).

Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital . Edward Elgar Publishing.

doi : 10.4337/9781781005323 .

ISBN 978-1-78100-532-3 .

^ , for example, Perez, Carlota (2009): Technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms.

,  in Working Papers in Technology Governance and Economic Dynamics, Working Paper No. 20, (Norway and Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn) [3] Archived 2022-03-21 at the Wayback Machine ^ based on: Šmihula, Daniel (2011): Long waves of technological innovations, Studia politica Slovaca, 2/2011, Bratislava, ISSN 1337-8163 , pp. 50-69.

[4] ^ for example: Drucker, Peter F. (1965): The First Technological Revolution and Its Lessons.

[5] ^ Šmihula, Daniel (2011): Long waves of technological innovations , Studia Politica Slovaca, 2/2011, Bratislava, ISSN 1337-8163 , pp. 50-69 ^ Perez, C. (2010-01-01).

"Technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms" (PDF) .

Cambridge Journal of Economics .

34 (1): 185– 202.

doi : 10.1093/cje/bep051 .

ISSN 0309-166X .

^ Philip S. Anton,  Richard Silberglitt, James Schneider (2001): The Global Technology Revolution - Bio/Nano/Materials Trends and Their Synergies with Information Technology by 2015.

, RAND, ISBN 0-8330-2949-5 ^ Realizing Society 5.0 (promotional paper for Japan) ^ Modern society has reached its limits. Society 5.0 will liberate us (promotional article for Japan) ^ Schwab, Klaus (2015-12-12).

"The Fourth Industrial Revolution" . Retrieved 2019-01-15 .

^ "New Forum Center to Advance Global Cooperation on Fourth Industrial Revolution" . October 10, 2016 . Retrieved October 15, 2018 .

^ "The Fourth Industrial Revolution: what it means and how to respond" .

World Economic Forum . Retrieved 2018-03-20 .

^ Schwab, Klaus.

"The Fourth Industrial Revolution: what it means, how to respond" .

World Economic Forum . Retrieved 2017-06-29 .

The possibilities of billions of people connected by mobile devices, with unprecedented processing power, storage capacity, and access to knowledge, are unlimited. And these possibilities will be multiplied by emerging technology breakthroughs in fields such as artificial intelligence, robotics, the Internet of Things, autonomous vehicles, 3-D printing, nanotechnology, biotechnology, materials science, energy storage, and quantum computing.

^ Jeremy Rifkin (2011).

The Third Industrial Revolution: How Lateral Power is Transforming Energy, the Economy, and the World .

^ Banerjee, Abhijit (2019).

Good Economics for Hard Times (PDF) . Public Affairs. pp.

161– 162.

v t e Industrial and technological revolution Proto First Second Third Fourth Potential future Themes Coal Coal mining Coke Cotton Industry/Manufacturing Invention Iron Machinery Metallurgy Sociology Steam power Steel Technology Textiles Water power Workforce Economies of agglomeration Economies of density Economies of scale People/ groups Richard Arkwright Thomas Boulsover Matthew Boulton James Brindley Isambard Kingdom Brunel Edmund Cartwright Henry Cort Thomas and George Cranege Samuel Crompton Abraham Darby I Abraham Darby II Abraham Darby III Francis Egerton, 3rd Duke of Bridgewater William Fairbairn James Hargreaves Hawks family Thomas Highs Eaton Hodgkinson Benjamin Huntsman Joseph Marie Jacquard John Kay (flying shuttle) John Kay (spinning frame) Francis Cabot Lowell Lunar Society Thomas Newcomen Robert Owen Lewis Paul William Radcliffe Richard Roberts Thomas Savery Samuel Slater John Smeaton George Stephenson Robert Stephenson Thomas Telford Richard Trevithick James Watt John Wilkinson John Wyatt Places Abbeydale Industrial Hamlet Allentown Bethlehem Bridgewater Canal Broseley Coalbrookdale Cromford Derwent Valley Mills Ironbridge New Lanark Portsmouth Block Mills Quarry Bank Mill Soho Foundry Stockton and Darlington Railway Invention/ technology Blast furnace Canal Cotton mill Crucible steel Factory Flying shuttle Newcomen steam engine Power loom Railway Reverberatory furnace Sheffield plate Spinning frame Spinning jenny Steam engine Stephenson's Rocket Water frame Watt steam engine Social impact Bourgeoisie Child labour History of the cooperative Movement Cottage industry Factory Acts Great Divergence Industrial unrest Luddite Proletariat Rochdale Pioneers Urbanization Industrial warfare Reference History of technology History of the British canal system Industrial archaeology List of United Kingdom-related topics Timeline of clothing and textiles technology Timeline of invention Timeline of materials technology Timeline of steam power Category Commons v t e History of technology History of technology cultures Prehistoric technology Neolithic Urban revolution Ancient Egypt Mayan Inca Ancient Greek Roman Chinese Indian Byzantine Medieval Islam Medieval Europe Renaissance Ottoman Great Divergence Industrial Revolution Modern History of technology domains History of biotechnology History of communication History of computing History of computing hardware History of electrical engineering History of materials science History of measurement History of medicine History of nuclear technology History of transport v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars v t e Population Major topics Demographics of the world Demographic transition Estimates of historical world population Population growth Population momentum Human population projections World population Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population model Population pyramid Population ecology Biocapacity Carrying capacity I = P × A  × T Kaya identity Malthusian growth model Overshoot (population) World3 model Society and population Eugenics Dys genics Human overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Human population planning Compulsory sterilization Dependency ratio Family planning One-child policy Two-child policy Overconsumption Political demography Population ethics Antinatalism Intergenerational equity Mere addition paradox Natalism Non-identity problem Reproductive rights Sustainable population Zero population growth Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Dependency ratio Largest cities Number of births World population milestones 6 billion 7 8 Population concern organizations Events and organizations 7 Billion Actions Church of Euthanasia International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters United Nations Population Fund United Nations world population conferences Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Conference World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Bennett's law Green Revolution Human impact on the environment Migration Net migration rate Sustainability Commons Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐jh48h
Cached time: 20250812021753
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.614 seconds
Real time usage: 0.755 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2363/1000000
Revision size: 17487/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 118546/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3747/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 90761/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.341/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7420539/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  571.641      1 -total
 33.04%  188.850      1 Template:Reflist
 17.73%  101.366      2 Template:Cite_journal
 14.82%   84.718      1 Template:History_of_technology_sidebar
 14.48%   82.779      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.23%   69.889      1 Template:Short_description
 11.33%   64.771      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.57%   60.402      1 Template:Ambox
  8.18%   46.787      3 Template:Navbox
  7.71%   44.098      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23421828:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021753 and revision id 1305085020. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technological_revolution&oldid=1305085020 " Categories : History of technology Revolutions by type Technological change Stages of history Science and technology studies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with neologism issues from October 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2023 This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 23:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technological revolution 10 languages Add topic

