Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Thesis 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Future Primitive and Other Essays 2 languages Español Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by John Zerzan Future Primitive and Other Essays Author John Zerzan Subject Anarcho-primitivism Genre Anthropology , political economy Publisher Autonomedia , Anarchy: a Journal of Desire Armed Publication date December 1, 1994 Publication place United States Media type Paperback Pages 192 pages ISBN 1-57027-000-7 OCLC 30630861 Preceded by Elements of Refusal Followed by Running on Emptiness Future Primitive and Other Essays is a collection of essays by anarcho-primitivist philosopher John Zerzan published by Autonomedia in 1994. The book became the subject of increasing interest after Zerzan and his beliefs rose to fame in the aftermath of the trial of fellow thinker Theodore Kaczynski and the 1999 anti-WTO protests in Seattle .

[ 1 ] It was republished in 1996 by Semiotext(e) , and has since been translated into French (1998), Turkish (2000), Spanish (2001), and Catalan (2002). As is the case with Zerzan's previous collection of essays, Elements of Refusal , Future Primitive is regarded by Anarcho-Primitivists and technophobes as an underground classic.

[ 2 ] Thesis [ edit ] Future Primitive is an unequivocal assertion of the superiority of the hunter-gatherer lifestyle.

[ 3 ] Zerzan rejects the thesis that time and technology are neutral scientific realities, arguing instead that they are carefully constructed means of enslaving people.

[ 4 ] He cites as examples the computer and the Internet , which he maintains have an atomizing effect on society, creating novel divisions of labour , demanding ever increasing efficiency and portions of leisure time .

[ 4 ] Life prior to domestication and agriculture , Zerzan argues, was predominantly one of "leisure, intimacy with nature, sensual wisdom, sexual equality and health".

[ 5 ] In the Paleolithic era, as The Wall Street Journal summarized Zerzan's thesis, "people roamed free, lived off the land and knew little or nothing of private property, government, money, war, even sexism. In the wild, the shackles of civilization weren't necessary, as people were instinctively munificent and kind, the primitivist argument goes." [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Anarchism portal Green anarchism Marshall Sahlins References [ edit ] ^ Campbell, Duncan (April 18, 2001).

"Anarchy in the United States" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2008-10-06 .

^ Noble, Kenneth B. (May 7, 1995).

"Prominent Anarchist Finds Unsought Ally in Serial Bomber" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2008-10-06 .

^ Gowdy, John (1998).

Limited Wants, Unlimited Means . Washington: Island Press. p. 220.

ISBN 1-55963-555-X .

^ a b Veseth, Michael (2002).

The New York Times Twentieth Century in Review: the Rise of the Global Economy . New York: Routledge. pp.

515 .

ISBN 1-57958-369-5 .

^ Bookchin, Murray (1995).

Social Anarchism or Lifestyle Anarchism . Stirling: AK Press . p. 39.

ISBN 1-873176-83-X .

^ Waldman, Peter (December 6, 1999).

"An Anarchist Looks to Provide Logic To Coterie Leading WTO Vandalism" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Dow Jones & Company . Archived from the original on March 11, 2016.

Alt URL External links [ edit ] Future Primitive and Other Essays (PDF) – Libcom.org Future Primitive and Other Essays (PDF) – Archive.org v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Future_Primitive_and_Other_Essays&oldid=1305245546 " Categories : 1994 non-fiction books Books about anarchism Green anarchism Literature critical of work and the work ethic Anarcho-primitivism American essay collections Autonomedia books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 22:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Future Primitive and Other Essays 2 languages Add topic

