Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Reception 3 See also 4 Further reading 5 External links 6 References Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Naumann 27 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Македонски مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German politician (1860–1919) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Friedrich Naumann" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Friedrich Naumann Member of the Weimar National Assembly In office 1919–1919 Constituency Berlin Member of the German Reichstag In office 1907–1912 Constituency 3rd Württemberg ( Heilbronn ) In office 1913–1918 Constituency Waldeck Personal details Born ( 1860-03-25 ) 25 March 1860 Störmthal (now part of Großpösna ) near Leipzig , Kingdom of Saxony Died 24 August 1919 (1919-08-24) (aged 59) Travemünde , Germany Political party National-Social Association (1896–1903) Freeminded Union (1903–1910) Progressive People's Party (1910–1918) German Democratic Party (1918–1919) Spouse Maria Magdalena Zimmermann Occupation Theologian , Politician Friedrich Naumann (25 March 1860 – 24 August 1919) was a German liberal politician and Protestant parish pastor. In 1896, he founded the National-Social Association that sought to combine liberalism , nationalism and (non- Marxist ) socialism with Protestant Christian values, proposing social reform to prevent class struggle . He led the party until its merger into the Free-minded Union in 1903. From 1907 to 1912 and again from 1913 to 1918, he was a member of the Reichstag of the German Empire.

Naumann advocated an imperialist foreign policy, laying out Germany's claim to dominate Central Europe in his 1915 Mitteleuropa plan. After the First World War , he co-founded the German Democratic Party and was elected to the Weimar National Assembly . Naumann is also somewhat controversial for his anti-Armenian statements.

[ 1 ] The Friedrich Naumann Foundation of the Free Democratic Party is named after him.

Life [ edit ] Naumann was born in the parsonage of Großpösna near Leipzig in Saxony , being the son of the local Lutheran pastor. He attended the St Nicholas School (Nikolaischule) in Leipzig and the Fürstenschule in Meissen , whereafter he studied Protestant theology at the universities of Leipzig and Erlangen . In 1881 he was one of the founders of the nationalist student fraternity Verein Deutscher Studenten in Leipzig. From 1883 he worked at the Rauhes Haus charity institution established by Johann Hinrich Wichern in Hamburg , before in 1886 he took over the rectorate of Lengenberg near Glauchau in Saxony. From 1890 he also served in the Inner mission in Frankfurt .

During the 1880s, Naumann was a follower of the conservative-clerical and antisemitic Berlin movement led by Adolf Stoecker and his Christian Social Party . At the 1890 Evangelical Social Congress however, he became a spokesman of the liberal wing, distancing himself from Stoecker's conservatism and antisemitism. Later he became interested in the social theories advocated by his friend Max Weber , one of the most pronounced critics of Emperor Wilhelm II . His ideal was that of helping the workers , whose miserable life circumstances he had witnessed in Hamburg. His goal was to raise interest in this issue among the middle class , however, initially he was hindered by the German middle class fear of the proletariat, who were regarded as potential revolutionaries . Naumann later tried to involve Weber in politics, but this failed due to the bad health and temper of Weber.

Starting from 1894 he published the weekly magazine Die Hilfe ("The Help") to address the social question from a non- marxist middle class point of view. To this end he wrote the short book, Soziale Briefe An Reiche Leute ("Social Letters to Wealthy People") published in Göttingen in 1895.

Together with Rudolph Sohm and Caspar René Gregory , he founded the National-Social Association in 1896; an attempt to provide a social liberal , social Christian and nationalist alternative to the Marxist , predominantly irreligious and internationalist Social Democrats . The Association tried to address the growing social rift between rich industrialists and the poor working class with social reforms rather than class struggle. In the same year, Naumann gave up his pastoral office, concentrating on his political and writing activities from then on. In his 1897 "National-Social Catechism " (structured in rhetorical questions and answers, following the model of Luther's Small Catechism ) he explained the National-Social Association's fundamental conviction that "the national and the social (interest) belong together". By national(ism) he understood "the drive of the German people to expand its influence on the globe"; while he defined social(ism) as "the drive of the working masses to extend their influence within the people".

[ 2 ] During the 1890s Hamidian massacres , Naumann became known for expressing anti-Armenianism in Die Hilfe including the famous "potter's quote" in which Naumann quoted a German potter, whom he met during his journey to the Near East in Constantinople, as stating: I am a Christian and hold "Love thy neighbor" as the first commandment, and I say that the Turks did the right thing when they beat the Armenians to death. There is no other way for the Turk to protect himself from the Armenian. ... The Armenian is the worst type in the world. He sells his wife, his still under-aged daughter, he steals from his brother. The whole of Constantinople is being morally poisoned by the Armenians. It is not the Turks who have attacked, but the Armenians. ... An orderly means of protecting oneself against the Armenians does not exist. The Turk is acting in self-defense.

[ 1 ] Historian Stefan Ihrig states that "Naumann had exposed a very broad audience to justifications for killing Armenians and had made Germany's ears deaf to the Armenian plight as well as anti- Armenianism 'morally' and politically more acceptable".

[ 3 ] But with regard to the Armenian genocide in 1915 Die Hilfe [ 4 ] – still edited and led by Friedrich Naumann – wrote: Neither the German-Turkish alliance could be legitimation "for a massacre of the Armenians in an extent which has not been seen in history as yet. No doubt one must be allowed to deplore the Armenian people's adverse fate and to speak open that not all Armenian, most notably not the entire Armenian people are hostile to Turkish – without being blamed to be a traitor on our good cause! Also the German press has to discuss the Arminian question, without prejudice!" Later in his life, Naumann worked for an approachment of German social democratic and liberal movements, but faced major opposition from conservatives . Industrialists like Freiherr von Stumm called Naumann and his associates "Allies of the Socialists". Naumann wanted to preserve Christian values, which he hoped would improve the fraught relations between workers and corporate businessmen. The National-Social Association failed in the German elections of 1898 and 1903 and was then dissolved into the Freeminded Union . Naumann became a member of the Reichstag parliament upon the 1907 federal election .

In 1907, he co-founded the Deutscher Werkbund association. On the eve of World War I , Naumann proved to be a monarchist, but his sympathy for the German emperor Wilhelm II had vanished since the well-known Daily Telegraph Affair of 1908. He espoused a kind of liberal imperialism , signing the 1914 Manifesto of the Ninety-Three , and still in 1918 backed the " Anti-Bolshevist League " of Eduard Stadtler . On the other side Naumann supported the Peace Resolution , with which the Reichstag offered peace negotiations without annexiations in 1917.

[ 5 ] In 1919, Friedrich Naumann was among the founders of the social liberal German Democratic Party (Deutsche Demokratische Partei, DDP) with Theodor Wolff and Hugo Preuss . As a member of the Weimar National Assembly , he became one of the "Fathers of the Constitution " of the Weimar Republic , and, shortly before his death, was elected as the first president of the Democratic Party.

Reception [ edit ] Naumann is often considered an advocate of German nationalism with militarist and annexionist ideals, [ citation needed ] due to his book Mitteleuropa (1915) on the geopolitics of a Central Europe under German leadership.

[ 6 ] The work had a great public impact, though it did not affect the military strategy of World War I. Like many scholars of his time, Naumann upheld the theories of Social Darwinism and Volksgemeinschaft . He shared his views with the intellectual circles he frequented, including not only Max Weber , but also Lujo Brentano , Hellmut von Gerlach , young Theodor Heuss , his wife Elly Heuss-Knapp , and Gustav Stresemann .

[ citation needed ] For Jürgen Frölich, historian at the Archive of Liberalism , Naumann is "a key figure in German liberalism in the late Kaiserreich ", [ 7 ] who saw his political goals mainly realized, when just before the end of war the Constitution of the German Empire adopted an amendment, which turned the state into a short living parliamentary democratic monarchy.

[ citation needed ] According to the historian Götz Aly , Naumann "distorted liberalism beyond recognition and completed the turn to nationalist power and popular welfare politics". While Naumann was not a forerunner of the Nazis' antisemitism, Aly accuses him of having "combined social, imperial, and national thought into a cohesive intellectual current that could eventually blend with the NSDAP 's mindset".

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Liberalism in Germany List of liberal theorists Further reading [ edit ] Jürgen Frölich (2015). " Naumann, Friedrich ." In: 1914–1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War , ed. by Ute Daniel, Peter Gatrell, Oliver Janz, Heather Jones, Jennifer Keene, Alan Kramer, and Bill Nasson, issued by Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin 2015-06-02. DOI: 10.15463/ie1418.10652.

Wolfhart Pentz (2002). "The Meaning of Religion in the Politics of Friedrich Naumann".

Journal for the History of Modern Theology .

9 (1): 70– 97.

Alastair P. Thompson (2000).

Left liberals, the state, and popular politics in Wilhelmine Germany , Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.

Theodor Heuss (1949).

Friedrich Naumann: der Mann, das Werk, die Zeit . Stuttgart & Tübingen: Wunderlich.

External links [ edit ] Works by or about Friedrich Naumann at the Internet Archive Media related to Friedrich Naumann at Wikimedia Commons Friedrich Naumann; Christabel Margaret Meredith; William James Ashley (1917).

Central Europe . King.

Newspaper clippings about Friedrich Naumann in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW References [ edit ] ^ a b Ihrig, Stefan (2018).

"Germany and the 1890s Armenian massacres: Questions of Morality in Foreign Policy" .

Études arméniennes contemporaines (11): 75– 92.

doi : 10.4000/eac.1871 .

ISSN 2269-5281 .

^ Naumann, Friedrich (1897).

National-Sozialer Katechismus: Erklärung der Grundlinien des National-Sozialen Vereins . Buchverlag der Zeit. p. 5.

Cited in Kedar, Asaf (Summer 2013). "National Socialism Before Nazism: From Friedrich Naumann to the 'Ideas of 1914' ".

History of Political Thought .

34 (2): 324– 349.

JSTOR 26225828 .

^ Justifying Genocide , p. 77.

^ Die Hilfe , No 36/1915, p. 582.

^ Heuss 1949, p. 389.

^ Naumann, Friedrich (1915).

Mitteleuropa (in German). Berlin, Germany: Georg Reimer.

^ Jürgen Frölich: "Naumann, Friedrich" .

1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

German Historical Institute . 2 June 2015 . Retrieved 18 February 2021 .

^ Aly, Götz (2011).

Warum die Deutschen? Warum die Juden?: Gleichheit, Neid und Rassenhass . S. Fischer Verlag.

Portals : Christianity Germany Liberalism Politics Socialism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Naumann&oldid=1306149062 " Categories : 1860 births 1919 deaths 19th-century German Lutheran clergy 20th-century German Lutheran clergy Anti-Armenian sentiment Anti-Marxism Antisemitism in Germany Critics of Freemasonry Free-minded Union politicians Geopoliticians German anti-communists German Christian socialists German Democratic Party politicians German radicals German political party founders Leaders of political parties in Germany Members of the 12th Reichstag of the German Empire Members of the 13th Reichstag of the German Empire Members of the Weimar National Assembly National-Social Association politicians People from Leipzig (district) People from the Kingdom of Saxony Progressive People's Party (Germany) politicians Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2018 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from October 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Articles with Internet Archive links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 06:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Naumann 27 languages Add topic

