Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Examples 3 Research use 4 Other neurotropic infections 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Neurotropic virus 7 languages العربية فارسی Français Galego हिन्दी Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Species of virus that infects nerve tissue "Neurotropic" redirects here; not to be confused with Neurotrophic .

A neurotropic virus is a virus that is capable of infecting nerve tissue .

[ 1 ] Terminology [ edit ] A neurotropic virus is said to be neuroinvasive if it is capable of accessing or entering the nervous system and neurovirulent if it is capable of causing disease within the nervous system. Both terms are often applied to central nervous system infections, although some neurotropic viruses are highly neuroinvasive for the peripheral nervous system (e.g.

herpes simplex virus ). Important neuroinvasive viruses include poliovirus , which is highly neurovirulent but weakly neuroinvasive, and rabies virus , which is highly neurovirulent but requires tissue trauma (often resulting from an animal bite) to become neuroinvasive. Using these definitions, herpes simplex virus is highly neuroinvasive for the peripheral nervous system and rarely neuroinvasive for the central nervous system, but in the latter case may cause herpesviral encephalitis and is therefore considered highly neurovirulent. Many arthropod-borne neurotropic viruses, like West Nile virus , spread to the brain primarily via the blood system by crossing the blood–brain barrier in what is called hematogenous dissemination .

[ citation needed ] Examples [ edit ] Neurotropic viruses that cause infection include Japanese Encephalitis , Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis , and California encephalitis viruses; polio , coxsackie , echo , mumps , measles , influenza and rabies , as well as diseases caused by members of the family Herpesviridae such as herpes simplex , varicella-zoster , Epstein–Barr , cytomegalovirus and HHV-6 viruses.

[ 2 ] All seven of the known human coronaviruses are neurotropic, the common cold viruses mainly in vulnerable populations while the more virulent SARS-CoV-1 , MERS , and SARS-CoV-2 frequently attack the nervous systems (primarily in animal models).

[ 3 ] Those causing latent infection include herpes simplex and varicella-zoster viruses. Those causing slow virus infection include measles virus , rubella and JC viruses, and retroviruses such as human T-lymphotropic virus 1 and HIV .

[ citation needed ] Research use [ edit ] Neurotropic viruses are increasingly being exploited as research tools, and for their potential use in treatment. In particular, they are being used to improve the understanding of the nervous systems circuits.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Other neurotropic infections [ edit ] Several diseases, including transmissible spongiform encephalopathy , kuru , and Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease resemble a slow neurotropic virus infection—but are, in fact, caused by the infectious proteins known as prions .

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Blood–brain barrier Immunology Pathogen Virulent References [ edit ] ^ "neurotropic - WordReference.com Dictionary of English" .

www.wordreference.com .

^ a b Hotta H (April 1997). "神経親和性ウイルス" [Neurotropic viruses--classification, structure and characteristics].

Nihon Rinsho (in Japanese).

55 (4): 777– 82.

PMID 9103870 .

S2CID 11123404 .

^ Morgello, Susan (31 July 2020).

"Coronaviruses and the central nervous system" .

Journal of Neurovirology .

26 (4): 459– 473.

doi : 10.1007/s13365-020-00868-7 .

PMC 7393812 .

PMID 32737861 .

^ Advances in Virus Research . Academic Press. October 17, 2000.

ISBN 9780080524535 – via Google Books.

^ Kennedy, P. G. E. (1 August 2003).

"Neurovirological methods and their applications" .

Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry .

74 (8): 1016– 1022.

doi : 10.1136/jnnp.74.8.1016 .

PMC 1738595 .

PMID 12876227 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neurotropic_virus&oldid=1196123246 " Category : Viruses Hidden categories: CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 This page was last edited on 16 January 2024, at 12:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neurotropic virus 7 languages Add topic

