Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Historical context 2.2 Epistemology 2.3 Metaphysics 2.4 Philosophy of mind 2.5 Affiliation 3 Writings and commentaries 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Dharmakirti 28 languages العربية বাংলা Български བོད་ཡིག Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Кыргызча Magyar മലയാളം 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский संस्कृतम् Slovenščina Suomi தமிழ் తెలుగు Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian Buddhist philosopher (fl.c.600–670) For the 10th century teacher from Suvarṇadvīpa, see Dharmakīrtiśrī .

Dharmakīrti Portrait of Dharmakirti in silver, c.

15th–16th century , at the Cleveland Museum of Art .

Personal life Born c.

600 CE South India Died c.

670 CE Education Nalanda Religious life Religion Buddhism Teachers Dharmapala of Nalanda Senior posting Students Vajrabodhi This article contains special characters .

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols .

Part of a series on Buddhism Glossary Index Outline History Timeline The Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering No-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Mettā Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Sanskrit literature Tibetan canon Chinese canon Post-canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Brazil Cambodia China India Indonesia Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar New Zealand Russia Singapore US Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Buddhism portal v t e Dharmakīrti (fl.

c.

600–670 CE ; [ 1 ] ), was an influential Indian Buddhist philosopher who worked at Nālandā .

[ 2 ] He was one of the key scholars of epistemology ( pramāṇa ) in Buddhist philosophy , and is associated with the Yogācāra [ 3 ] and Sautrāntika schools. He was also one of the primary theorists of Buddhist atomism .

[ 4 ] His works influenced the scholars of Mīmāṃsā , Nyaya and Shaivism schools of Hindu philosophy as well as scholars of Jainism .

[ 5 ] Dharmakīrti's Pramāṇavārttika , his largest and most important work, was very influential in India and Tibet as a central text on pramana ('valid knowledge instruments') and was widely commented on by various Indian and Tibetan scholars. His texts remain part of studies in the monasteries of Tibetan Buddhism .

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Little is known for certain about the life of Dharmakirti.

[ 2 ] As per John Taber, the only reliable information that we have about his life was that he was a teacher at Nalanda .

[ 7 ] The Chinese monk, Yijing , who was a resident at Nalanda between the years of 675 and 685 CE, refers to Dharmakirti as a “recent” teacher.

Yijing also mentioned that a Chinese traveller called Wuxing, was studying Dharmakirti's teachings at the Telhara monastery which is just a short distance away from Nalanda which indicates that Dharmakīrti had attained fame as a logician in Magadha around 650–660 CE.

[ 8 ] Tibetan hagiographies suggest that Dharmakirti ( Tibetan : ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པ་; Wylie : chos kyi grags pa ) was born into a Brahmin family born in South India [ 9 ] and was the nephew of the Mīmāṃsā scholar Kumārila Bhaṭṭa . When he was young, Kumārila spoke abusively towards Dharmakirti as he was taking his Brahminical garments. This led Dharmakirti to take the robes of the Buddhist order instead, resolving to "vanquish all the heretics." As a student of Buddhism, he first studied under Isvarasena, [ 10 ] and later moved to Nalanda where he interacted with 6th century Dharmapala.

[ 2 ] [ 9 ] However, the accuracy of the Tibetan hagiographies is uncertain, and scholars place him in the 7th century instead. This is because of inconsistencies in different Tibetan and Chinese texts, and because it is around the middle of 7th-century, and thereafter, that Indian texts begin discussing his ideas, [ 2 ] [ 11 ] [ 6 ] such as the citation of Dharmakirti verses in the works of Adi Shankara .

[ 4 ] Dharmakīrti is placed by most scholars to have lived between 600 and 660 CE, but a few place him earlier.

[ 5 ] Dharmakirti is credited with building upon the work of Dignāga , the pioneer of Buddhist logic , and Dharmakirti has ever since been seen as influential in the Buddhist tradition.

[ 6 ] His theories became normative in Tibet and are studied to this day as a part of the basic monastic curriculum.

[ 6 ] The Tibetan tradition considers that Dharmakīrti was ordained as a Buddhist monk at Nālandā by Dharmapāla .

[ 2 ] In his writings, we find the statement that no one will understand the value of his work and that his efforts would soon be forgotten, [ 2 ] [ 12 ] but history proved his fears wrong.

[ 2 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on Eastern philosophy China Confucianism Classical Confucius Mencius Xun Zi Dong Zhongshu Zheng Xuan Wang Yun Neo-Confucianism Han Yu Zhou Dunyi Zhang Zai Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Shao Yong Zhu Xi Lu Jiuyuan Wang Shouren Liu Zongzhou Li Zhi Wang Fuzhi Huang Zongxi Gu Yanwu Dai Zhen New Confucianism Kang Youwei Tan Sitong Liang Shuming Xiong Shili Feng Youlan Mou Zongsan Du Weiming Buddhism Han Buddhism Tientai Zhiyi Huayan school Fazang Guifeng Zongmi East Asian Mādhyamaka Jizang Kumārajīva Yogācāra Xuanzang Chinese Chan Bodhidharma Huineng Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Sakya Sakya Pandita Nyingma Longchenpa Gelug Tsongkhapa Four Tenets system Rangtong-Shentong Svatantrika-Prasaṅgika distinction Daoism Classical Laozi Zhuangzi Lie Yukou Neo-Daoism Wang Bi Ruan Ji Guo Xiang Ge Hong Cheng Xuanying Hundred Schools of Thought Legalism Guan Zhong Han Feizi Shang Yang Li Si Mohism Mozi Military and Strategy Sun Tzu Wu Qi Modern Hong Xiuquan Hong Rengan Yan Fu Zhang Taiyan Sun Yat-sen Lu Xun Dai Jitao Li Dazhao Chen Duxiu Ai Siqi Mao Zedong Liu Shaoqi Zhang Chunqiao Teng Wensheng Wang Huning Yi Junqing Zhao Tingyang Wang Hui Qin Hui Li Zehou India Āstika (orthodox) Vedic philosophy Agastya Aruni Ashtavakra Atri Vashistha Yajnavalkya Mimamsa Jaimini Vedanta Advaita Badarayana Gaudapada Adi Shankara Dvaita Madhvacharya Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Sri Vaishnavism Ramanuja Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Nyaya Gotama Navya-Nyāya Gangesha Upadhyaya Vaisheshika Kanada Nāstika (heterodox) Ājīvika Charvaka Kashmir Shaivism Abhinavagupta Pratyabhijna Tantra Tamil Valluvam Valluvar Other Chanakya General topics Ahimsa Atomism Atman Ātman (Hinduism) Ātman (Buddhism) Ātman (Jainism) Artha Anekantavada Brahman Dharma Indian logic Karma Kama Maya Moksha Nondualism Samadhi Pramana Yoga Jainism Haribhadra Umaswati Buddhism The Buddha Traditions Madhyamika Nagarjuna Yogacara Vasubandhu Dharmakirti Indian logic Dignāga Topics Dukkha Anatta Anicca Maitrī Nirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Emptiness Japan Traditions Japanese Buddhism Japanese Zen Sōtō school Dogen Rinzai school Eisai Shingon Kukai Japanese Confucianism Tokugawa Mitsukuni Fujiwara Seika Hayashi Razan Nakae Tōju Itō Jinsai Ogyū Sorai Kokugaku Motoori Norinaga Modern Thought Statism Fukuzawa Yukichi Tokutomi Soho Kita Ikki Kyoto School Kitaro Nishida Hajime Tanabe Jun Tosaka Shūzō Kuki Tetsuro Watsuji Kiyoshi Miki Keiji Nishitani Shin'ichi Hisamatsu Masao Abe D. T. Suzuki liberalism and Marxism Masao Maruyama Kojin Karatani Hiroki Azuma Chizuko Ueno Korea Traditions Korean Buddhism Wonhyo Uisang Hwaeom Uicheon Cheontae Jinul Seon Korean Confucianism Persons Chŏng Tojŏn Sŏ Kyŏngdŏk Yi Ŏnjŏk Yi Hwang Yi I Yi Ik Pak Chiwŏn Chŏng Yagyong Kim Chŏnghŭi Choe Han-gi Topics Silhak , Seohak Donghak Choe Je-u Modern Thought Persons Jaegwon Kim Topics Minjung theology Juche Philosophy portal v t e Historical context [ edit ] The Buddhist works such as the Yogacarabhumi-sastra and the Mahāyānasūtrālaṅkāra composed before the 6th century, on hetuvidyā (logic, dialectics) are unsystematic, whose approach and structure are heresiological, proselytical and apologetic.

[ 5 ] They aimed were to defeat non-Buddhist opponents ( Hinduism , Jainism , Ājīvikism , Charvaka ( materialists ), and others), defend the ideas of Buddhism, develop a line of arguments that monks can use to convert those who doubt Buddhism and to strengthen the faith of Buddhists who begin to develop doubts.

[ 5 ] Around the middle of the 6th century, possibly to address the polemics of non-Buddhist traditions with their pramana foundations, the Buddhist scholar Dignāga shifted the emphasis from dialectics to more systematic epistemology and logic, retaining the heresiological and apologetic focus.

[ 5 ] Dharmakīrti followed in Dignāga footsteps, and is credited with systematic philosophical doctrines on Buddhist epistemology, which Vincent Eltschinger states, has "a full-fledged positive/direct apologetic commitment".

[ 5 ] Dharmakīrti lived during the collapse of the Gupta Empire , a time of great insecurity for Buddhist institutions. The role of Buddhist logic was seen as an intellectual defense against Hindu philosophical arguments formulated by epistemically sophisticated traditions like the Nyaya school. However, Dharmakīrti and his followers also held that the study of reasoning and its application was an important tool for soteriological ends.

[ 5 ] Epistemology [ edit ] Buddhist epistemology holds that perception and inference are the means to correct knowledge.

Dharmakīrti's philosophy is based on the need to establish a theory of logical validity and certainty grounded in causality. Following Dignāga 's Pramāṇasamuccaya , Dharmakīrti also holds that there are only two instruments of knowledge or 'valid cognition' ( pramāṇa ); "perception" ( pratyaksa ) and "inference" ( anumāṇa ). Perception is a non-conceptual knowing of particulars that is bound by causality, while inference is reasonable, linguistic, and conceptual.

[ 2 ] In the Pramāṇavārttika Dharmakīrti defines a pramana as a "reliable cognition". What it means for cognition to be reliable has been interpreted in different ways. Following commentators like Dharmottara, who define it as meaning that cognition can lead to the obtaining of one's desired object, some modern scholars such as Jose I. Cabezon have interpreted Dharmakīrti as defending a form of Pragmatism .

[ 13 ] Tillemans sees him as holding to a weak form of correspondence theory , which holds that to "confirm causal efficacy" ( arthakriyāsthiti ) is to have a justification that an object of cognition has the causal powers we expected.

[ 2 ] That justification comes through a certain kind of non-conceptual perception ( pratyakṣa ) which is said to be an "intrinsical source of knowledge" ( svataḥ prāmāṇya ) which is ultimately reliable. Dharmakīrti sees a cognition as being valid if it has a causal connection with the object of cognition through an intrinsically valid, un-conceptual perception of the object which does not err regarding its functionality. As Dharmakirti says: "A pramāṇa is a reliable cognition. [As for] reliability, it consists in [this cognition's] compliance with [the object's capacity to] perform a function" ( Pramāṇavārttika 2.1ac).

[ 5 ] Dharmakīrti also holds that there were certain extraordinary epistemic warrants, such as the words of the Buddha, who was said to be an authoritative/reliable person ( pramāṇapuruṣa ) as well as the 'inconceivable' perception of a yogi ( yogipratyakṣa ). On the role of scriptural authority, Dharmakīrti has a moderate and nuanced position. For Dharmakīrti, scripture (Buddhist or otherwise) is not a genuine and independent means of valid cognition. He held that one should not use scripture to guide one on matters that can be decided by factual and rational means and that one is not to be faulted for rejecting unreasonable parts of the scriptures of one's school. However, scripture is to be relied upon when dealing with "radically inaccessible things", such as the laws of karma and soteriology . However, according to Dharmakīrti scripture is a fallible source of knowledge and has no claim to certainty.

[ 2 ] Dharmakīrti made significant contributions to Buddhist epistemology by refining the theory of inference, which addresses a central problem left unresolved by his predecessor, Dignāga. Dharmakīrti's approach ensures that the evidence (e.g. smoke) must always be present when the predicate (e.g. fire) is present, thereby providing a stronger foundation for inferential reasoning.

[ 14 ] Metaphysics [ edit ] According to Buddhologist Tom Tillemans , Dharmakīrti's ideas constitute a nominalist philosophy which disagrees with the Madhyamaka philosophy, by asserting that some entities are real. Dharmakīrti states that the real is only the momentarily existing particulars ( svalakṣaṇa ), and any universal ( sāmānyalakṣaṇa ) is unreal and fiction. He criticized the Nyaya theory of universals by arguing that since they have no causal efficacy, there is no rational reason to posit them. What is real must have powers ( śakti ), fitness ( yogyatā ), or causal properties which is what individuates a real particular as an object of perception. Dharmakīrti writes "whatever has causal powers ( arthakriyāsamartha ), that exists ( paramārthasat )." [ 2 ] This theory of causal properties has been interpreted as a form of trope theory .

[ 2 ] Svalakṣaṇa are said to be part-less, undivided, and property-less, and yet they impart a causal force which give rise to perceptual cognitions, which are direct reflections of the particulars.

[ 5 ] Dharmakīrti's ultimately real ( paramārthasat ) particulars are contrasted with conventionally real entities ( saṃvṛtisat ) as part of his presentation of the Buddhist Two truths doctrine . The conventionally real for him are based on linguistic categories, intellectual constructs, and erroneous superimpositions on the flow of reality, such as the idea that universals exist.

[ 5 ] According to Dharmakīrti, cognitive distortion of the direct perception of particulars occurs during the process of recognition ( pratyabhijñāna ) and perceptual judgment ( niścaya ) which arises due to latent tendencies ( vāsanā ) in the mind left over from past impressions of similar perceptions. These latent dispositions come together into constructed representations of the previously experienced object at the moment of perception, and hence it is an imposed error on the real, a pseudo-perception ( pratyakṣābhāsa ) which conceals ( saṃvṛti ) reality while at the same time being practically useful for navigating it.

[ 5 ] Ignorance ( avidyā ) for Dharmakīrti is conceptuality, pseudo-perception and superimposition overlaid on the naturally radiant ( prabhāsvara ) nature of pure perception. By correcting these defilements of perception through mental cultivation as well as using inference to gain "insight born of (rational) reflection" ( cintāmayī prajñā ) a Buddhist yogi is able to better see the true nature of reality until his perception is fully perfected.

[ 5 ] Dharmakīrti, again following Dignāga , also holds that that things as they are in themselves are "ineffable" ( avyapadeśya ). Language is never about the things in themselves, only about conceptual fiction, hence they are nominalists .

[ 2 ] Due to this theory, the main issue for Dharmakirti becomes how to explain that it is possible for our arbitrary and conventional linguistic schemas to refer to perceptual particulars that are ineffable and non-conceptual. To explain this gap between conceptual schema and perceptual content, Dharmakirti takes up Dignaga's theory of "exclusion" ( apoha ). Dignāga's view is that "a word talks about entities only as they are qualified by the negation of other things." [ 2 ] Dharmakīrti's unique take on this nominalist theory, which underlies his entire system, is to reinterpret it in terms of causal efficacy— arthakriyā (which can also be translated as 'telic function', 'functionality', and 'fulfillment of purpose').

[ 5 ] Dharmakīrti developed his philosophical system to defend Buddhist doctrines, so it is no surprise that he developed many of arguments for rebirth , the Four Noble Truths , the authority of the Buddha, karma , anatta , and compassion as well as attacking Brahminical views such as the authority of the Vedas .

[ 5 ] Dharmakīrti also defended the Buddhist theory of momentariness ( kṣaṇikatva ), which held that dharmas spontaneously perish the moment they arise. Dharmakīrti came up with an argument for the theory which stated that since anything that exists has a causal power, the fact that its causal power is in effect proves it is always changing. For Dharmakīrti, nothing could be a cause while remaining the same, and any permanent thing would be causally inert.

[ 2 ] Philosophy of mind [ edit ] Dharmakīrti defends Dignāga's theory of consciousness being non-conceptually reflexive ( svasamvitti or svasaṃvedana ). This is the idea that an act of intentional consciousness is also aware of itself as aware.

[ 2 ] Consciousness is said to illuminate itself like a lamp that illuminates objects in a room as well as itself. Dharmakīrti also defends the Yogācāra theory of "awareness-only" ( vijñaptimātratā ), which holds that 'external objects' of perception do not exist.

[ 2 ] According to Dharmakīrti, an object of cognition is not external or separate from the act of cognition itself. This is because the object is "necessarily experienced simultaneously with the cognition [itself]" ( Pramāṇavārttika 3.387).

[ 5 ] The view that there is a duality ( dvaya ) between an object ( grāhya ) and a subjective cognition ( grāhaka ) arises out of ignorance.

Dharmakīrti's Substantiation of Other Mindstreams ( Saṃtānāntarasiddhi ) is a treatise on the nature of the mindstream and Buddhist response to the problem of other minds [ 15 ] Dharmakirti held the mindstream to be a beginning-less yet also described the mindstream as a temporal sequence, and that as there are no true beginnings, there are no true endings, hence, the "beginningless time" motif that is frequently used to describe the concept of mindstream.

[ 16 ] Affiliation [ edit ] There is disagreement among Indian and Tibetan doxographers as to how to categorise Dharmakīrti's thoughts. The Gelug school asserts that he expressed Yogācāra views, most non-Gelug Tibetan commentators assert that he expressed Sautrāntika views and, according to one Tibetan source, several of renowned later Indian Madhyamikas asserted that he expressed Madhyamaka views.

[ 17 ] Among modern scholars, some like Tillemans argue that Dharmakīrti represented the Yogācāra school, while Amar Singh argues that he was a Sautrāntika.

[ 18 ] For Christine Mullikin Keyt, Dharmakīrti represents a "synthesis of two schools of Indian Buddhism, the Sautrantika and the Yogacara." [ 19 ] Likewise, Dan Arnold argues that Dharmakīrti's alternating philosophical perspectives of Sautrāntika and Yogācāra views are ultimately compatible and are applied at different levels of his 'sliding scale of analysis.' [ 20 ] There is also a tendency to see Dignāga and Dharmakīrti as founding a new type of Buddhist school or tradition, which is known in Tibetan as "those who follow reasoning" ( rigs pa rjes su 'brang ba ) and sometimes is known in modern literature as pramāṇavāda .

Writings and commentaries [ edit ] Dharmakīrti is credited with the following major works: [ 21 ] Sambandhaparīkṣā and Sambandhaparīkṣāvṛtti ( Analysis of Relations ) Sambandhaparīkṣāvṛtti ( Analysis of Relations auto-commentary ) Pramāṇaviniścaya ( Ascertainment of Valid Cognition ) Pramāṇavārttika -kārika (Commentary on Dignāga's Pramāṇasamuccaya ) Pramāṇavārttikasvavrtti (auto-commentary on the above text) Nyāyabinduprakaraṇa ( Drop of Logic ) Hetubindunāmaprakaraṇa ( Drop of Reason ) Saṃtānāntarasiddhināmaprakaraṇa ( Proof of Others' Mindstreams ) Vādanyāyanāmaprakaraṇa ( Reasoning for Debate ) There are various commentaries by later thinkers on Dharmakīrti, the earliest commentators are the Indian scholars Devendrabuddhi (ca. 675 CE.) and Sakyabuddhi (ca. 700 C.E.).

[ 22 ] Other Indian commentators include Karṇakagomin, Prajñākaragupta , Manorathanandin, Ravigupta and Śaṅkaranandana .

[ 23 ] He was extremely influential in Tibet, where Phya pa Chos kyi Seng ge (1182-1251) wrote the first summary of his works, called "Clearing of Mental Obscuration with Respect to the Seven Treatises on Valid Cognition" ( tshad ma sde bdun yid gi mun sel ).

Sakya Pandita wrote the "Treasure on the Science of Valid Cognition" ( tshad ma rigs gter ) and interpreted Dharmakirti as an anti-realist against Phya pa's realism.

[ 24 ] These two main interpretations of Dharmakīrti became the foundation for most debates in Tibetan epistemology.

See also [ edit ] Dignāga Hetucakra Trairūpya Buddhist logic Pramana Buddhist atomism Epistemology William of Ockham References [ edit ] ^ Lopez, Donald (2014).

"Dharmakīrti" .

The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Tom Tillemans (2011), Dharmakirti , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ Donald S. Lopez Jr. (2009).

Buddhism and Science: A Guide for the Perplexed . University of Chicago Press. p. 133.

ISBN 978-0-226-49324-4 .

^ a b Hajime Nakamura (1980).

Indian Buddhism: A Survey with Bibliographical Notes . Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 301 with footnotes.

ISBN 978-81-208-0272-8 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Eltschinger 2010 .

^ a b c d Kenneth Liberman (2007).

Dialectical Practice in Tibetan Philosophical Culture: An Ethnomethodological Inquiry into Formal Reasoning . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 52.

ISBN 978-0-7425-7686-5 .

^ Edelglass, William (2023).

The Routledge Handbook of Indian Buddhist Philosophy . Taylor and Francis. p. 303.

ISBN 9781351030885 .

^ Vincent, Eltschinger.

"Dharmakīrti" .

Brill's Encyclopedia of Buddhism Online .

^ a b Lal Mani Joshi (1977).

Studies in the Buddhistic Culture of India During the 7th and 8th Centuries A.D.

Motilal Banarsidass. pp.

146– 147.

ISBN 978-81-208-0281-0 .

^ Hajime Nakamura (1980).

Indian Buddhism: A Survey with Bibliographical Notes . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 301.

ISBN 978-81-208-0272-8 .

^ Kurtis R. Schaeffer (2013).

Sources of Tibetan Tradition . Columbia University Press. p. 372.

ISBN 978-0-231-13599-3 .

^ Collins, Randall (2000).

The sociology of philosophies: a global theory of intellectual change. Volume 30, Issue 2 of Philosophy of the social sciences . Harvard University Press. p. 240.

ISBN 978-0-674-00187-9 .

^ Cabezón, José I., 2000, "Truth in Buddhist Theology," in R. Jackson and J. Makransky, (eds.), Buddhist Theology, Critical Reflections by Contemporary Buddhist Scholars. London: Curzon, 136–154.

^ Dunne, John D.

Dharmakirti, Foundations Of Dharmakirtis Philosophy John Dunne D. Wisdom Publications . pp.

148– 151.

^ Source: [1] (accessed: Wednesday 28 October 2009). There is an English translation of this work by Gupta (1969: pp.81–121) which is a rendering of Stcherbatsky 's work from the Russian: Gupta, Harish C. (1969).

Papers of Th. Stcherbatsky . Calcutta: Indian Studies Past and Present. (translated from Russian by Harish C. Gupta).

^ Dunne 2004 , p. 1.

^ Ngawang Palden in the Sautrantika chapter of his Explanation of the Conventional and the Ultimate in the Four Systems of Tenets ( Grub mtha' bzhi'i lugs kyi kun rdzob dang don dam pa'i don rnam par bshad pa legs bshad dpyid kyi dpal mo'i glu dbyangs , New Delhi: Guru Deva, 1972, 39.5–39.6) says that some such as Prajñakaragupta, Suryagupta, Shantarakshita, Kamalashila, and Jetari interpret Dharmakirti's Commentary on [Dignaga's] Compendium of Valid Cognition ( Tshad ma rnam 'grel , Pramanavarttika ) as a Madhyamika treatise.

Dependent-Arising and Emptiness: A Tibetan Buddhist Interpretation of Madhyamika Philosophy Emphasizing the Compatibility of Emptiness and Conventional Phenomena Napper, Elizabeth . Boston: Wisdom Publications. p. 685, note 142 ^ Singh, Amar; The Heart of Buddhist Philosophy: Dinnaga and Dharmakīrti, New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1984. xvi + 168 pp.
Appendices, glossary, bibliography and indices.

^ Keyt, Christine Mullikin; Dharmakīrti's concept of the Svalakṣaṇa, 1980, https://digital.lib.washington.edu/researchworks/handle/1773/5723 ^ Arnold, Dan; Buddhist Idealism, Epistemic and Otherwise: Thoughts on the Alternating Perspectives of Dharmakīrti, 2008 ^ Epistemology and Argumentation in South Asia and Tibet (EAST).

"Dharmakīrti" .

east.ikga.oeaw.ac.at . Retrieved 29 February 2024 .

^ Dunne 2004 , p. 4.

^ Cluster of Excellence "Asia and Europe in a Global Context" of the University of Heidelberg, http://east.uni-hd.de/buddh/ind/7/16/ Archived 8 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ Recognizing Reality: Dharmakirti's Philosophy and its Tibetan Interpretations, (Suny: 1997), page 23-24 Bibliography [ edit ] Dreyfus, Georges (1997).

Recognizing Reality: Dharmakirti's Philosophy and Its Tibetan Interpretations . New York: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-3098-9 .

extensive discussion of the Dharmakirti's Tibetan reception Dunne, John D. (2004).

Foundations of Dharmakirti's Philosophy . Somerville, Mass.: Wisdom Publications.

ISBN 978-0-86171-184-0 .

[ permanent dead link ] Eltschinger, Vincent (2010).

"Dharmakīrti: Revue internationale de philosophie" .

Buddhist Philosophy . 2010.3 (253): 397– 440.

Pecchia, C. (ed., with the assistance of Pierce P.). (2015).

Dharmakīrti on the Cessation of Suffering. A Critical Edition with Translation and Comments of Manorathanandin's Vṛtti and Vibhūticandraʼs Glosses on Pramāṇavārttika II.190-216 . Leiden, Brill.

Shcherbatskoy, Fyodor (1932) Buddhist Logic , introduced the West to Buddhist logic, and more specifically to Dignaga. Although pioneering, this work is now regarded as outdated by some Buddhist scholars. — David Loy complains about viewing Buddhist philosophy "through the categories of another system – Stcherbatsky's Kant, Murti's Vedānta , Gudmundsen's Wittgenstein – which (as with earlier interpretations of nirvāṇa ) reveals more about the interpreter than the interpreted." ( Loy, David (1984). "How not to criticize Nāgārjuna".

Philosophy East and West .

34 (4): 437– 445.

doi : 10.2307/1399177 .

JSTOR 1399177 .

).

Tillemans, T. J. F.

(1999).

Scripture, Logic, Language: Essays on Dharmakirti and His Tibetan Successors . Somerville, Mass.: Wisdom Publications.

ISBN 978-0-86171-156-7 .

External links [ edit ] Tillemans, Tom.

"Dharmakirti" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal v t e Yogachara Key doctrines Caitasika Kleśa Mānasvijñāna ālayavijñāna Bīja Vāsanā Trisvabhāva Four Views Parikalpitasvabhāva Paratantrasvabhāva Pariniṣpannasvabhāva Figures India Maitreya-nātha Asaṅga Vasubandhu Dharmapāla Guṇamati Sthiramati Bandhuśri Nanda Śuddhacandra Citrabhāna Viśeṣamitra Jinaputra Jñānacandra Dignāga Asvabhāva Śīlabhadra Dharmakīrti Śāntarakṣita Kamalaśīla China Paramārtha Xuanzang Kuiji Huizhao Zhizhou Japan Dōshō Chitsū Chihō Gyōki Gien Genbō Tokuitsu Shingyō Jōkei Ryōhen Kōin Sūtra Avataṃsaka Sūtra Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra Mahāyāna Abhidharma Sūtra Śāstra Yogācārabhūmi Śāstra Mahāyānasaṃgraha Triṃśikāvijñaptimātratā Vimśatikāvijñaptimātratāsiddhi Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi Viṃśatikā Lamp of Complete Understanding Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi Dōgakushō Kanjinkakumushō Schools Vijñānavāda Alīkākāravāda Satyākāravāda Branches Hossō Kōfuku-ji Yakushi-ji Northern Hossō Kiyomizu-dera Shōtoku-shū Hōryū-ji Hokki-ji Hōrin-ji Chūgū-ji Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wd4th
Cached time: 20250817051304
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.798 seconds
Real time usage: 1.012 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6111/1000000
Revision size: 27775/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 201431/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16366/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 144479/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.430/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24625893/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  780.002      1 -total
 21.42%  167.058      1 Template:Reflist
 14.40%  112.352      1 Template:Infobox_religious_biography
 12.07%   94.129      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.75%   83.861      1 Template:Buddhism
 10.08%   78.641      2 Template:Transliteration
 10.04%   78.328      4 Template:Cite_journal
  9.99%   77.897      1 Template:Infobox
  7.13%   55.610     12 Template:Cite_book
  7.13%   55.586      3 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1893748:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051304 and revision id 1301935972. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dharmakirti&oldid=1301935972 " Categories : 7th-century Indian philosophers 7th-century Indian writers Atheist philosophers Atomists 7th-century Buddhists Buddhist logic Buddhist writers Idealists Indian Buddhists Indian scholars of Buddhism Indian logicians Srivijaya Writers from Bihar Yogacara scholars Scholars from Bihar Monks of Nalanda Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from October 2013 Use dmy dates from January 2024 Pages using religious biography with multiple nickname parameters Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 13:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dharmakirti 28 languages Add topic

