Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Treatment 3 History 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Garbage 6 languages Afrikaans Bikol Central فارسی Hausa ಕನ್ನಡ Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unwanted material discarded by humans For other uses, see Garbage (disambiguation) .

Collected garbage at Attero, Wijster, the Netherlands Litter dumped in a wetland area in the United States, among water lilies and marsh plants Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Garbage , trash ( American English ), rubbish ( Commonwealth English ), or refuse is waste material that is discarded by humans, usually due to a perceived lack of utility. The term generally does not encompass bodily waste products, purely liquid or gaseous wastes, or toxic waste products. Garbage is commonly sorted and classified into kinds of material suitable for specific kinds of disposal.

[ 1 ] Terminology The word garbage originally meant chicken giblets and other entrails , as can be seen in the 15th century Boke of Kokery, which has a recipe for Garbage .

[ 2 ] What constitutes garbage is highly subjective, with some individuals or societies tending to discard things that others find useful or restorable.

[ 3 ] The words garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash, and waste are generally treated as interchangeable when used to describe "substances or objects which the holder discards or intends or is required to discard".

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Some of these terms have historic distinctions that are no longer present. In the 1880s, material to be disposed of was divided into four general categories: ashes (derived from the burning of coal or wood), garbage, rubbish, and street-sweepings.

[ 6 ] This scheme of categorization reduced some of these terms to more specific concepts: Garbage, the technical term for putrescent organic matter such as kitchen or food scraps, was fed to pigs and other livestock or boiled down in a process known as "rendering," to extract fats, oils, and greases for manufacturing lubricants, or allowed to dry to become commercial fertilizer. Rubbish, a broad category of dry goods including boxes, bottles, tin cans, or virtually anything made from wood, metal, glass, and cloth, could be transformed into new consumer products through a variety of reclamation methods.

[ 6 ] The distinction between terms used to describe wet and dry discarded material "was important in the days when cities slopped garbage to pigs, and needed to have the wet material separated from the dry", but has since dissipated.

[ 7 ] Treatment Garbage in a 'Clean City' garbage can in Volzhskiy, Volgograd Oblast , Russia In urban areas, garbage of all kinds is collected and treated as municipal solid waste ; garbage that is discarded in ways that cause it to end up in the environment, rather than in containers or facilities designed to receive garbage, is considered litter . Litter is a form of garbage that has been improperly disposed of, and which therefore enters the environment.

[ 8 ] Notably, however, only a small fraction of garbage that is generated becomes litter, with the vast majority being disposed of in ways intended to secure it from entering the environment.

[ 7 ] History Humans have been creating garbage throughout history, beginning with bone fragments left over from using animal parts and stone fragments discarded from toolmaking.

[ 9 ] The degree to which groups of early humans began engaging in agriculture can be estimated by examining the type and quality of animal bones in their garbage.

[ 9 ] Garbage from prehistoric or pre-civilization humans was often collected into mounds called middens , which might contain things such as "a mix of discarded food, charcoal , shell tools, and broken pottery".

[ 10 ] See also Garbology (study of modern refuse and trash) Landfill Garbage truck References ^ Susan Strasser, Waste and Want: A Social History of Trash (2014), p. 6-7.

^ "Boke of Kokery - Garbage" . British Library. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020 . Retrieved April 25, 2020 .

^ Susan Strasser, Waste and Want: A Social History of Trash (2014), p. 3-4.

^ J. M. Baptista, The Regulation of Water and Waste Services (2014), p. 1: "Solid waste, also written as municipal or urban waste, commonly known as trash, garbage, refuse or rubbish, is defined as any substances or objects which the holder discards or intends or is required to discard".

^ William Viney, Waste: A Philosophy of Things (2014), p. 1: "The conventional way of thinking about the creation of waste, rubbish, trash, garbage, or whichever words we like to employ to denote things without use, is that the concept like the thing is created , produced through the order or disorder we construe, manufacture or identify in the world".

^ a b James Ciment, Social Issues in America: An Encyclopedia (2015), p. 1844-45.

^ a b William L. Rathje, Cullen Murphy, Rubbish!: The Archaeology of Garbage (2001), p. 9.

^ Carl A. Zimring, William L. Rathje, eds., Encyclopedia of Consumption and Waste: The Social Science of Garbage (2012), p. 657.

^ a b Simon Davis, "By their garbage shall they be known", New Scientist (November 17, 1983), p. 506-515.

^ Sid Perkins (March 22, 2011).

"Prehistoric Garbage Piles May Have Created 'Tree Islands' " .

sciencemag.org .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2014.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Garbage&oldid=1300608350 " Category : Waste Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 10:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Garbage 6 languages Add topic

