Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Halftoning 2 Comparison to CMY 3 Other printer color models 4 Comparison with RGB displays Toggle Comparison with RGB displays subsection 4.1 Spectrum of printed paper 5 Conversion 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents CMYK color model 62 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių Livvinkarjala Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Олык марий Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from CMYK ) Subtractive color model, used in color printing "CMYK" redirects here. For the EP by James Blake, see CMYK (EP) .

"CMYB" redirects here. For the cMyb gene tree, see MYB (gene) .

Color printing typically uses ink of four colors: cyan, magenta, yellow, and black.

When subtractive CMY inks are combined at full strength, pairwise combinations are red, green, and blue. Combining all three gives an imperfect black color.

What appears as cerulean ( ) in the top image is actually a blend of cyan, magenta, yellow and black, as magnification under a microscope demonstrates.

The CMYK color model (also known as process color , or four color ) is a subtractive color model , based on the CMY color model , used in color printing , and is also used to describe the printing process itself. The abbreviation CMYK refers to the four ink plates used: c yan , m agenta , y ellow , and k ey (most often black).

The CMYK model works by partially or entirely masking colors on a lighter, usually white, background. The ink reduces the light that would otherwise be reflected. Such a model is called subtractive , as inks subtract some colors from white light; in the CMY model, white light minus red leaves cyan, white light minus green leaves magenta, and white light minus blue leaves yellow.

In additive color models, such as RGB , white is the additive combination of all primary colored lights, and black is the absence of light. In the CMYK model, it is the opposite: white is the natural color of the paper or other background, and black results from a full combination of colored inks. To save cost on ink, and to produce deeper black tones, unsaturated and dark colors are produced by using black ink instead of or in addition to combinations of cyan, magenta, and yellow.

The CMYK printing process was invented in the 1890s, when newspapers began to publish color comic strips .

Halftoning [ edit ] Main article: Halftone This diagram shows three examples of color halftoning with CMYK separations, as well as the combined halftone pattern and how the human eye would observe the combined halftone pattern from a sufficient distance.

With CMYK printing, halftoning (also called screening ) allows for less than full saturation of the primary colors; tiny dots of each primary color are printed in a pattern small enough that humans perceive a solid color.

[ 1 ] Magenta printed with a 20% halftone, for example, produces a pink color, because the eye perceives the tiny magenta dots on the large white paper as lighter and less saturated than the color of pure magenta ink.

[ citation needed ] Halftoning allows for a continuous variability of each color, which enables continuous color mixing of the primaries. Without halftoning, each primary would be binary, i.e. on/off, which only allows for the reproduction of eight colors: white, the three primaries (cyan, magenta, yellow), the three secondaries (red, green, blue), and black.

Comparison to CMY [ edit ] The image above, (left) separated for printing with process cyan, magenta, and yellow (CMY) inks, and (right) separated for CMY and black (K) Inspection CMYK colors of offset printing on a paper The CMYK color model is based on the CMY color model, which omits the black ink. Four-color printing uses black ink in addition to subtractive primaries for several reasons: [ 2 ] In traditional preparation of color separations, a red keyline on the black line art marked the outline of solid or tint color areas. In some cases a black keyline was used when it served as both a color indicator and an outline to be printed in black because usually the black plate contained the keyline. The K in CMYK represents the keyline, or black, plate, also sometimes called the key plate .

[ 3 ] Text is typically printed in black and includes fine detail (such as serifs ). To avoid even slight blurring when reproducing text (or other finely detailed outlines) using three inks would require impractically accurate registration .

A combination of 100% cyan, magenta, and yellow inks soaks the paper with ink, making it slower to dry, causing bleeding, or (especially on low-quality paper such as newsprint ) weakening the paper so much that it tears.

[ citation needed ] Although a combination of 100% cyan, magenta, and yellow inks would, in theory, completely absorb the entire visible spectrum of light and produce a perfect black, practical inks fall short of their ideal characteristics, and the result is a dark, muddy color that is not quite black. Black ink absorbs more light and yields much better blacks.

Black ink is less expensive than the combination of colored inks that makes black.

A black made with just CMY inks is sometimes called a composite black .

[ 4 ] When a very dark area is wanted, a colored or gray CMY "bedding" is applied first, then a full black layer is applied on top, making a rich, deep black; this is called rich black .

[ 5 ] The amount of black to use to replace amounts of the other inks is variable, and the choice depends on the technology, paper and ink in use. Processes called under color removal , under color addition , and gray component replacement are used to decide on the final mix; different CMYK recipes will be used depending on the printing task.

[ 6 ] Other printer color models [ edit ] CMYK, as well as all other process color printing, is contrasted with spot color printing, in which specific colored inks are used to generate the colors seen. Some printing presses are capable of printing with both four-color process inks and additional spot color inks at the same time. High-quality printed materials, such as marketing brochures and books, often include photographs requiring process-color printing, other graphic effects requiring spot colors (such as metallic inks), and finishes such as varnish, which enhances the glossy appearance of the printed piece.

[ 7 ] CMYK are the process printers which often have a relatively small color gamut . Processes such as Pantone 's proprietary six-color (CMYKOG) Hexachrome considerably expand the gamut.

[ 8 ] Light, saturated colors often cannot be created with CMYK, and light colors in general may make visible the halftone pattern. Using a CcMmYK process , with the addition of light cyan and magenta inks to CMYK, can solve these problems, and such a process is used by many inkjet printers , including desktop models.

[ 9 ] Comparison with RGB displays [ edit ] Comparison of some RGB and CMYK color gamuts on a CIE 1931 xy chromaticity diagram Comparisons between RGB displays and CMYK prints can be difficult, since the color reproduction technologies and properties are very different. A computer monitor mixes shades of red, green, and blue light to create color images. A CMYK printer instead uses light-absorbing cyan, magenta, and yellow inks, whose colors are mixed using dithering , halftoning, or some other optical technique.

[ 10 ] Similar to electronic displays, the inks used in printing produce color gamuts that are only a subsets of the visible gamut, and the two color modes have their own specific ranges, each being capable of producing colors the other is not. As a result of this, an image rendered on an electronic display and rendered in print can vary in appearance.

[ 11 ] When designing images to be printed, designers work in RGB color spaces (electronic displays) capable of rendering colors a CMYK process cannot, and it is often difficult to accurately visualize a printed result that must fit into a different color space that both lacks some colors an electronic display can produce and includes colors it cannot.

Spectrum of printed paper [ edit ] To reproduce color, the CMYK color model codes for absorbing light rather than emitting it (as is assumed by RGB). The K component ideally absorbs all wavelengths and is therefore achromatic. The cyan, magenta, and yellow components are used for color reproduction and they may be viewed as the inverse of RGB: Cyan absorbs red, magenta absorbs green, and yellow absorbs blue (−R,−G,−B).

[ 12 ] Spectrum of the visible wavelengths on printed paper (SCA Graphosilk). Shown is the transition from red to yellow. White, red, blue, and green are shown for reference. Readings from a white orchid flower, a rose (red and yellow petals), and a red cyclamen flower are shown for comparison. The units of spectral power are simply raw sensor values (with a linear response at specific wavelengths).

Conversion [ edit ] Since RGB and CMYK spaces are both device-dependent spaces, there is no simple or general conversion formula that converts between them. Conversions are generally done through color management systems, using color profiles that describe the spaces being converted. An ICC profile defines the bidirectional conversion between a neutral "profile connection" color space (CIE XYZ or Lab) and a selected colorspace , in this case both RGB and CMYK. The precision of the conversion depends on the profile itself, the exact methodology, and because the gamuts do not generally match, the rendering intent and constraints such as ink limit.

ICC profiles, internally built out of lookup tables and other transformation functions, are capable of handling many effects of ink blending. One example is the dot gain , which show up as non-linear components in the color-to-density mapping. More complex interactions such as Neugebauer blending can be modelled in higher-dimension lookup tables.

The problem of computing a colorimetric estimate of the color that results from printing various combinations of ink has been addressed by many scientists.

[ 13 ] A general method that has emerged for the case of halftone printing is to treat each tiny overlap of color dots as one of 8 (combinations of CMY) or of 16 (combinations of CMYK) colors, which in this context are known as Neugebauer primaries . The resultant color would be an area-weighted colorimetric combination of these primary colors, except that the Yule–Nielsen effect of scattered light between and within the areas complicates the physics and the analysis; empirical formulas for such analysis have been developed, in terms of detailed dye combination absorption spectra and empirical parameters.

[ 13 ] Standardization of printing practices allow for some profiles to be predefined. One of them is the US Specifications for Web Offset Publications , which has its ICC color profile built into some software including Microsoft Office (as Agfa RSWOP.icm).

[ 14 ] The device-dependency of RGB and CMYK also means that a set of RGB or CMYK values cannot uniquely represent a color, so long as no device or paper–ink–process combination is specified. With RGB the sRGB standard is widespread enough to be the implied default, but there is not a single form of CMYK which is widespread enough to be the default.

Early representation of the three-color process (1902) Approximation of the image using CMY colors.

See also [ edit ] CMY color model CcMmYK color model Cycolor RGB color model Gray component replacement Jacob Christoph Le Blon SWOP CMYK standard Color management Technicolor , the three-strip version of which is based on the CMYK model References [ edit ] ^ Kang, Henry R. (1999).

Digital Color Halftoning . SPIE Press. p. 1.

ISBN 0-8194-3318-7 .

^ Roger Pring (2000).

WWW.Color . Watson–Guptill. p. 178.

ISBN 0-8230-5857-3 .

^ Menegus, Bryan (May 20, 2016).

"The Difference Between RGB and CMYK, Explained" .

Gizmodo . Retrieved October 4, 2020 .

^ Sigel, Jay A. (2015).

Forensic Chemistry: Fundamentals and Applications . John Wiley & Sons. p. 331.

ISBN 978-1-118-89772-0 .

^ R. S. Hodges (2003).

The Guild Handbook of Scientific Illustration . John Wiley and Sons. p. 242.

ISBN 0-471-36011-2 .

^ Kipphan, Helmut, ed. (2001).

Handbook of Print Media: Technologies and Production Methods . Springer. p. 87.

ISBN 3-540-67326-1 .

^ Davies, Helen (August 3, 2020).

"Top 8 Large Format Printing Tips To Achieve High-End Projects" .

Front Signs .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2020 . Retrieved October 4, 2020 .

^ Zeng, Huanzhao (2003). Eschbach, Reiner; Marcu, Gabriel G (eds.).

"3-D Color Separation Maximizing the Printer Gamut" .

Proceedings of SPIE . Color Imaging VIII: Processing, Hardcopy, and Applications.

5008 : 260.

Bibcode : 2003SPIE.5008..260Z .

doi : 10.1117/12.472012 .

S2CID 20555157 .

^ Carla Rose (2003).

Sams Teach Yourself Adobe Photoshop Elements 2 in 24 Hours . Sams Publishing. p. 108.

ISBN 0-672-32430-X .

^ "Overview of color in Illustrator" .

Adobe Inc.

Archived from the original on February 7, 2023 . Retrieved October 4, 2020 .

^ Damien van Holten, Printinternational, " RGB Vs CMYK " ^ "Subtractive Color Mixing" .

L. R. Ingersoll Physics Museum . Retrieved October 4, 2020 .

^ a b Gaurav Sharma (2003).

Digital Color Imaging Handbook . CRC Press. p. 68.

ISBN 0-8493-0900-X .

^ "KB933845 How to obtain and install the Microsoft Standard CMYK Profile (RSWOP.icm) in Windows Vista" .

Beta Archive > Microsoft KB Archive . March 15, 2007 . Retrieved 1 September 2023 .

The RSWOP.icm cyan-magenta-yellow-black (CMYK) color profile targets the "Specifications for Web Offset Publications" (SWOP) printing standard. This color profile is installed when you install Microsoft Office. However, by default, this color profile is not installed in Windows Vista. Therefore, you may experience unexpected results when you use certain programs that manage color.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to CMYK .

XCmyk – A Windows software with source code for converting CMYK to RGB.

RGB to CMYK converter – Tool for RGB to CMYK color converter online.

Color Space Fundamentals – animated illustration of RGB vs. CMYK ICC profile registry , which lists some standard CMYK profiles, their paper types, and color separation limits v t e Color space List of color spaces Color models CAM CIECAM02 iCAM CAM16 CIECAM16 CIE XYZ (1931) RGB (1931) YUV (1960) UVW (1964) CIELAB (1976) CIELUV (1976) CIECAM02 CIECAM16 RGB RGB color spaces sRGB rg chromaticity Adobe Wide-gamut ProPhoto scRGB DCI-P3 Rec. 601 SMPTE 240M/"C" Rec. 709 Rec. 2020 Rec. 2100 Y′UV YUV PAL YDbDr SECAM YIQ NTSC YCbCr Rec. 601 Rec. 709 Rec. 2020 Rec. 2100 ICtCp Rec. 2100 YPbPr MAC xvYCC YCoCg Other CcMmYK CMYK ColorADD Coloroid LMS Hexachrome HSL, HSV HCL Imaginary color Oklab OSA-UCS PCCS RG RYB HWB YJK TSL Color systems and standards ACES ANPA Colour Index International CI list of dyes DIC Federal Standard 595 HKS ICC profile ISCC–NBS Munsell NCS Ostwald Pantone RAL list JIS Z8102 [ ja ] For the vision capacities of organisms or machines, see Color vision .

v t e Photography Equipment Camera light-field digital field instant phone pinhole press rangefinder SLR still TLR toy view Darkroom enlarger safelight Film base format holder stock available films discontinued films Filter Flash beauty dish cucoloris gobo hot shoe lens hood monolight reflector snoot softbox Lens long-focus prime zoom wide-angle fisheye swivel telephoto Manufacturers Monopod Movie projector Slide projector Tripod head Zone plate Terminology 35 mm equivalent focal length Angle of view Aperture Backscatter Black-and-white Chromatic aberration Circle of confusion Clipping Color balance Color temperature Depth of field Depth of focus Exposure Exposure compensation Exposure value Zebra patterning F-number Film format large medium Film speed Focal length Guide number Hyperfocal distance Lens flare Metering mode Perspective distortion Photograph Photographic printing Albumen Photographic processes Reciprocity Red-eye effect Science of photography Shutter speed Sync Zone System Genres Abstract Aerial Aircraft Architectural Astrophotography Banquet Candid Conceptual Conservation Cloudscape Documentary Eclipse Ethnographic Erotic Fashion Fine-art Fire Forensic Glamour High-speed Landscape Monochrome Nature Neues Sehen Nude Photojournalism Pictorialism Pornography Portrait Post-mortem Ruins Selfie space selfie Social documentary Sports Still life Stock Straight photography Street Underwater Vernacular Wedding Wildlife Techniques Afocal Bokeh Brenizer Burst mode Contre-jour Crittercam ( Pigeon photography ) ETTR Fill flash Fireworks Hand-colouring Harris shutter High-speed Holography Infrared Intentional camera movement Kirlian Kite aerial Lo-fi photography Lomography Long-exposure Luminogram Macro Mordançage Multiple exposure Multi-exposure HDR capture Night Panning Panoramic Photogram Print toning Redscale Rephotography Rollout Scanography Schlieren photography Sabattier effect Slow motion Stereoscopy Stopping down Strip Slit-scan Sprocket hole Sun printing Tilt–shift Miniature faking Time-lapse Ultraviolet Vignetting Xerography Zoom burst Composition Diagonal method Framing Headroom Lead room Rule of thirds Simplicity Golden triangle (composition) History Timeline of photography technology Ambrotype Film photography Autochrome Lumière Box camera Calotype Camera obscura Daguerreotype Dufaycolor Heliography Lippmann plate Painted photography backdrops Photography and the law Glass plate Tintype Visual arts Regional Albania Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Greece India Japan Korea Luxembourg Norway Philippines Serbia Slovenia Sudan Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United States Uzbekistan Vietnam Digital photography Digital camera D-SLR comparison MILC camera back Digiscoping Comparison of digital and film photography Film scanner Image sensor CMOS APS CCD Three-CCD camera Foveon X3 sensor Image sharing Pixel Color photography Print film Chromogenic print Reversal film Color management color space primary color CMYK color model RGB color model Photographic processing Bleach bypass C-41 process Collodion process Cross processing Cyanotype Developer Digital image processing Dye coupler E-6 process Fixer Gelatin silver process Gum printing Instant film K-14 process Print permanence Push processing Stop bath Lists Largest photographs Most expensive photographs Museums devoted to one photographer Photographs considered the most important Photographers Norwegian Polish street women Photography periodicals Related Conservation and restoration of photographs film photographic plates Polaroid art Stereoscopy Say cheese NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐hf7bd
Cached time: 20250811234955
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.405 seconds
Real time usage: 0.596 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1911/1000000
Revision size: 18122/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 88019/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2081/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 73247/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.237/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6714739/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  471.271      1 -total
 29.06%  136.937      1 Template:Reflist
 19.92%   93.876      7 Template:Cite_book
 18.02%   84.933      2 Template:Navbox
 17.42%   82.077      1 Template:Color_space
 14.28%   67.285      2 Template:Redirect
 11.19%   52.745      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.83%   51.022      1 Template:Sister_project
 10.81%   50.950      1 Template:Short_description
 10.57%   49.826      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:44682:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811234955 and revision id 1292354293. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CMYK_color_model&oldid=1292354293 " Categories : Color space Printing Printing terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 14:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents CMYK color model 62 languages Add topic

