Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Selected publications 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Charles Dupin 18 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar مصرى Română Русский Slovenščina Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French Catholic mathematician, economist and politician (1784–1873) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(May 2021) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Charles Dupin]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Charles Dupin}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Pierre Charles François Dupin Born ( 1784-10-06 ) 6 October 1784 Varzy, France Died 18 January 1873 (1873-01-18) (aged 88) Paris, France Known for Choropleth map Dupin cyclide Dupin hypersurface Dupin indicatrix Dupin's theorem Malus-Dupin theorem Scientific career Fields Mathematics Engineering Economics Baron Pierre Charles François Dupin ( French pronunciation: [pjɛʁ ʃaʁl fʁɑ̃swa dypɛ̃] ; 6 October 1784, Varzy , Nièvre – 18 January 1873, Paris , France ) was a French Catholic mathematician , engineer, economist [ 1 ] and politician, particularly known for work in the field of mathematics, where the Dupin cyclide and Dupin indicatrix are named after him; and for his work in the field of statistical and thematic mapping .

[ 2 ] In 1826 he created the earliest known choropleth map .

[ 3 ] Life and work [ edit ] He was born in Varzy in France, the son of Charles Andre Dupin, a lawyer, and Catherine Agnes Dupin.

[ 4 ] His elder brother is André Marie Jean Jacques Dupin .

Dupin studied geometry with Monge at the École Polytechnique and then became a naval engineer ( ENSTA ). His mathematical work was in descriptive and differential geometry . He was the discoverer of conjugate tangents to a point on a surface and of the Dupin indicatrix .

[ 5 ] Dupin participated in the Greek science revival by teaching mathematics and mechanics lessons in Corfu in 1808. One of his students was Giovanni Carandino , who would go on to be the founder of the Greek Mathematics School in the 1820s.

From 1807 Dupin was responsible for the restoration of the damaged port and arsenal at Corfu . He founded the Toulon Maritime Museum in 1813.

In 1818, Dupin was elected to the body of the French Academy of Sciences , one of the Institut de France 's five Academies.

[ 6 ] 1826 choropleth map of France.

He was appointed professor at the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers in 1819; he kept this post until 1854. In 1822, Dupin was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences . He was made a baron in 1824.
In 1826 he published a thematic map showing the distribution of illiteracy in France, using shadings (from black to white), the first known instance of what is called a choropleth map today.

[ 3 ] Dupin had been inspired by the work of the German statisticians Georg Hassel and August Friedrich Wilhelm Crome .

[ 2 ] Dupin was named rapporteur for the central jury of the Exposition des produits de l'industrie française en 1834 .
For each branch of industry he noted the quantities and value of French exports and imports, with comparative figures for 1823, 1827 and 1834.

[ 7 ] Dupin also had a political career and was appointed to the Senate in 1852.

[ 6 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Essai historique sur les services et les travaux scientifiques de Gaspard Monge , 1819 Dupin, François Pierre Charles.

Développements de géométrie.

(1813).

Dupin, François Pierre Charles.

Discours et leçons sur l'industrie, le commerce, la marine, et sur les sciences appliquées aux arts.

1825.

Dupin, François Pierre Charles.

Canal maritime de Suez. Imprimerie de Mallet-Bachelier , 1858.

Developments in geometry, with applications to the stability of vessels, to cuts and embankments, to scrolling, to optics, etc. to follow on from the descriptive geometry and the analytical geometry of M. Monge: Theory, Paris, V e  Courcier,1813, 373  p. ( read online  [ archive ] ).

Memoirs on the navy and the bridges and roads of France and England: containing two accounts of voyages made by the author in the ports of England, Scotland and Ireland, in the years 1816, 1817 and 1818; the description of the Plymouth jetty, the Caledonian Canal, etc., Paris, Bachelier,1818, 468  p. ( read online  [ archive ] )— Dedicated to Prony .

Letter to Mylady Morgan on Racine and Shakespeare  [ archive ], 1818; a rare foray of Dupin's pen outside of science and politics. Dupin critiques a best-selling book by Lady Morgan, née Sydney Owenson.

Historical essay on the services and scientific works of Gaspard Monge  [ archive ], 1819 (Digitization: Gallica ) Applications of geometry and mechanics, to the navy, bridges and roads, etc., to follow on from the Developments of geometry  [ archive ], 1822 (with Laplace, Prony, Girard and Ampère ) Report made to the Institut de France, (Academy of Sciences), on the advantages, on the disadvantages, and on the comparative dangers of steam engines, in simple, medium and high pressure systems  [ archive ], 1823 Travels in Great Britain, undertaken in relation to the public services of war, the navy, and bridges and roads, to commerce and industry since 1816, Paris, Bachelier, 1825, 6 volumes, 3 parts  : Volumes 1 & 2: Military force. Constitution of the army. Studies & works  [ archive ] .

Volumes 3 & 4: Naval force. Constitution of the navy . Studies & works.

Volumes 5 & 6: Commercial force (public works and associations section). Public roads, squares, streets, roads, canals, bridges and highways, coasts and seaports.

References [ edit ] ^ Entry in Catholic Encyclopedia ^ a b Palsky, Gilles . " Connections and Exchanges in European Thematic Cartography. The case of XIXth century choropleth maps ." Formatting Europe. Mapping a continent.

2007 ^ a b Michael Friendly (2008).

"Milestones in the history of thematic cartography, statistical graphics, and data visualization" .

^ Biographical Index of Former Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 1783–2002 (PDF) . The Royal Society of Edinburgh. July 2006.

ISBN 0-902-198-84-X . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-01-24 . Retrieved 2016-03-30 .

^ Pierre Charles Francois Dupin .

^ a b "Dupin biography" .

www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk . Retrieved 2017-12-18 .

^ Colmont, Achille de (1855), Histoire des Expositions des produits de l'Industrie Française (in French), Guillaumin, p. 156 , retrieved 2017-10-11 External links [ edit ] Media related to Charles Dupin at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Charles Dupin at Wikiquote Entry in MacTutor History of Mathematics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Poland Vatican 2 Israel Belgium Academics zbMATH People Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering v t e Cabinet of Hugues-Bernard Maret (10 November 1834 to 18 November 1834) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the council Hugues-Bernard Maret Hugues-Bernard Maret Interior Hugues-Bernard Maret Justice and Religious Affairs Jean-Charles Persil Foreign Affairs Charles-Joseph Bresson War Simon Bernard Finance Hippolyte Passy Navy and Colonies Charles Dupin Public Education Jean-Baptiste Teste Commerce Jean-Baptiste Teste Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_Dupin&oldid=1296668557 " Categories : 1784 births 1873 deaths People from Nièvre French barons French Roman Catholics Orléanists Party of Order politicians Bonapartists Members of the 4th Chamber of Deputies of the Bourbon Restoration Members of the 1st Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 2nd Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 3rd Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 1848 Constituent Assembly Members of the National Legislative Assembly of the French Second Republic Members of Parliament for Tarn Members of Parliament for Seine Members of Parliament for Seine-Maritime French senators of the Second Empire 18th-century French mathematicians 19th-century French mathematicians Differential geometers Data and information visualization experts French civil engineers École Polytechnique alumni Members of the French Academy of Sciences Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 13:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles Dupin 18 languages Add topic

