Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 John Stuart Mill's formulation 2 Legal applications Toggle Legal applications subsection 2.1 Historical examples 2.1.1 Restrictions 2.2 In modern policy 2.2.1 Libertarianism 3 Broader definitions of harm 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Harm principle 15 languages العربية বাংলা Български فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano ქართული Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Português Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Moral philosophy principle Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e The harm principle holds that the actions of individuals should be limited only to prevent harm to other individuals.

John Stuart Mill articulated the principle in the 1859 essay On Liberty , where he argued that "The only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others." [ 1 ] [ 2 ] An equivalent was earlier stated in France's Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789 as, "Liberty consists in the freedom to do everything which injures no one else; hence the exercise of the natural rights of each man has no limits except those which assure to the other members of the society the enjoyment of the same rights. These limits can only be determined by law." It finds earlier expression in Thomas Jefferson 's 1785 " Notes on the State of Virginia ", Query 17 (Religion) in which he writes, "The legitimate powers of government extend to such acts only as are injurious to others." [ 3 ] John Stuart Mill's formulation [ edit ] The harm principle was first fully articulated by the English philosopher John Stuart Mill [JSM] (1806–1873) in the first chapter of On Liberty (1859), [ 1 ] where he argued that: The object of this Essay is to assert one very simple principle, as entitled to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the individual in the way of compulsion and control, whether the means used be physical force in the form of legal penalties, or the moral coercion of public opinion. That principle is, that the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection.

That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will , is to prevent harm to others.

His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinion of others, to do so would be wise, or even right... The only part of the conduct of anyone, for which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns others. In the part which merely concerns himself, his independence is, of right, absolute. Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign .

— John Stuart Mill [ 4 ] Mill also put the harm principle within his list of rights that sprung from liberty. It was found within his list of political rights (political activities that did not involve harm to others) - but also within his non-political liberty rights - his "tastes and pursuits" - activities which did not involve politics and did not involve harm to others: This, then, is the appropriate region of human liberty. It comprises, first, the inward domain of consciousness; demanding liberty of conscience, in the most comprehensive sense; liberty of thought and feeling; absolute freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects; practical or speculative, scientific, moral, or theological. The principle of expressing and publishing opinions may seem to fall under a different principle, since it belongs to that part of the conduct of an individual which concerns other people; but, being almost of as much importance as the liberty of thought itself, and resting in great part on the same reasons, is practically inseparable from it. Secondly, the principle requires liberty of tastes and pursuits; of framing the plan of our life to suit our own character; of doing as we like, subject to such consequences as may follow; without impediment from our fellow-creatures, so long as what we do does not harm them even though they should think our conduct foolish, perverse, or wrong.

According to Mills, harm is thus necessary but sometimes insufficient to justify legal coercion.

[ 5 ] Legal applications [ edit ] Historical examples [ edit ] The harm principle is found in article 5 of the first English-language constitution from 1647: "An Agreement of the People for a firme and present Peace, upon grounds of common right and freedome...." , presented to the Army Council, E. 412, 21. October 28, 1647: That the laws ought to be equal, so they must be good and not evidently destructive to the safety and well-being of the people.

The harm principle is found in Articles 4 and 5 of the first French constitution (and first nationally adopted constitution) from 1789: Declaration of Human and Civic Rights of 26 August 1789 : Liberty consists in being able to do anything that does not harm others: thus, the exercise of the natural rights of every man has no bounds other than those that ensure to the other members of society the enjoyment of these same rights. These bounds must be determined only by Law. The Law has the right to forbid only those actions that are injurious to society. Nothing that is not forbidden by Law may be hindered, and no one may be compelled to do what the Law does not ordain.

One might rightly argue that the "pursuit of Happiness" mentioned in the 1776 US Declaration of Independence was one of the "tastes and pursuits" that Mill had in mind: We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness . . .

Restrictions [ edit ] In On Liberty , J. S. Mill writes that his principle does not apply to persons judged as mentally ill, " barbarians " (which he assimilated to minors) and minors [ 6 ] while the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen did not concern women, slaves, foreigners and minors, as they were not citizens.

Modern interpretations of the principle often does not make distinction of race or sex.

In modern policy [ edit ] The harm principle is also found in recent US case law - in the case of the People v Alvarez , from the Supreme Court of California, in May, 2002: In every criminal trial, the prosecution must prove the corpus delicti, or the body of the crime itself - i.e., the fact of injury, loss, or harm, and the existence of a criminal agency as its cause.

The harm principle even found its way into the drug laws of Colombia , in 1994, and again in 2009: In July 2009, the Colombian Supreme Court of Justice reconfirmed the 1994 ruling of the Constitutional Court by determining that the possession of drugs for personal use 'cannot be the object of any punishments,' when the incident occurred 'in the exercise of his personal and private rights, [and] the accused did not harm others.

Even if a self-regarding action results in harm to oneself, it may still be considered beyond the sphere of justifiable state coercion.

Libertarianism [ edit ] The belief "that no one should be forcibly prevented from acting in any way he chooses provided his acts are not invasive of the free acts of others" has become one of the basic principles of libertarian politics.

[ 7 ] The US Libertarian Party includes a version of the harm principle as part of its official party platform . It states: Criminal laws should be limited in their application to violations of the rights of others through force or fraud, or to deliberate actions that place others involuntarily at significant risk of harm. Therefore, we favor the repeal of all laws creating “crimes” without victims . . .

[ 8 ] Broader definitions of harm [ edit ] In the same essay, Mill further explains the principle as a function of two maxims: The maxims are, first, that the individual is not accountable to society for his actions, in so far as these concern the interests of no person but himself. Advice, instruction, persuasion, and avoidance by other people, if thought necessary by them for their own good, are the only measures by which society can justifiably express its dislike or disapprobation of his conduct. Secondly, that for such actions as are prejudicial to the interests of others, the individual is accountable, and may be subjected either to social or to legal punishments, if society is of opinion that the one or the other is requisite for its protection.

(LV2) The second of these maxims has become known as the social authority principle.

[ 9 ] However, the second maxim also raises the question of broader definitions of harm, including harm to the society. Harm is not limited to harm to another individual but can extend to groups or communities, without specifying the affected individuals.

This is an important principle for the purpose of determining harm that only manifests gradually over time—such that the resulting harm can be anticipated, but does not yet exist at the time that the action causing harm was taken. It also applies to other issues—which range from the right of an entity to discharge broadly polluting waste on private property, to broad questions of licensing, and to the right of sedition .

Harm can also result from a failure to meet an obligation. Morality generates obligations. Duty may be exacted from a person in the same way as a debt, and it is part of the notion of duty that a person may be rightfully compelled to fulfill it.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Criticism [ edit ] Stewart Hamish has argued that the harm principle does not provide a narrow scope of which actions count as harmful towards oneself or the population and that it cannot be used to determine whether people can be punished for their actions by the state. A state can determine whether an action is punishable by determining what harm the action causes. If a morally unjust action occurs but leaves no indisputable form of harm, there is no justification for the state to act and punish the perpetrators for their actions. The harm principle has an ambiguous definition of what harm specifically is and what justifies a state to intervene.

[ 10 ] Ben Saunders has also said that the harm principle does not specify on whether the state is justified with intervention tactics. The ambiguity can lead a state to define what counts as a harmful self-regarding action at its own discretion. That freedom might allow for an individual's own liberty and rights to be in danger. It would not be plausible for a state to intervene with an action that will negatively affect the population more than an individual. The harm principle scope of usage has been described as too wide to follow directly and to implement possible punishment by a state.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Ahimsa Classical liberalism Primum non nocere - "first, to do no harm" Do no significant harm principle (DNSH) Law of equal liberty Legal good Libertarianism Negative utilitarianism Non-aggression principle Wiccan Rede References [ edit ] ^ a b "Freedom of Speech" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 17 April 2008 . Retrieved 10 June 2013 .

^ Mill, John Stuart (1869).

"Chapter 1" .

On Liberty (4 ed.). London. p.

22 – via Wikisource .

{{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Amendment I (Religion): Thomas Jefferson, Notes on the State of Virginia, Query 17, 157--61" .

^ a b Mill, John Stuart (1859).

On Liberty . Oxford, England: Oxford University . pp.

21– 22 . Retrieved February 27, 2008 .

^ a b Menezes Oliveira, Jorge (2012).

"Harm and Offence in Mill's Conception of Liberty" . Oxford, England: University of Oxford . p. 13.

^ Monahan, J. (December 1977).

"John Stuart Mill on the liberty of the mentally ill: a historical note" .

American Journal of Psychiatry .

134 (12): 1428– 1429.

doi : 10.1176/ajp.134.12.1428 .

ISSN 0002-953X .

PMID 335904 .

^ Hamowy, Ronald, ed. (2008).

The Encyclopaedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications . p. xxi.

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

^ "2016 Platform" . Libertarian National Committee. 2016 . Retrieved 25 February 2017 .

^ Rossi, Philip J. (2012).

The Social Authority of Reason . Albany, New York: SUNY Press . p. 60.

ISBN 978-0791483367 .

^ Stewart, Hamish (2009-08-23). "The Limits of the Harm Principle".

Criminal Law and Philosophy .

4 (1): 17– 35.

doi : 10.1007/s11572-009-9082-9 .

ISSN 1871-9791 .

S2CID 144027938 .

^ Saunders, Ben (2016-08-30).

"Reformulating Mill's Harm Principle" .

Mind .

125 (500): 1005– 1032.

doi : 10.1093/mind/fzv171 .

hdl : 1893/18198 .

ISSN 0026-4423 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Feinberg, Joel (1984).

The Moral Limits of the Criminal Law . London, England: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0199878574 .

External links [ edit ] Baselines , at Legal Theory Blog .

"Mill's Moral and Political Philosophy" .

Mill's Moral and Political Philosophy: 3.6 The Harm Principle .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2018.

v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐l45tm
Cached time: 20250816113005
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.542 seconds
Real time usage: 0.664 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2516/1000000
Revision size: 15590/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 128672/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7114/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 66366/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.318/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7243090/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  518.643      1 -total
 33.35%  172.993      1 Template:Reflist
 28.36%  147.104      1 Template:Liberalism_sidebar
 27.89%  144.642      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.84%   87.328      2 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 13.66%   70.845      1 Template:Short_description
  9.85%   51.090      3 Template:Navbox
  9.63%   49.966      1 Template:Libertarianism
  8.15%   42.278      1 Template:Excerpt
  7.87%   40.802      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:607960:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816113005 and revision id 1298483706. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harm_principle&oldid=1298483706 " Categories : Classical liberalism Ethical principles 1859 introductions John Stuart Mill Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from August 2016 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 20:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harm principle 15 languages Add topic

