Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 1.1 Examples 1.2 Industrial applications 2 References Toggle the table of contents Deposition (phase transition) 37 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oromoo Polski Qaraqalpaqsha Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Phase transition from gas to solid This article needs additional or more specific categories .

Please help out by adding categories to it so that it can be listed with similar articles.

( January 2025 ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Water vapour from humid winter-air deposits directly into a solid, crystalline frost pattern on a window, without ever being liquid in the process.

Deposition is the phase transition in which gas transforms into solid without passing through the liquid phase . Deposition is a thermodynamic process . The reverse of deposition is sublimation and hence sometimes deposition is called desublimation .

Applications [ edit ] Examples [ edit ] One example of deposition is the process by which, in sub-freezing air , water vapour changes directly to ice without first becoming a liquid . This is how frost and hoar frost form on the ground or other surfaces, including leaves. For deposition to occur, thermal energy must be removed from a gas. When the air becomes cold enough, water vapour in the air surrounding a leaf loses enough thermal energy to change into a solid. Even though the air temperature may be below the dew point , the water vapour in the air alone may not condense spontaneously. This supercooled water vapour, when around a leaf, immediately begins to condense. Since it is already past the freezing point, the water vapour changes directly into solid frost.

Soot accumulates as an aerosol deposition. In a fireplace, soot is deposited on the walls of the chimney. Soot particles are aerosolized within volatile organic compounds . These VOCs are in a hot and gaseous state, rising from the fire. When the VOCs come into contact with the walls, they cool, and change to the solid state, without formation of the liquid state. The soot particles also cling to the walls upon contact. This process is made use of industrially in combustion chemical vapour deposition .

Industrial applications [ edit ] There is an industrial coating process, known as evaporative deposition , whereby a solid material is heated to the gaseous state in a low-pressure chamber, the gas molecules travel across the chamber space and then deposit to the solid state on a target surface, forming a smooth and thin layer on the target surface. Again, the molecules do not go through an intermediate liquid state when going from the gas to the solid. See also physical vapor deposition , which is a class of processes used to deposit thin films of various materials onto various surfaces.

Deposition releases energy and is an exothermic phase change.

References [ edit ] Gaja, Shiv P., Fundamentals of Atmospheric Modeling, Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed., 2005, p. 525 ISBN 978-0-521-83970-9 Moore, John W., et al., Principles of Chemistry: The Molecular Science, Brooks Cole, 2009, p. 387 ISBN 978-0-495-39079-4 Whitten, Kenneth W., et al., Chemistry, Brooks-Cole, 9th ed., 2009, p. 7 ISBN 978-0-495-39163-0 Focus on Physical Science . Glencoe Science.

v t e States of matter ( list , timeline ) State Solid Liquid Gas / Vapor Supercritical fluid Plasma Low energy Bose–Einstein condensate Fermionic condensate Degenerate matter Quantum Hall Rydberg matter Strange matter Superfluid Supersolid Photonic molecule High energy QCD matter Quark–gluon plasma Color-glass condensate Other states Colloid Crystal Liquid crystal Time crystal Quantum spin liquid Exotic matter Programmable matter Dark matter Antimatter Magnetically ordered Antiferromagnet Ferrimagnet Ferromagnet String-net liquid Superglass Phase transitions Boiling Boiling point Condensation Critical line Critical point Crystallization Deposition Evaporation Flash evaporation Freezing Chemical ionization Ionization Lambda point Melting Melting point Recombination Regelation Saturated fluid Sublimation Supercooling Triple point Vaporization Vitrification Quantities Enthalpy of fusion Enthalpy of sublimation Enthalpy of vaporization Latent heat Latent internal energy Trouton's rule Volatility Concepts Baryonic matter Binodal Compressed fluid Cooling curve Equation of state Leidenfrost effect Macroscopic quantum phenomena Mpemba effect Order and disorder (physics) Spinodal Superconductivity Superheated vapor Superheating Thermo-dielectric effect Authority control databases : National United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deposition_(phase_transition)&oldid=1295410099 " Category : Phase transitions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional categories from January 2025 Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 15:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deposition (phase transition) 37 languages Add topic

