Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of Eretria Toggle History of Eretria subsection 1.1 Prehistory 1.2 Archaic to Roman period 1.2.1 Macedonian period 1.2.2 Roman period 2 Site monuments Toggle Site monuments subsection 2.1 Temple of Apollo Daphnephoros 2.2 The ancient theatre of Eretria 2.3 Temple of Isis 2.4 House with the mosaics 2.5 Macedonian tomb of Erotes 2.6 Tholos 2.7 Gymnasium and Eileithyia's sanctuary 3 Modern Eretria 4 Municipality 5 Historical population 6 Notable people 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Eretria 39 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Български Cebuano Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lietuvių مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°23′53″N 23°47′26″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.39806°N 23.79056°E ﻿ / 38.39806; 23.79056 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Town in Euboea, Greece For the African country, see Eritrea .

For other uses, see Eretria (disambiguation) .

Municipality in Greece Eretria Ερέτρια Municipality The ancient theatre with the gymnasion Eretria Location within the region Coordinates: 38°23′53″N 23°47′26″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.39806°N 23.79056°E ﻿ / 38.39806; 23.79056 Country Greece Administrative region Central Greece Regional unit Euboea Area • Municipality 168.56 km 2 (65.08 sq mi) • Municipal unit 58.65 km 2 (22.64 sq mi) Elevation 8 m (26 ft) Population (2021) [ 1 ] • Municipality 10,652 • Density 63/km 2 (160/sq mi) • Municipal unit 6,567 • Municipal unit density 110/km 2 (290/sq mi) Time zone UTC+2 ( EET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+3 ( EEST ) Postal code 340 08 Area code(s) 22290 Vehicle registration ΧΑ Neighbouring ancient cities Plan of the site Eretria ( / ə ˈ r iː t r i ə / ; Greek : Ερέτρια , Erétria , Ancient Greek : Ἐρέτρια , Erétria , literally 'city of the rowers') is a town in Euboea , Greece , facing the coast of Attica across the narrow South Euboean Gulf . It was an important Greek polis in the 6th and 5th century BC, mentioned by many famous writers and actively involved in significant historical events.

Excavations of the ancient city began in the 1890s and have been conducted since 1964 by the Greek Archaeological Service (11th Ephorate of Antiquities) and the Swiss School of Archaeology in Greece .

[ 2 ] History of Eretria [ edit ] Prehistory [ edit ] The first evidence for human activity in the area of Eretria are pottery shards and stone artifacts from the late Neolithic period (3500–3000 BC) found on the Acropolis as well as in the plain. No permanent structures have yet been found. It is therefore unclear whether a permanent settlement existed at that time.

The first known settlement from the Early Helladic period (3000–2000 BC) was located on the plain. A granary and several other buildings, as well as a pottery kiln, have been found so far. This settlement was moved to the top of the Acropolis in the Middle Helladic period (2000–1600 BC) because the plain was flooded by the nearby lagoon. In the Late Helladic period (1600–1100 BC), the population dwindled and the remains found so far have been interpreted as an observation post. The site was abandoned during the Greek Dark Ages .

Archaic to Roman period [ edit ] The oldest archaeological finds date the foundation of the city to the Greek Dark Ages.

Ancient Greek polychrome antefix, featuring a Gorgona.

Archaeological Museum of Eretria Statue of a youth found in the gymnasium, now in the National Archaeological Museum in Athens The earliest surviving mention of Eretria was by Homer ( Iliad 2.537), who listed Eretria as one of the Greek cities which sent ships to the Trojan War . In the 8th century BC, Eretria and her near neighbour and rival, Chalcis , were both powerful and prosperous trading cities. Eretria controlled the Aegean islands of Andros , Tenos and Ceos . They also held territory in Boeotia on the Greek mainland. Eretria was also involved in the Greek colonisation and founded the colonies of Pithekoussai and Cumae in Italy together with Chalcis.

Coin of Eretria, 500–490 BC. Silver obol . Obverse: Facing head of cow. Reverse: Octopus in incuse square.

At the end of the 8th century BC, however, Eretria and Chalcis fought a prolonged war (known mainly from the account in Thucydides as the Lelantine War ) for control of the fertile Lelantine plain. Little is known of the details of this war, but it is clear that Eretria was defeated. The city was destroyed and Eretria lost her lands in Boeotia and her Aegean dependencies. Neither Eretria nor Chalcis ever again counted for much in Greek politics. As a result of this defeat, Eretria turned to colonisation. She planted colonies in the northern Aegean , on the coast of Macedon , in Italy , and in Sicily .

It became an important city in the 6th/5th century BC mentioned by many famous writers and actively involved in significant historical events.

[ 3 ] The Eretrians were Ionians and were thus natural allies of Athens . When the Ionian Greeks in Asia Minor rebelled against Persia in 499 BC, Eretria joined Athens in sending aid to the rebels, because Miletus had supported Eretria in the Lelantine War. The rebels burned Sardis , but were defeated and the Eretrian general Eualcides was killed.

Darius made a point of punishing Eretria during his invasion of Greece. In 490 BC the city was sacked and burned by the Persians under the admiral Datis . In retribution for the stout resistance, the victors killed all the male citizens and deported women and children barefoot to Arderikka in Susiana , Persia, forcing them into slavery. The Persians also destroyed the great temple of Apollo , built around 510 BC; parts of a pediment were found in 1900, including the torso of a statue of Athena .

Eretria was rebuilt shortly afterwards and took part with 600 hoplites in the Battle of Plataea (479 BC). The ancient writer Plutarch mentions a woman of Eretria, "who was kept by Artabanus" at the Persian court of Artaxerxes , who facilitated the audience that Themistocles obtained with the Persian king.

[ 4 ] During the fifth century BC the whole of Euboea became part of the Delian League , which later became the Athenian Empire . Eretria and other cities of Euboea rebelled unsuccessfully against Athens in 446 BC. During the Peloponnesian War Eretria was an Athenian ally against her Dorian rivals Sparta and Corinth . But soon the Eretrians, along with the rest of the Empire, found Athenian domination oppressive. When the Spartans defeated the Athenians at the Battle of Eretria in 411 BC, the Euboean cities all rebelled.

After her eventual defeat by Sparta in 404 BC, Athens soon recovered and re-established her hegemony over Euboea, which was an essential source of grain for the urban population. The Eretrians rebelled again in 349 BC and this time the Athenians could not recover control. In 343 BC supporters of Philip II of Macedon gained control of the city, but the Athenians under Demosthenes recaptured it in 341 BC.

Macedonian period [ edit ] The Battle of Chaeronea in 338 BC, in which Philip defeated the combined armies of the rest of the Greeks, marked the end of the Greek cities as independent states. However, under Macedonian rule Eretria experienced a new period of prosperity which lasted until the 3rd century as attested by many inscriptions, by extensions to the west and south sections of the walls and by many other private and public new buildings including the circus.

From 318 to 312 BC King Cassander lived at Eretria [ 5 ] and commissioned the painter Philoxenus of Eretria to paint the battle of Issus , [ 6 ] [ 7 ] of which the famous Alexander Mosaic [ 8 ] in the Naples museum is a copy [ 9 ] and the wall paintings in Phillip's tomb at Vergina are connected.

From 304 BC Demetrius I granted the city partial autonomy. During this time the city was governed by Menedemos who founded the Eretrian school of philosophy. After the Chremonidean War (267–262 BC) a permanent Macedonian garrison was installed.

Roman period [ edit ] In 198 BC in the Second Macedonian War Eretria was plundered by the Romans. The admiral Lucius Quinctius Flamininus was joined by the allied fleets of Attalus I of Pergamon and of Rhodes, and used them in besieging Eretria. He eventually took the town during a night-time assault during which the citizens surrendered. Flamininus came away with a large collection of art works as his share of the booty.

[ 10 ] Eretria became an object of contention between the Romans and Macedonians, but was given partial independence and experienced a new period of prosperity. Under the Romans, athletic contests for children and youths called the Romaia were held.

In 87 BC it was finally destroyed in the First Mithridatic War and gradually declined further.

Ancient polygonal city walls on the acropolis Site monuments [ edit ] Many remains of the ancient city can be seen today including: Parts of the city walls and gates (of 4 km length) The Theatre Palaces I and II Upper and Lower Gymnasiums House of the mosaics The Baths Temple of Apollo Daphnephoros Temple of Artemis Temple of Isis Temple of Dionysos The Acropolis Macedonian tomb Temple of Apollo Daphnephoros [ edit ] Temple of Apollo Daphnephoros Temple of Apollo pediment sculptures The temple of Apollo Daphnephoros is the most important and wider known monument of Eretria, featuring sparkling and sharp sculptures on the pediments, their postures well in advance of experiments in Athens of the time.

[ 11 ] Together with its enclosure it constituted the sacred temenos of Apollo, a religious centre and fundamental place of worship within the core of the ancient city, to the north of the Agora.

According to the Homeric hymn to Apollo, when the god was seeking for a location to found its oracle, he arrived to the Lelantine plain. The first temple is dated to the Geometric period and was situated probably near the harbour, as the sea then reached the area of the Agora.  The hecatompedon (hundred-footer) apsidal edifice is the earliest in its type among those mentioned by Homer, and slightly after the hecatompedon temple of Hera on the island of Samos . It was flanked to the south by another apsidal building which also came to light: the so-called Daphniforio or "space with laurels" (7.5 x 11.5m) is the most ancient edifice in Eretria, related to the early cult of Apollo in Delphi .

At the centre of this edifice were preserved the clay bases supporting the laurel trunks that propped up the roof. In the early sixteenth century a second hecatompedon temple was erected through earth fills upon its Geometric predecessor, on a solid artificial terrace. This temple had wooden columns (six at the narrow sides and nineteen at the longer sides), and was subsequently covered with earth in order to build the later and most renowned of all temples in the city.

Construction started at the late sixth century BC (520-490 BC) and the temple was perhaps still unfinished when the Persians razed the city in 490 BC.

Poros stone and marble were the materials used for this Doric peristyle (surrounded by colonnades) temple (6 x 14 columns). It had a prodomos (anteroom) and an opisthodomos (back section) arranged with two columns in antis; the cella (in Greek sekos was divided into three naves by two interior colonnades.  After the destruction of the city by the Persians , the temple was repaired and remained in use; yet in 198 BC it was destroyed again, this time by the Romans, a fact which initiated the gradual abandonment and dilapidation of the monument until the first century BC. Some important sculptures were found and are displayed in the Chalcis museum. One of the Amazons was salvaged in antiquity and carried off to Rome. Several Niobids perhaps from the pediment of the temple were probably taken to Rome by Augustus [ 12 ] including the dying Niobid and the running Niobid (now in the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek).

[ 13 ] The majority of architectural parts from this temple and other sanctuaries of the city were re-used as construction material; only a few (column) drums together with fragmented capitals and triglyphs remain from the superstructure of the monument.

Of the sumptuous sculptural decoration survive only parts of the west pediment featuring in relief the fight of the Amazons (or Amazonomachy, a usual motif for the iconography at the time). The centre was occupied by Athena and is partially preserved, depicting her trunk with the Gorgoneion on the thorax; a superb work of art is the complex of Theseus and Antiope marked by sensitivity and softness of the form, internal force and clarity, despite the ornamental tendency obvious in the coiffures and the folds of their clothes. These sculptures are impregnated by the rules of archaic plasticity; the analogies are rendered in an innovative manner, a precursor to the idealization and the force of the classical art. The entire composition supposedly featured chariots to Athena's right and left, one chariot presumably carrying Theseus and Antiope , while Hercules might ride the other, and the picture could be complemented by fighting Amazons and a dead warrior. The east pediment possibly narrated the Gigantomachy (fight of the Giants). The details of the faces and the clothes were coloured, thus rendering the depiction more vivid. Fragmented sculptures that may be part of the temple after the destruction by the Persians (warrior, Amazon and Athena's trunk) have been located in Rome . Today are visible only the foundations of the Post-Archaic temple, as well as remains of the Geometric temples uncovered in lower deposits.

The temples in the temenos of Apollo Daphniforos were excavated between 1899 and 1910 by Κ. Kourouniotis .  Further investigations were conducted by Mrs.

I. Konstantinou and by the Swiss Archaeological School .

The ancient theatre of Eretria [ edit ] The most impressive monument of ancient Eretria, one of the oldest known theatres , lies in the western section of town, between the western gate, the stadium and the upper gymnasium; the temple of Dionysos was found at its south-west end. As indicated by the architectural remains of the scene, the initial construction phase followed the invasion by the Persians and the reconstruction of the city in the fifth century BC, whereas the fourth century BC marked the site's peak.

A striking fact is the construction of the cavea (Gr.

koilo , auditorium) on an artificial hill surrounded by numerous retaining walls, instead of taking advantage of the citadel's slopes.  During the first building phase, the scene looked like a palace, disposed of five adjacent rectangle rooms and found itself at the same level as the circular orchestra, leading to it via three entrances. At its peak (fourth century BC), the theatre suffered transformations and was shaped to a large extent in its present form.  The cavea comprised eleven tiers divided by ten staircases.  The circular orchestra was transferred for 8m to the north, and was lowered by 3m.  The scene was amplified by two backstages connected through a portico with an Ionic façade, thus raising above the orchestra.  This difference in heights was evened up by a vaulted underground gallery, leading through the scene to the centre of the orchestra; this was in all probability the "charonian stairway" (stairs of Hades ) allowing actors impersonating chthonic deities and the dead to appear and perform at the orchestra.

Local poros stone was used for the foundation and limestone for the parodoi (passageways), which sloped to the orchestra in order to diminish the difference in height with the cavea. The theatre seated 6,300 spectators and is reminiscent in form to the Theatre of Dionysos in Athens , after transformation of the latter in 330 BC. Following the destruction of Eretria by the Romans in 198 BC, it was rebuilt with lower quality materials and the rooms to the south of the parodos were then apparently decorated with colour mortars of the first Pompeian style .

Most benches have been looted. There are still the impressive remains of the scene, especially the vaulted underground passage leading to the orchestra centre. Excavation of the monument was undertaken by the American Archaeological School, while the local Ephorate of Antiquities strived greatly for its restoration.

Temple of Isis [ edit ] Temple of Isis at Eretria Among the most interesting monuments of ancient Eretria is the Iseion, a temple sacred to the goddess Isis and other Egyptian deities . Situated to the south of the town, between the baths and the Lower Gymnasium or the palaistra (wrestling area) , it extends behind the small harbour, a detail that correlates the temenos with merchants who had their interests in Eretria. According to excavation and inscription testimonies, the temple was probably built in the fourth century BC and was surrounded by other edifices and auxiliary spaces. The initiation to the cult of Isis and the Egyptian deities occurred during the Hellenistic period by Greek merchants who came to Greece from Egypt after the unification of the then known world by Alexander the Great . Their worship in Eretria has also been attested by inscriptions, of which the most important is set on a limestone block to the left of the prodomos (anteroom) before the cella.

The temple of Isis was initially simple and oriented to the east, with a prodomos that was distyle (two-columned) in antis. The ceremonial clay statue of the goddess stood on a base within the cella.  In front of the temple was the altar and nearby a small drain tank. The temple was reconstructed after the destruction of the city by the Romans in 198 BC: it then acquired a larger external prodomos on ameliorated foundations and was surrounded by porticoes on three sides (north, south and west). Only the south-west end of the portico was covered by a roof.  The columns were later replaced by a parapet. At the centre of the east forecourt was a portal facing the entrance of the sanctuary. Fifteen more edifices and auxiliary spaces lied to the north, considered by the excavators as places of purification. Among them was a courtyard and an andren (dining hall for male residents), while one room of the complex had a superb mosaic floor featuring lozenges.

Excavations at the temenos sacred to Isis and other Egyptian deities were conducted in 1917 by the then Ephor of Antiquities for the island of Evia (Euboea), Ι. Papadakis. In recent years, the Archaeological Service of the Ministry of Culture undertook further excavations in the wider area of the temple, which brought to light an additional complex of courtyards and rooms directly related to the sanctuary.

House with the mosaics [ edit ] House of the mosaics This splendid house was built in ca. 370 B.C. and remained in use for about a century. It is distinguished by its floors, covered with elegant pebble mosaics representing mythological scenes: Nereids on the back of a seahorse, legendary battles between Arimaspians and griffins , sphinxes and panthers . The building is a representative specimen of the Classical and Hellenistic domestic architecture.

In the first century BC a funerary monument with a massive rectangular peribolos was erected over the ruins of the house.

The monument was excavated between 1975 and 1980.

Macedonian tomb of Erotes [ edit ] The so-called " tomb of Erotes " lies on a hill to the northwest of Eretria city and counts among the most significant monuments of Evia island.  Based on the findings, it is dated to the fourth century BC, the time when these characteristic burial monuments of the Macedonian type make their appearance in southern Greece after the descent of the Macedons. More Macedonian tombs were found in the wider area around Eretria, namely in the settlements of Kotroni and Amarynthos .

The tomb of Erotes consists of a single vaulted chamber and a dromos (entrance passageway) of stone and bricks.  The burial chamber is reminiscent of a residential room; it is built of poros stone plastered with white mortar. During the excavation were found two replicas of painted stone thrones bearing relief decoration.  At the rear corners of the burial chamber were two marble bed-shaped sarcophagi .  The tomb had been pillaged.  Among the findings today exhibited in the New York Metropolitan Museum , are bronze vases and clay statuettes of Erotes (Amors), which inspired the tomb's conventional name.  Above the tomb was uncovered a stone-built construction, probably the basis of a sepulchre.

The monument was excavated in 1897 and is well preserved to date.

Tholos Tholos [ edit ] Excavations carried out by the Greek Archaeological Service have revealed the limestone foundations and crepis of a circular building.  It was erected in the fifth century BC in the Agora of the city, and underwent several modifications in the fourth and the third centuries BC. A circular bothros has also survived at the centre of the monument.

Upper Gymnasion Gymnasium and Eileithyia's sanctuary [ edit ] In 1917, archaeologists uncovered traces of a gymnasium dating to the 4th century BC. A sanctuary dedicated to Eileithyia , had been placed in the northwestern section of the building. Also, excavations in the area of the sanctuary found a well containing some 100 terracotta cups dating to the 3rd century BC. In 2018, new excavations in the area revealed more buildings.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Modern Eretria [ edit ] View of the harbour The office of the Swiss School of Archaeology in Greece at Eretria.

Modern Eretria was created in 1824 by refugees from Psara after the Destruction of Psara , who gave to their settlement the name "Nea Psara". The ancient name was revived during the first years of the independent Greek state. The new city plan was appointed by Stamatios Kleanthis and Eduard Schaubert .

[ 17 ] The modern town of Eretria is now a popular beachside resort. The historic and archaeological finds from Eretria and Lefkandi are displayed in the Eretria Museum , established by the Swiss School of Archaeology in Greece .

The town can be reached from Skala Oropou , Attica by ferry or via Halkida by road.  It is an important station on the way to the south of the island.  It has many taverns and a long beach promenade.  The archaeological excavations are located on the northern edge of the modern town.

Municipality [ edit ] The municipality Eretria was formed at the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following two former municipalities, that became municipal units: [ 18 ] Amarynthos Eretria The municipality has an area of 168.557 km 2 , the municipal unit 58.648 km 2 .

[ 19 ] Historical population [ edit ] Year Town Municipal unit Municipality 1981 3,711 - - 1991 3,022 4,987 - 2001 3,156 5,969 - 2011 4,166 6,330 13,053 2021 - 6,567 12,652 Notable people [ edit ] Achaeus , tragic playwright Menedemus (345/4-261/0 BC), Greek philosopher Philoxenus (4th century BC), painter See also [ edit ] List of traditional Greek place names References [ edit ] ^ "Αποτελέσματα Απογραφής Πληθυσμού - Κατοικιών 2021, Μόνιμος Πληθυσμός κατά οικισμό" [Results of the 2021 Population - Housing Census, Permanent population by settlement] (in Greek). Hellenic Statistical Authority. 29 March 2024.

^ http://www.unil.ch/esag ESAG ^ Herodotus, The Histories VI 100 ^ Plutarch's Lives , Volume 1, The Dryden translation, ISBN 0-375-75676-0 , p. 165 ^ Eretria, Ministry of Culture, ISBN 960-214-136-0 ^ Pliny, Natural History xxxv. 10, 36 ^ Kleiner, Fred S. (2008).

Gardner's Art Through the Ages: A Global History . Cengage Learning. p. 142.

ISBN 0-495-11549-5 .

^ Alexander Mosaic by Dr. Beth Harris and Dr. Steven Zucker, Smarthistory, 2013 ^ Pliny the Elder, XXXV, 110 ^ Smith, William Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology , Vol. II (1867) ^ Greek Sculpture, the Archaic Period, John Boardman, ISBN 0 500 18166 7 ^ Autori Vari, Palazzo Massimo alle Terme [collegamento interrotto], a cura di Adriano La Regina, Mondadori Electa, 1998, ISBN 978-88-435-6609-9 ^ Eugenio La Rocca & M. Cima, Horti romani. Ideologia e autorappresentazione. Atti del Convegno internazionale (Roma, 4-6 maggio 1995), Roma, L'Erma di Bretschneider, 1998, ISBN 978-88-826-5021-6 .

^ Saraceni, Jessica Esther (October 17, 2018).

"Ancient Gymnasium Uncovered on Greek Island of Evia" .

Archaeology Magazine .

^ "2018 excavations of the South Palaestra in Eretria, Greece" .

The Archaeology News Network . 17 October 2018. Archived from the original on 17 October 2018.

^ "Η Νότια Παλαίστρα στην Ερέτρια, ανασκαφές 2018" .

www.culture.gr (in Greek). Archived from the original on 2 December 2018.

^ Δήμος Ερέτρειας, Η ιστορία μας Archived 2011-06-27 at the Wayback Machine , ανακτήθηκε 4 Δεκεμβρίου 2010 ^ "ΦΕΚ A 87/2010, Kallikratis reform law text" (in Greek).

Government Gazette .

^ "Population & housing census 2001 (incl. area and average elevation)" (PDF) (in Greek). National Statistical Service of Greece. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-09-21.

Further reading [ edit ] ESAG, Eretria. A guide to the ancient city , Infolio éditions, Gollion, 2004.

ISBN 2-88474-112-7 ESAG, ERETRIA Series, Excavations and researches Keith G. Walker, "Archaic Eretria. A Political and Social History from the Earliest Times to 490 BC", Routledge, London, 2004.

External links [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Eretria .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eretria .

ESAG - Eretria The Swiss School Website of the excavations at Eretria Perseus – Eretria Links to resources about ancient Eretria Greek Ministry of Culture Eretria Ferry boats Eretria Dream island beach photo Eretria photo by night Photos of Eretria Ministry of Culture and Sports v t e Administrative division of the Central Greece Region Area 15,549 km 2 (6,004 sq mi) Population 547,390 (as of 2011) Municipalities 25 (since 2011 ) Capital Lamia Regional unit of Boeotia Aliartos-Thespies Distomo-Arachova-Antikyra Livadeia Orchomenos Tanagra Thebes Regional unit of Euboea Chalcis Dirfys-Messapia Eretria Istiaia-Aidipsos Karystos Kymi-Aliveri Mantoudi-Limni-Agia Anna Skyros Regional unit of Evrytania Agrafa Karpenisi Regional unit of Phocis Delphi Dorida Regional unit of Phthiotis Amfikleia-Elateia Domokos Kamena Vourla Lamia Lokroi Makrakomi Stylida Regional governor Fanis Spanos (since 2019 ) Decentralized Administration Thessaly and Central Greece v t e Subdivisions of the municipality of Eretria Municipal unit of Amarynthos Amarynthos Ano Vatheia Gymno Kallithea Seta Municipal unit of Eretria Eretria v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eretria&oldid=1293080708 " Categories : Populated places in Euboea Municipalities of Central Greece Eretria Ancient Eretria Cities in ancient Greece Populated places in ancient Euboea Populated places established in 1824 Former populated places in Greece Members of the Delian League Ancient Greek cities Greek city-states Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 Greek-language sources (el) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Use British English from January 2015 This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 15:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eretria 39 languages Add topic

