Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Emergence 2 Merger with the National-Social Association 3 Merger into the Progressive People's Party 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Free-minded Union 7 languages Беларуская Deutsch Español Français Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political party in Germany Free-minded Union Freisinnige Vereinigung Founded 1893 Dissolved 6 March 1910 Split from German Free-minded Party Merged into Progressive People's Party Ideology Liberalism Economic liberalism Social liberalism National liberalism Political position Centre to centre-left Colours Yellow Politics of Germany Political parties Elections The Free-minded Union ( German : Freisinnige Vereinigung ; FVG ) or Radical Union [ 1 ] [ 2 ] was a liberal party in the German Empire that existed from 1893 to 1910.

Emergence [ edit ] Inside its predecessor, the German Free-minded Party , there had always been tensions between the leftist and the moderate wing. Another contentious point was the personalist style of leader Eugen Richter . When Chancellor Leo von Caprivi presented an army bill in parliament on 6 May 1893, seven Free-minded representatives, among them Georg von Siemens , decided to accept the motion. Consequently, Richter urged successfully the expulsion of the deviants. Other moderate party members, including Ludwig Bamberger and Theodor Barth , left voluntarily and formed the Free-minded Union. The left liberal wing of the Free-mindeds, loyal to Richter, assembled in the Free-minded People's Party The new party focused on political and economically liberal positions. In the federal election of 1893 , it won 13 seats. The union was initially more a loose electoral alliance than a real party. Its organisational structure was very weak. Its stronghold were in northern and eastern Germany. Together with the governing National Liberal Party and unlike the German Free-minded Party , the Free-minded Union supported the Imperial Navy arms race and the German colonial policy.

Merger with the National-Social Association [ edit ] In 1903, the electoral unsuccessful social liberal and progressive Christian National-Social Association , led by the parson Friedrich Naumann , merged into the Free-minded Union. This brought new members, including Hellmut von Gerlach , to the party. Both the organisational structure and the programmatical outlook changed from this incident on. Influenced by the ideas of Joseph Chamberlain , the party tended now to compassion towards the masses of the working class, but also tried to strengthen the German national position outwards by closing the ranks of the middle and working classes . This was compatible with the union's liberal nationalist line. The gain of the National Socials' local structures led to a development of a loose notables' association towards a members' party. However, the party could not really win the support of the working class and did not become a major party.

Merger into the Progressive People's Party [ edit ] From 1905 onward, the Free-minded Union cooperated increasingly with the other left liberals, namely the Free-minded People's Party and the German People's Party . In 1907, the three parties drafted a common electoral program for the elections to the Reichstag . Afterwards, they formed a common parliamentary group, which was part of the pro-government imperialist Bernhard von Bülow bloc together with the Conservatives and National Liberals . The party's own left-wing and pacifist faction, including Theodor Barth , Hellmut von Gerlach , Rudolf Breitscheid and feminist Helene Lange , were discontent with this step and left to form the Democratic Union .

In 1910, the Free-minded Union, Free-minded People's Party and German People's Party merged into the Progressive People's Party .

References [ edit ] ^ Kurlander, Eric (2007).

The Landscapes of Liberalism: Particularism and Progressive Politics in Two Borderland Regions . University of Toronto Press. p. 125.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Zucker, Stanley (1975).

Ludwig Bamberger: German Liberal Political and Social Critic, 1823-1899 . University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 239.

External links [ edit ] Freisinnige Vereinigung 1893-1910 . Website of the Deutsches Historisches Museum (German Historical Museum) (in German).

Preceded by German Free-minded Party liberal German parties 1893-1910 Succeeded by Progressive People's Party v t e Political parties in Germany until the end of World War I Socialist General German Workers' Association (ADAV) Lassallean General German Workers' Association (LADAV) Social Democratic Workers' Party of Germany (SDAP) Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany (MSPD) Catholic Centre Party (Zentrum) Liberal Social liberal German Progress Party (DFP) Democratic People's Party (DVP) German People's Party (DtVP) Liberal Union (LV) German Free-minded Party (DFsP) Free-minded People's Party (FVP) Free-minded Union (FV) National-Social Association (NSV) Democratic Union (DV) Progressive People's Party (FVP) National liberal National Liberal Party (NLP) Imperial Liberal Party (LRP) Conservative Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) Christian Social Party (CSP) German Fatherland Party Conservative Party (Prussia) Antisemitic German Reform Party (DRP) German Social Party (DSP) German Social Reform Party (DSRP) Regionalist Saxon People's Party German-Hanoverian Party (DHP) Bavarian Peasants' League (BB) Polish Party Danish Party Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Free-minded_Union&oldid=1274725522 " Categories : Political parties established in 1893 1893 establishments in Germany Political parties of the German Empire Liberal parties in Germany National liberal parties Political parties disestablished in 1910 1910 disestablishments in Germany Defunct liberal political parties Radical parties Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 8 February 2025, at 22:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Free-minded Union 7 languages Add topic

