Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Modern archaeological discoveries 2 Attractions 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Assos 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Kiswahili Latina مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Wolof 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 39°29′16″N 26°20′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.48778°N 26.33694°E ﻿ / 39.48778; 26.33694 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Town in Turkey For the village on the Ionian island Cephalonia, see Asos .

Assos Ἄσσος Behramkale Ruins of the Temple of Athena in Assos Shown within Marmara Show map of Marmara Assos (Turkey) Show map of Turkey Location Ayvacık , Çanakkale Province , Turkey Region Troad Coordinates 39°29′16″N 26°20′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.48778°N 26.33694°E ﻿ / 39.48778; 26.33694 Type Settlement History Builder Colonists from Mithymna Founded 10th century BC Associated with Aristotle Site notes Website Assos Archaeological Site Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assos .

Map of Assos Assos ( / ˈ æ s ɒ s / ; Ancient Greek : Ἄσσος , Latin : Assus ) was an ancient Greek city near today's Behramkale ( pronounced [behˈɾamkale] ) or Behram for short, which most people still call by its ancient name of Assos. It is located on the Aegean coast in the Ayvacık district of Çanakkale province , Turkey . It is on the southern side of Biga Peninsula (better known by its ancient name of the Troad ). Assos sits on the coast of the Adramyttian Gulf (Turkish: Edremit Körfezi [ 1 ] ) and used to offer the only good harbour along the 80 kilometres (50 mi) of coast which made it very important for shipping in the Troad.

[ 1 ] During Pliny the Elder 's lifetime (1st century AD), the city was also known as Apollonia (Ἀπολλωνία).

[ 2 ] Assos' most famous resident was the Greek philosopher Aristotle . Assos is also the birthplace of Cleanthes , who later was to succeed Zeno of Citium as head of the Stoic school of philosophy. The Acts of the Apostles [ 3 ] also refers to visits to the city by Luke the Evangelist and Paul the Apostle .

[ 4 ] Today, Assos is a holiday retreat amid ancient ruins. In 2017 it was inscribed on the UNESCO Tentative list of World Heritage Sites in Turkey .

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Temple of Athena in Assos, overlooking the Aegean Ancient theatre of Assos overlooking the Aegean, with the island of Lesbos on the horizon to the right City walls The city was founded from 1000 to 900 BC by Aeolian colonists from Lesbos , who are said to have come from Methymna .

[ citation needed ] The settlers built a Doric Temple to Athena on top of the dominant crag in 530 BC.

[ 6 ] From this temple Hermias of Atarneus , a student of Plato , ruled Assos, the Troad and Lesbos during the town's greatest period of prosperity. (Strangely, Hermias was actually the slave of the ruler of Atarneus.

[ 7 ] ) Hermias encouraged philosophers to move to the city and one of those who answered the call was Aristotle, who came here in 348 BC and married Hermeias's niece, Pythia. Aristotle founded an Academy in Assos where he became chief amongst a group of philosophers, and together with them, made innovative observations on zoology and biology .

[ 8 ] Assos' 'golden period' ended several years later when the Persians arrived and tortured Hermias to death. Aristotle then fled to Macedonia , which was ruled by his friend King Philip II of Macedon [ 8 ] and where he became tutor to Philip's son, Alexander the Great .

[ 8 ] A modern statue of Aristotle greets visitors at the entrance to Assos.

[ 9 ] The Persians were driven out by Alexander the Great in 334 BC. Not long afterwards Assos became the birthplace of Cleanthes , who later succeeded Zeno of Citium as head of the Stoic school of philosophy in Athens . Between 241 and 133 BC, the city was ruled by the Kings of Pergamon . However, in 133 BC, the Pergamons lost control of the city and it was absorbed into the Roman empire.

[ 1 ] According to Christian tradition, St. Paul visited the city during his third missionary journey (53-57 AD) through Asia Minor on his way to Mytilene on the island of Lesbos .

Acts 20 records that Luke the Evangelist and his companions ('we') "went ahead to the ship and sailed [from Troas ] to Assos, there intending to take Paul on board ... and when he met us at Assos, we took him on board and came to Mitylene".

[ 10 ] From this period onwards, Assos shrunk to the small village it has remained ever since. From the Middle Ages the only relics are the Hüdavendigar Mosque and Bridge dating back to the second half of the 14th century.

[ 11 ] The mosque is on the hilltop near the ruined temple while the bridge is off the road to Ayvacık .

Modern archaeological discoveries [ edit ] The ruins of ancient Assos continue to be excavated.

[ 6 ] In 2018, archaeologists discovered an undamaged Hellenistic family grave with the name "Aristios" written on its cover. The grave contained the remains of a family of twenty-one. One of the family members was buried, while the remaining twenty were cremated and their ashes placed inside urn -like vases. The lids had been sealed with cement to prevent any foreign substance getting inside the urns.

[ 12 ] In 2018, archaeologists also discovered many strigils , some of them iron, but most of them bronze.

[ 13 ] Archaeologists also uncovered a 2,200-year-old Hellenistic lion sculpture and a 1,500-year-old stone oven dating to the Byzantine period . The sculpture was unearthed from a structure used as an inn at that time, and one of the Byzantine period findings contained a cooking stove with three pots.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] The pillars from the ancient port lay in the harbour for over a millennia. Eventually they were probably sold.

Attractions [ edit ] On the acropolis 238 m above sea level stand the remains of the only Doric order temple in Asia Minor, which was dedicated to Athena and dates to 530 BC. Six of the original 38 columns remain. In the early 1900s sculptures of the Temple of Athena were moved to museums including the Louvre .

[ 1 ] The view from the temple extends to nearby Lesbos in the south, to Pergamum in the southeast and to Mount Ida in the east. To the northwest, two massive Hellenic columns still mark the entrance to the city.

[ 1 ] West of the acropolis stands the well preserved 4th century BC city wall and main gate with 14-meter-high (46 ft) towers. An ancient paved road leads northeast through the gate to the ruins of a large 2nd-century BC gymnasium , a 2nd-century BC agora and a bouleuterion . Further south toward the seashore is a 3rd-century BC theatre built for 5,000 spectators.

[ 9 ] Also on the hillside are the remains of a cemetery full of broken sarcophagi which were "able to eat flesh", according to Pliny, hence their name.

[ 11 ] Lower Assos has a small pebbly beach. Although the narrow road to İskele, the ex-fishing harbour, is steep and with sheer drops, a constant stream of cars and minibuses passes up and down it from dawn to dusk.

Architrave from the Temple of Athena; banquet scene showing Herakles ( Louvre Museum ) Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Eleventh edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica , p. 790.

^ Pliny .

Naturalis Historia . Vol. 5.32.

^ Acts 20:13–14 ^ St. Paul's Routes: From Troas to Assos Archived March 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Archaeological Site of Assos" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre . UNESCO . Retrieved 4 June 2018 .

^ a b Points from Turkey [ usurped ] ^ Eleventh editition of the Encyclopædia Britannica p790 ^ a b c Ancient Greece: Aristotle ^ a b Tucker, Jack (2012).

Innocents Return Abroad: Exploring Ancient Sites in Western Turkey . Jack Tucker. pp.

17– 18.

ISBN 9781478343585 .

^ Acts 20:13–14 ^ a b "ASSOS (BEHRAMKALE)" .

www.turkeyfromtheinside.com . Retrieved 2022-10-03 .

^ Family grave of 2,000 years discovered in Turkey's northwest ^ 2,000-year-old athletes' tools unearthed in Turkey's Assos ^ "Lion statue of Hellenistic period found" .

Hürriyet Daily News . 20 September 2019 . Retrieved 2019-10-30 .

^ "Lion statue of Hellenistic period unveiled in Turkeys Çanakkale - Sayfa 8 - Galeri - Life - 30 Ekim 2019 Çarşamba" .

www.anews.com.tr . Retrieved 2019-10-30 .

^ Val, Daniel; Archaeology, ovski · in (2019-09-20).

"2nd Century BC Lion Statue from Hellenistic Era, Byzantine Oven Found in Ancient Assos in Turkey" .

Archaeology in Bulgaria . Retrieved 2019-10-30 .

References [ edit ] Nurettin Arslan - Beate Böhlendorf-Arslan, Living in the Rocks Assos an Archaeological Guide, Istanbul 2010.

ISBN 978-9944-483-30-8 .

Haiko Türk: Die Mauer als Spiegel der Stadt . Neue Forschungen zu den Befestigungsanlagen in Assos, in: A. Kuhrmann - L. Schmidt (Ed.), Forschen, Bauen & Erhalten. Jahrbuch 2009/2010 (Berlin/Bonn 2009) p. 30-41, ISBN 978-3-939721-17-8 .

Stupperich, Reinhard (1994). "Beobachtungen zu Gräbern und Grabsitten in der Nekropole von Assos".

Laverna .

5 : 56– 86.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assos .

Official website v t e Journeys of Paul the Apostle First journey 1.

Antioch 2.

Seleucia 3.

Cyprus 3a.

Salamis 3b.

Paphos 4.

Perga 5.

Antioch of Pisidia 6.

Iconium 7.

Derbe 8.

Lystra 9.

Attalea 10.

Antioch (returns to beginning of journey) Second journey 1.

Cilicia 2.

Derbe 3.

Lystra 4.

Phrygia 5.

Galatia 6.

Mysia ( Alexandria Troas ) 7.

Samothrace 8.

Neapolis 9.

Philippi 9.

Amphipolis 10.

Apollonia 11.

Thessalonica 12.

Beroea 13.

Athens 14.

Corinth 15.

Cenchreae 16.

Ephesus 17.

Syria 18.

Caesarea 19.

Jerusalem 20.

Antioch Third journey 1.

Galatia 2.

Phrygia 3.

Ephesus 4.

Macedonia 5.

Corinth 6.

Cenchreae 7.

Macedonia (again) 8.

Troas 9.

Assos 10.

Mytilene 11.

Chios 12.

Samos 13.

Miletus 14.

Cos 15.

Rhodes 16.

Patara 17.

Tyre 18.

Ptolemais 19.

Caesarea 20.

Jerusalem v t e Ancient settlements in Turkey Aegean Abbassus Abrostola Achaion Limen Acharaca Acmonia Acrassus Adramyttium Agatheira Aegae Airai Aizanoi Alabanda Alia Alinda Allianoi Almura Amnista Amorium Amos Amynanda Amyzon Anaua Anineta Annaea Antandrus Antioch on the Maeander Apamea in Phrygia Aphrodisias Apollonia in Mysia Apollonia Salbaces Apollonis Apollonos Hieron Appia Appolena Aragokome Araukome Arcadiopolis Arilla Aroma Aspaneus Astragon Astyra near Adramyttium Astyra near Pergamon Astyria Atarneus Atarneus sub Pitanem Attea Attuda Augustopolis Aulae Aurelia Neapolis Aureliopolis in Lydia Aurokra Bageis Bargasa Bargasa in northern Caria Bargylia Beudos Beycesultan Birgena Blaundus Bonitai Boukolion Boutheia Briula Bruzus Bybassus Cadi Callipolis Caloe Canae Carene Carmylessus Carura Caryanda Castabus Casystes Cedreae Celaenae Ceramus Chalcetor Choria Chrysaoris Chytrium Cidramus Cindye Cisthene Clannuda Claros Colophon Colossae Conium Coryphas Cybeleia Cyllandus Cyme Daldis Dareioukome Dideiphyta Didyma Digda Dioclea Dionysiopolis Dios Hieron in Ionia Dios Hieron in Lydia Dioskome Docimium Doroukome Eibeos Eiokome Elaea Eluza Embatum Emoddi Ephesus Erines Erythrae Erythras Etsyena Euaza Eukarpia Euhippe Eumeneia Euromus Euthenae Euxine Gambrium Gerga Gergitha Gerriadai Glauke Gryneium Halicarnassus Halisarna Harpasa Helos Heraclea at Latmus Heraclea in Aeolis Heraclea in Lydia Heraclea Salbace Hermocapelia Hierapolis Hieropolis Hierocaesarea Homadena Hydai Hydas Hydissus Hygassos Hyllarima Hypaepa Hypokremnos Hyrcanis Iasos Iaza Idyma Ioniapolis Ioudda Ipsus Isinda in Ionia Iskome Kadyie Kaira Kalabantia Kasara Kasossos Kaualena Kaunos Kaymakçı Tepe Kilaraza Kildara Klazomenai Kleimaka Kleros Politike Knidos Koddinou Petra Koraia Korakoe Koresa Kouara Kyllene Kymnissa Kys Labraunda Lagina Lalandos Lamyana Lankena Laodicea on the Lycus Larisa in Caria Larisa in Ionia Larisa in Lydia Larissa Phrikonis Larymna Lasnedda Latmus Lebedus Leimon Leucae Leucophrys Limantepe Lobolda Loryma Lunda Lydae Lyrna Lysimachia Madnasa Maeandropolis Magnesia ad Sipylum Magnesia on the Maeander Maiboza Maionia in Lydia Malene Marathesium Mastaura Meiros Meiros Megale Melampagos Meloukome Metropolis in Lydia Metropolis in southern Phrygia Miletus Mylasa Mobolla Mokolda Mossyna Mostene Motella Myloukome Myndus Myrina Myus Nais Nasos Naulochon Naulochus Naxia Neapolis Neonteichos Nisyra Notion Nymphaeum Nysa on the Maeander Odon Oenoanda Olaeis Olymos Oroanna Orthoisa Ortygia Otrus Palaemyndus Palaeopolis Panasion Panormus near Miletus Panormus near Halicarnassus Parsada Parthenium Passala Passanda Pedasa Peltae Pepuza Pergamon Perperene Philadelphia in Lydia Phocaea Phoenix in Caria Physcus Phyteia Pidasa Pinara Pisilis Pisye Pitane Pladasa Plarasa Polichna in Ionia Polichne in Ionia Polybotus Pordoselene Priene Prymnessus Pteleum Pydnae Pygela Pyrnus Pyrrha Saouenda Sardis Satala in Lydia Sebaste in Phrygia Sebastopolis in Caria Setae Side in Caria Sidussa Silandus Sillyos Sion Skolopoeis Smyrna Soa Spore Stadia Stectorium Stratonicea in Lydia Stratonicea in Caria Strobilos Syangela Symbra Synaus Syneta Synnada Syrna Tabae Tabala Tateikome Taza Teichiussa Telandrus Temenothyra Temnos Tempsis Tendeba Teos Termera Teuthrania Thasthara Theangela Thebe Hypoplakia Thebes Thera Thyaira Thyatira Thymbrara Thyssanus Tisna Tlos in Caria Tomara Traianopolis Trapezopolis Trarium Triopium Tripolis on the Meander Troketta Tyanollos Tymion Tymnos Ula Uranium Zemmeana Zingotos Kome Black Sea Abonoteichos Aegialus Aiginetes Alaca Höyük Amasia Amastris Ancon Anticinolis Argyria Armene Athenae Berissa Bonita Boon Cabira Cales Callistratia Carambis Carissa Carussa Cerasus Chadisia Cinolis Cizari Colonia in Armenia Colussa Comana in the Pontus Coralla Cordyle Cratia Crenides Cromen Cromna Cyptasia Cytorus Dia Diacopa Elaeus Endeira Erythini Euchaita Eusene Gadilon Garius Garzoubanthon Gaziura Gozalena Hadrianopolis in Paphlagonia Hattusa Heraclea Pontica Heracleium Hermonassa Hieron Oros Hüseyindede Tepe Hyssus Ibora Ischopolis Karza Kelesa Kimista Laodicea Pontica Libiopolis Lillium Metroon Mokata Naustathmus Nerik Nicopolis Ophis Oxinas Patara Pharnacia Phazemon Philocaleia Pida Pimolisa Polemonium Pompeiopolis Potami Prusias ad Hypium Pteria in Paphlagonia Salatiwara Samuha Sandaraca Sapinuwa Satala Saurania Sebastopolis in Pontus Stephane Syderos Themiscyra Thymena Timolaeum Tium Tripolis Virasia Yazılıkaya Zagorus Zaliche Zephyrium in Paphlagonia Ziporea Central Anatolia Abouadeineita Alişar Hüyük Amblada Anadynata Anastasiopolis Andabalis Anisa Anniaca Antoniopolis Anzoulada Aquae Saravenae Aralla Arasaxa Archalla Ardistama Ariaramneia Ariarathia Armaxa Artiknos Aspenzinsos Astra Atenia Balbissa Balgatia Barate Bathys Rhyax Binbirkilise Blucium Borissos Campae Camuliana Candara Carus Vicus Çatalhöyük Cimiata Ciscissus Cinna Claneus Comitanassus Congustus Corna Corniaspa Coropassus Cotenna Cybistra Cyzistra Dadastana Dasmenda Derbe Diocaesarea Doara Dometiopolis Dorylaeum Ecdaumava Ecobriga Ergobrotis Euaissa Eudocia (Cappadocia) Eudocia (Phrygia) Eulepa Faustinopolis Germa Gorbeus Gordium Hadrianopolis in Phrygia Heraclea Cybistra Herpha Hieropotamon Homana Hyde Ilistra Irenopolis Isauropolis Juliopolis Kaman-Kalehöyük Kanotala Karbala Keissia Kerkenes Kilistra Kindyria Kobara Kodylessos Korama Koron Kültepe (Kanesh) Lageina Lamatorma Laodicea Combusta Laroumada Lauzadus Limnae Lystra Malandasa Malus in Galatia Malus in Phrygia Meloë Metropolis in northern Phrygia Midaeium Mistea Mnizus Mokissos Mourisa Moutalaske Musbanda Myrika Nakoleia Nazianzus Nitazi Nora Nyssa Ochras Olosada Orcistus Papirion Parnassus Pedachtoë Pedaia Peium Perta Pessinus Pharax Phlara Pillitokome Pissia Pithoi Pontanena Posala Pteria Purushanda Pyrgoi Sadagolthina Salamboreia Salarama Sasima Savatra Sbida Sedasa Senzousa Sereana Sibora Sidamaria Skandos Soanda Soandos Sora Takourtha Tavium Thebasa Thouththourbia Tiberiopolis Trocmades Tyana Tynna Tyriaeum Vasada Verinopolis Zeita Zizima Eastern Anatolia Altıntepe Ani Arsamosata Cafer Höyük Camachus Citharizum Dadima Justinianopolis Melid Sugunia Theodosiopolis Tushpa Marmara Abarnis Abydos Achaiion Achilleion Ad Statuas Adrasteia Aegospotami Agora Aianteion in Thrace Aianteion in the Troad Ainos Alexandria Troas Alopeconnesus Ammoi Amycus Anaplous Apamea Myrlea Aphrodisias Apollonia on the Rhyndacus Aprus Apsoda Arbeila Argiza Argyria Argyronion Argyropolis Arisba Artace Artaiouteichos Artanes Assos Astacus Astyra in Troad Athyras Aureliane Aureliopolis Baradendromia Baris Basilica Therma Basilinopolis Bathonea Bathys Limen Beodizo Bergule Birytis Bisanthe Bitenas Bithynium Blachernae Bolos Boradion Brunca Burtudizon Bythias Byzantium Byzapena Caenophrurium Callum Calpe Canopus Cardia Cebrene Cenchreae Cenon Gallicanon Chalcaea Chalcedon Charax Charmidea Chelae on the Black Sea Chelae on the Asian coast of the Bosphorus Chelae on the European coast of the Bosphorus Choiragria Chryse Chrysopolis Cius Clitae Cobrys Cocylium Colla Colonae Cremaste Crenides Cressa Crithote Cypasis Cypsela Cyzicus Dadokome Dacibyza Damalis Daphne Mainomene Daphnus Dardanus Dascylium Dascylium in Bithynia Dekaton in Bithynia Dekaton in Thrace Delkos Delphin Deris Desa Didymateiche Diolkides Drabus Drizipara/Drusipara Eirakla Elaea in Bithynia Elaeus Elekosmioi Embolos Ergasteria Eribolum Gargara Gentinos Gergis Germa Germanicopolis Hadriani ad Olympum Hadriania Hadrianotherae Halone Hamaxitus Harpagion Hebdomon Helenopolis/Drepanum Heracleium Hermaion Hieria Hierion Iasonion Ide Ilieon Kome Kabia Kalamos Kalasyrta Kale Peuke Kalos Agros Kampos Kassa Katapaspanas Kepos Kizoura Koila Kolonai Kosilaos Koubaita Kyparodes Kypra Lamponeia Lampsacus Larisa in Troad Lasthenes Leptoia Liada Libum Libyssa Limnae in Bithynia Limnae in Thrace Linus Lupadium Lygos Lysimachia Madytus Mantineion Marpessos Miletopolis Mocasura Mochadion Modra Morzapena Mossynea Moukaporis Myrileion Narco Nassete Nausikleia Nausimachion Neandreia Neapolis on the Bosphorus Neapolis on the Thracian Chersonese Neonteichos Nerola Nicomedia Oka Ontoraita Ophryneion Orestias Orni Ostreodes Pactya Paeon Paesus Palodes Panion Pantichium Parabolos Parium Paulines Pegae in Mysia Pegae in Thrace Pege Pentephyle Percote Pericharaxis Perinthus Petrozetoi Pharmakia Phidalia Petra Phiela Philia Phosphorus Pionia Pitheci Portus Placia Ploketta Poemanenum Poleatikon Polychron Polymedium Potamoi Potamonion Praenetus Pratomysia Prepa Priapus Prindea Proconnesus Proochthoi Prusa Psarela Psyllium Pyrrhias Cyon Pytheion Rhebas Rhegion Rhesion Rhoiteion Rouphinianai Salmydessus Sangarus Scamandria Scamandrus Scepsis Scylace Scylla Selymbria Semystra Serrion Teichos Sestos Sigeion Sirkanos Smintheion Soka Strobilos Sykai Syllanta Tarpodizo Tarsus in Bithynia Tattaios Tenba Terbos Tesderamoska Tetrakomia Tipaso Tragasai Thynias Traron Tricomia in Bithynia Troy ( Hisarlik ) Tyrodiza Tzurulum Urisio Utsurgae Zeleia Mediterranean Acalissus Acarassus Adada Adrasus Aegae Agrae Alalakh Amelas Anabura in Pisidia Anazarbus Anchiale Andeda Andriaca Anemurium Ano Kotradis Antigonia Antioch on the Orontes Antioch of Pisidia Antiochia Lamotis Antioch on the Cragus Antioch on the Pyramis Antiphellus Aperlae Aphrodisias of Cilicia Apollonia in Lycia Arabissus Araxa Ariassus Arima Arnabanda Arneae Arsada Arsinoe Artanada Arycanda Aspendos Augai Augusta Aulae Aunesis Bab al-Hawa Border Crossing Balbura Baris Bindaios Bubon Cabassus Cadrema Cadyanda Callimache Calynda Carallia Carmylessus Casae Castabala Ceretapa Cestrus Charadrus Choma Cibyra Mikra Claudiopolis Colybrassus Comama Comana in Cappadocia Comba Conana Coracesium Corycium Antrum Corycus (Kızkalesi) Corydala Cremna Cretopolis Crya Cyaneae Cyrrhus Daedala Dalisandus in Isauria Dalisandus in Pamphylia Damasei Dias Diocaesarea Domuztepe Elaiussa Sebaste Elbessos Emirzeli Epiphania Erymna Etenna Eudocia (Lycia) Eudocias (Pamphylia) Flaviopolis Gagae Gözlükule Hacilar Hadrianopolis in Pisidia Halae Hamaxia Hierapolis Hippucome Holmi Hyia Idebessos Idyros Iotape Irenopolis Isaura Nea Isaura Palaea Isba Isinda in Lycia Isinda in Pisidia Issus Istlada Juliosebaste Kalanthia Kalelibelen Kandyba Kanytelis Karakabaklı Karatepe Karkabo Kastellon Kendema Keraia Kibyra Kiphisos Kirkota Kitanaura Kodroula Kolbasa Korasion Korma Kynosarion Laertes Lagbe Lamos Lebessus Legeita Limnae in Pamphylia Limnae in Pisidia Limyra Lissa Lycae Lyrbe Lysinia Magarsa Magastara Magydus Mallus Malus in Pisidia Mampsoukrenai Mamure Castle Manava Mandane Marciana Marmara (Mnara) Mastaura Meloë Melanippe Meriana Mezgitkale Moatra Mopsucrene Mopsuestia Morka Moron Hydor Moumoustra Mylae Mylios Myra Myriandus Nagidos Nauloi Neapolis in Pisidia Nephelis Nisa Octapolis Olba Olbasa Olbia Olympus Öküzlü Onobara Orokenda Otanada Ouerbe Padyandus Palaeopolis Panemotichus Panhormus Pargais Parlais Patara Pednelissus Perga Perminounda Phaselis Phellus Philadelphia in Cilicia Philaea Phoenicus Phoenix in Lycia Pisarissos Pisurgia Placoma Platanus Podalia Pogla Prostanna Pseudokorasion Ptolemais Rhodiapolis Rhoscopus Rhosus Rygmanoi Sabandus Sagalassos Sandalium Saraganda Sebeda Seleucia in Pamphylia Seleucia Pieria Seleucia Sidera Selge Selinus Seroiata Serraepolis Sia Sibidounda Sibyla Side Siderus Sidyma Sillyon Simena Sinda Siricae Soli Solyma Sozopolis Sura Syca Syedra Takina Tapureli Tardequeia Tarsus Teimiussa Tell Judaidah Tell Tayinat Telmessos Telmessos (Caria) Tenedos Termessos Tetrapyrgia in Cappadocia Tetrapyrgia in Pamphylia Titiopolis Tityassus Tlos Toriaeum Tragalassus Trebendae Trebenna Trysa Tyberissus Tyinda Tymandus Tynada Typallia Xanthos Yanıkhan Yumuktepe Zenopolis in Isauria Zenopolis in Lycia Zephyrium on the Calycadnus Southeastern Anatolia Amida Antioch in the Taurus Antioch in Mesopotamia (Constantia) Apamea on the Euphrates Carcathiocerta Carchemish Çayönü Dabanas Dara Doliche Edessa Göbekli Tepe Hallan Çemi Tepesi Harran Khashshum Kussara Matiate Nevalı Çori Nicopolis in Cilicia Nisibis Sakçagözü Sam'al Samosata Sareisa Seleucia at the Zeugma Sitai Sultantepe Tille Tushhan Urima Urshu Zeugma v t e Tentative list of World Heritage Sites in Turkey Aegean region Aizanoi Antique City Ancient City of Stratonikeia Archaeological Site of Assos Archaeological site of Laodikeia Archaeological Site of Priene Ayvalık Industrial Landscape The Bodrum Castle Historic Town of Birgi The Historical Port City of Izmir Mausoleum and Sacred area of Hecatomnus Medieval City of Beçin Black Sea region Early Period of Anatolian Turkish Heritage: Niksar, The Capital of Danishmend Dynasty Historic Guild Town of Mudurnu Kızılırmak Delta Wetland and Bird Sanctuary Mount Harşena and the Rock-tombs of the Pontic Kings Nature Park of Ballıca Cave Sümela Monastery (The Monastery of Virgin Mary) Central Anatolia region Ankara : The Planning and Building of a Republican Modern Capital City Archaeological Site of Kültepe-Kanesh Basilica Therma (Sarıkaya Roma Hamamı) Haci Bayram Mosque and its Surrounding Area (the Haci Bayram District) Haci Bektas Veli Complex Historic Town of Beypazarı Historical Monuments of Niğde Ivriz Cultural Landscape Konya-A capital of Seljuk Civilization Koramaz Valley Lake Tuz Special Environmental Protection Area (SEPA) Odunpazari Historical Urban Site Tomb of Ahi Evran Eastern Anatolia region Akdamar Church Eshab-ı Kehf Kulliye (Islamic-Ottoman Social Complex) Historic City of Harput Historic Town of Kemaliye Ishak Pasha Palace The Tombstones of Ahlat the Urartian and Ottoman citadel Tushpa/Van Fortress, the Mound and the Old City of Van Marmara region The Bridge of Justinian The Bridge of Uzunköprü Çanakkale (Dardanelles) and Gelibolu (Gallipoli) Battles Zones in the First World War İznik Nuruosmaniye Complex Sultan Bayezid II Complex: A Center of Medical Treatment Yıldız Palace Complex Mediterranean region Alahan Monastery Alanya Ancient Cities of Lycian Civilization Ancient City of Anazarbos Ancient City of Kaunos Ancient city of Kibyra Ancient City of Korykos Archaeological Site of Perge Archaeological Site of Sagalassos Eflatun Pinar: The Hittite Spring Sanctuary Güllük Dagi National Park and Termessos Hatay, St. Pierre Church Karain Cave Karatepe-Aslantaş Archaeological Site Kekova Mamure Castle St. Nicholas Church St.Paul Church , Saint Paul's Well and surrounding historic quarters The Theatre and Aqueducts of the Ancient City of Aspendos Vespasianus Titus Tunnel Yesemek Quarry and Sculpture Workshop Yivli Minaret Mosque Southeastern Anatolia region Archeological Site of Zeugma Harran and Şanlıurfa Ismail Fakirullah Tomb and its Light Refraction Mechanism Late Antique and Medieval Churches and Monasteries of Midyat and Surrounding Area ( Tur Abdin ) The Malabadi Bridge Mardin Cultural Landscape The Underground Water Structures in Gaziantep; Livas' and Kastels Zerzevan Castle and Mithraeum Zeynel Abidin Mosque Complex and Mor Yakup (Saint Jacob) Church Multiple regions Anatolian Seljuks Madrasahs Buruciye Medrese Cacabey Medrese Çifte Medrese Çifte Minareli Medrese (Erzurum) Çifte Minareli Medrese (Sivas) Gök Medrese Ince Minaret Madrasa Karatay Madrasa Sahabiye Madrasa Yakutiye Madrasa Mountainous Phrygia Seljuk Caravanserais on the route from Denizli to Dogubeyazit Trading Posts and Fortifications on Genoese Trade Routes from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea Akçakoca Castle Amasra Castle Çandarlı Castle Çeşme Castle Foça Castle Galata Tower Güvercinada Castle Sinop Fortress Yoros Castle Turkey portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Israel Geographic Pleiades Other Kulturenvanteri monument NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐mdft7
Cached time: 20250817052443
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.832 seconds
Real time usage: 1.079 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2560/1000000
Revision size: 12692/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 170227/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5119/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77041/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.472/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20554580/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  762.936      1 -total
 22.29%  170.026      1 Template:Reflist
 15.65%  119.418      1 Template:Infobox_ancient_site
 14.99%  114.330      2 Template:Langx
 14.98%  114.263      1 Template:Infobox
 13.12%  100.106      3 Template:Navbox
 11.50%   87.714      1 Template:Cite_Pliny
 11.32%   86.366      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  9.67%   73.810      1 Template:Third_Journey_of_Paul_of_Tarsus
  8.06%   61.491      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2237953:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052443 and revision id 1288655766. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Assos&oldid=1288655766 " Categories : Aeolian colonies Former populated places in Turkey Buildings and structures in Çanakkale Province History of Çanakkale Province Tourist attractions in Çanakkale Province Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Turkey Fishing communities in Turkey Geography of Çanakkale Province Greek city-states Populated places in ancient Mysia Populated places in ancient Troad New Testament places World Heritage Tentative List for Turkey Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Pages with Turkish IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 01:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Assos 28 languages Add topic

