Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy 3 Contra Hipparchia 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Theodorus the Atheist 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego Hrvatski Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių مصرى مازِرونی 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek philosopher Part of a series on Atheism Concepts Implicit and explicit atheism Naturalism Negative and positive atheism History History of atheism Atheism during the Age of Enlightenment New Atheism Society Atheist feminism Criticism of religion Demographics of atheism Discrimination against atheists Secular ethics Secularism Separation of church and state State atheism Atheism and religion Arguments Arguments for atheism Atheist's wager Creator of God Evil God challenge Fate of the unlearned Free will God of the gaps Hitchens's razor Incompatible properties Inconsistent revelation Nonbelief Occam's razor Omnipotence paradox Parody religion Poor design Problem of evil Problem of Hell Russell's teapot Theological noncognitivism People Lists of atheists Julian Baggini Mikhail Bakunin Mario Bunge Albert Camus Richard Dawkins Daniel Dennett Denis Diderot Ludwig Feuerbach A. C. Grayling Sam Harris Christopher Hitchens Baron d'Holbach Lawrence Krauss Michael Lou Martin Karl Marx Jean Meslier Friedrich Nietzsche Michel Onfray Bertrand Russell Peter Singer Victor J. Stenger Books Atheism: The Case Against God Breaking the Spell De rerum natura The End of Faith The God Delusion God Is Not Great The System of Nature Related stances Irreligion Agnosticism Freethought Secular humanism Atheism and religion Criticism of atheism LaVeyan Satanism Secular paganism Secular Buddhism Outline Category Philosophy portal WikiProject v t e Part of a series on Irreligion Irreligion Antireligion Anti-clericalism Criticism of religion Freethought Organized secularism Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Separation of church and state Atheism History Demographics Discrimination/Persecution Criticism Lists of atheists Forms and variations Implicit and explicit Negative and positive New State Aspects Antitheism Relationship between atheism and religion Existence of God Agnosticism Strong Weak Agnostic atheism Apatheism List of agnostics People Atheists Agnostics Humanists Books The Age of Reason Breaking the Spell The Demon-Haunted World The End of Faith The God Delusion God Is Not Great Letter to a Christian Nation The System of Nature Why I Am Not a Christian Why I Am Not a Muslim Why I Am an Atheist List of irreligious organizations American Atheists American Humanist Association Atheist Alliance International Center for Inquiry Freedom From Religion Foundation Humanists International Humanists UK Rational Response Squad Recovering from Religion Brazilian Association of Atheists and Agnostics Related topics Countries by irreligion Disestablishmentarianism Secular ethics }} Irreligion by country v t e Theodorus "the Atheist" ( Ancient Greek : Θεόδωρος ὁ ἄθεος , romanized : Theódōros ho átheos ; c. 340 – c. 250 BCE [ 1 ] ), of Cyrene , was a Greek philosopher of the Cyrenaic school. He lived in both Greece and Alexandria , before ending his days in his native city of Cyrene. As a Cyrenaic philosopher, he taught that the goal of life was to obtain joy and avoid grief, and that the former resulted from knowledge , and the latter from ignorance . However, his principal claim to fame was his alleged atheism . He was usually designated by ancient writers ho atheos ( ὁ ἄθεος ), "the atheist." Life [ edit ] Theodorus was a disciple of Aristippus the Younger , [ 2 ] grandson of the elder and more famous Aristippus .

[ 3 ] He heard the lectures of a number of philosophers beside Aristippus; such as Anniceris , and Dionysius the dialectician, [ 4 ] Zeno of Citium , and Pyrrho .

[ 5 ] He was banished from Cyrene, but for what reason is not stated; [ 6 ] and it is from the saying recorded of him on this occasion, "Men of Cyrene, you do ill in banishing me from Libya to Greece", [ 6 ] as well as from his being a disciple of Aristippus, that it is inferred that he was a native of Cyrene.  Of his subsequent history there is no connected account; but the anecdotes of him show that he was at Athens, where he narrowly escaped a trial, perhaps for impiety.

[ 7 ] The influence, however, of Demetrius Phalereus reportedly shielded him; [ 8 ] and this incident may therefore probably be placed during Demetrius' ten years of administration at Athens, 317–307 BCE. As Theodorus was banished from Athens , and was afterwards in the service of Ptolemy in Egypt , it is not unlikely that he shared the overthrow and exile of Demetrius.

[ citation needed ] The account of Amphicrates of Athens cited by Diogenes Laërtius , [ 8 ] that he was condemned to drink hemlock and so died, is doubtless an error.

[ citation needed ] While in the service of Ptolemy, Theodorus was sent on an embassy to Lysimachus , whom he offended by the freedom of his remarks. One answer which he made to a threat of crucifixion which Lysimachus had used, was celebrated by many ancient writers ( Cicero , [ 9 ] Seneca , [ 10 ] etc.): "Employ such threats to those courtiers of yours; for it matters not to Theodorus whether he rots on the ground or in the air." From the court or camp of Lysimachus he returned apparently to that of Ptolemy.

[ 11 ] We read also of his going to Corinth with a number of his disciples: [ 11 ] but this was perhaps only a transient visit during his residence at Athens. He returned at length to Cyrene, and lived there, says Diogenes Laërtius, [ 6 ] with Magas , the stepson of Ptolemy , who ruled Cyrene for fifty years (c. 300–250 BCE) as viceroy and then as king. Theodorus probably ended his days at Cyrene. Various characteristic anecdotes of Theodorus are preserved (Laërtius,.

[ 12 ] Plutarch , [ 13 ] Valerius Maximus , [ 14 ] Philo , [ 15 ] etc.), from which he appears to have been a man of keen and ready wit .

Philosophy [ edit ] Theodorus was the founder of a sect which was called after him Theodoreioi ( Θεοδώρειοι ), "Theodoreans". The opinions of Theodorus, according to Diogenes Laërtius , were of the Cyrenaic school. He taught that the great end of human life is to obtain joy and avoid grief, and that the former resulted from knowledge, and the latter from ignorance. He defined the good as prudence and justice , and the bad as the opposite. Pleasure and pain, however, were indifferent. He made light of friendship and patriotism, and asserted that the world was his country. He taught that there was nothing naturally disgraceful in theft, adultery, or sacrilege if one ignored public opinion, which had been formed by the consent of fools.

[ 16 ] Theodorus was attacked for atheism . "He did away with all opinions respecting the Gods," says Laërtius, [ 17 ] but some critics doubt whether he was absolutely an atheist, or simply denied the existence of the deities of popular belief. The charge of atheism is sustained by the popular designation of Atheus , by the authority of Cicero , [ 18 ] Laërtius, [ 2 ] Pseudo-Plutarch , [ 19 ] Sextus Empiricus , [ 20 ] and some Christian writers; while some others (e.g.

Clement of Alexandria ) [ 21 ] speak of him as only rejecting the popular theology.

Theodorus wrote a book called On the Gods ( Περὶ Θεῶν ). Laërtius had seen it, and said that it was not to be dismissed, [ 17 ] adding that it was said to have been the source of many of the statements or arguments of Epicurus . According to the Suda , [ 22 ] he wrote many works both on the doctrines of his sect and on other subjects.

Contra Hipparchia [ edit ] According to the Suda , Hipparchia of Maroneia wrote many letters addressed to Theodorus.

[ 22 ] Although none of them survives, there are anecdotes of her encounters with Theodorus: When she went into a symposium with Crates, she tested Theodorus the Atheist by proposing a sophism like this: "That which if Theodorus did, he would not be said to do wrong, neither should Hipparchia be said to do wrong if she does it. Theodorus hitting himself does not do wrong, nor does Hipparchia do wrong hitting Theodorus." He did not reply to what she said, but pulled up her garment.

[ 22 ] Hipparchia was neither offended nor ashamed by this "as most women would have been".

[ 23 ] We are also told that when Theodorus, quoting a line from The Bacchae of Euripides , said to her:
"Who is the woman who has left behind the shuttles of the loom?" she replied I, Theodorus, am that person, but do I appear to you to have come to a wrong decision, if I devote that time to philosophy, which I otherwise should have spent at the loom?

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Diagoras of Melos Notes [ edit ] ^ Dorandi 1999 , p. 52.

^ a b Laërtius , § 86.

^ Suda , Aristippos ^ a b Laërtius , § 98.

^ Suda , Theodoros ^ a b c Laërtius , § 103.

^ Filonik 2013 , pp. 75–76.

^ a b Laërtius , § 101.

^ Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones , i. 43 ^ Seneca, de Tranq. An.

^ a b Laërtius , § 102.

^ Laërtius , § 97–103.

^ Plutarch, De Animi Tranquill.

, vii.; De Exsilio , viii.

^ Valerius Maximus, vi. 2, extern. 3 ^ Philo, Jud. Quod omnis probus liber , c. 18, vol. ii., vol. v.

^ Laërtius , § 98 ff..

^ a b Laërtius , § 97.

^ Cicero, de Natura Deorum , i. 1 ^ Pseudo-Plutarch, De Placit. Philos.

, i. 7 ^ Sextus Empiricus, Pyrrhon. Hypotyp.

, lib. iii.

^ Clement of Alexandria, Protrept. ad Gentes ^ a b c Suda, Hipparchia .

^ Laërtius , § 96.

References [ edit ] Dorandi, Tiziano (1999). "Chapter 2: Chronology". In Algra, Keimpe; et al. (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.

52 .

ISBN 9780521250283 .

Filonik, Jakub (2013).

"Athenian impiety trials: a reappraisal" .

Dike .

16 (16): 75– 76.

doi : 10.13130/1128-8221/4290 .

Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Socrates, with predecessors and followers: Aristippus" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:2. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library. § 65–104.

Attribution: This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870).

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 4 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands 2 Greece Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theodorus_the_Atheist&oldid=1292823373 " Categories : Hellenistic-era philosophers in Athens 4th-century BC Greek philosophers 3rd-century BC Greek philosophers Cyrenaic philosophers Metic philosophers in Classical Athens Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers CS1 errors: missing title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM with no wstitle or title parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 01:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theodorus the Atheist 26 languages Add topic

