Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Composition 3 Reviews 4 Track listing 5 References Toggle the table of contents Space (Jimmy Cauty album) 2 languages Română Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1990 studio album by Jimmy Cauty as Space Space Studio album by Jimmy Cauty as Space Released 16 July 1990 Recorded Trancentral Genre Ambient house space music Length 38 : 21 Label KLF Communications Producer Jimmy Cauty Space is a 1990 ambient house concept album by Jimmy Cauty under the alias Space . Originally intended to be The Orb 's debut album, Space was refactored for release as a solo album following Cauty's departure from that group.

Space was independently released on KLF Communications , the record label formed to distribute the work of Cauty's other project, The KLF .

Origins [ edit ] Space was originally a collaboration between Alex Paterson and Jimmy Cauty , the original line-up of The Orb. Cauty's record label KLF Communications planned to release it as The Orb's debut album, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] but when Cauty left The Orb in April 1990 [ 3 ] to concentrate on producing music as The KLF with Bill Drummond , he took the recordings with him.  Reworked to remove Paterson's contributions, the album was released by KLF Communications in July 1990 as an eponymous album, [ 4 ] with Cauty alone receiving credit.

[ 5 ] Youth , a friend and colleague of both men, recalled: "Jimmy and Alex were making an album called Space when they had a big argument. Jimmy stormed off, took all of Alex’s bits off the record and released it under his own name. Alex was mortified. I told him not to worry – we’d make a record  that was even better".

[ 6 ] According to Cauty, Space "was a jam, all done on Oberheim keyboards . Loads of samples ... were chucked in there as well. I started on Monday morning and by Friday it was all done".

[ 7 ] He said: "Nothing was prepared, I started on a Monday morning and just jammed the whole thing." [ 8 ] Composition [ edit ] Space takes the listener on a voyage through the Solar System from Mercury outwards, with vast distances of empty space between worlds represented by periods of minimalist ambience and near-silence.

Synthesisers , excerpts from classical compositions and nursery rhymes (including Twinkle Twinkle Little Star ), sinusoidal loops , and communications from space flight controllers are among the sounds used to describe the voyage.  This musical interpretation of a physical journey is also a characteristic of the early ambient house recordings The Orb's Adventures Beyond the Ultraworld and The KLF's Chill Out .

Cauty has called Space "a record for 14-year-old space cadets to go and take acid [to] for the first time".

[ 7 ] Reviews [ edit ] Professional ratings Review scores Source Rating AllMusic [ 9 ] John Bush at AllMusic attributes "incredibly sparse ambience" to Space , with "long periods of near-silence [and] only an occasional break for galactic sine-waves and similarly spacy tones". The album is "more important for who's on it than what's in it", he concluded.

[ 9 ] Track listing [ edit ] Space comprises eight contiguous pieces across two sides of vinyl or one track of a CD.

"Mercury"  – 1:39 "Venus"  – 2:00 "Mars"  – 8:47 "Jupiter"  – 6:34 "Saturn"  – 2:44 "Uranus"  – 2:57 "Neptune"  – 10.28 "Pluto"  – 3:10 References [ edit ] ^ "The White Room - Information Sheet Eight" .

KLF Communications . August 1990.

Archived (via the Library of Mu) on 5 October 2007.

Wikipedia:WikiProject The KLF/LibraryOfMu/508 ^ "KLF Communications Info Sheet Nine" .

KLF Communications . June 1990.

Archived (via the Library of Mu) on 12 March 2007.

Wikipedia:WikiProject The KLF/LibraryOfMu/509 ^ Bush, John.

The Orb at AllMusic . Retrieved 5 March 2020.

^ Longmire, Ernie; et al. (2020) [1998].

"Discography: The KLF (including The JAMS, The Timelords, 2K etc.)" .

Archived from the original on 29 February 2020.

^ Space (label).

KLF Communications . 1990. SPACE LP1.

^ Simpson, Dave (7 June 2016).

"How we made the Orb's Little Fluffy Clouds" .

The Guardian (Interview with Youth and Alex Paterson) . Retrieved 7 March 2020 .

^ a b "The KLF: Enigmatic Dance Duo" .

Record Collector . 1 April 1991.

Archived (via the Library of Mu) on 16 September 2016.

Wikipedia:WikiProject The KLF/LibraryOfMu/226 ^ Prendergast, Mark (2003). "Ambience in the Rock Era".

The Ambient Century: From Mahler to Moby – The Evolution of Sound in the Electronic Age . New York, NY: Bloomsbury. p. 182.

ISBN 1-58234-323-3 .

^ a b Bush, John.

Space at AllMusic . Retrieved 6 March 2020.

v t e The KLF a.k.a.: The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu • The Timelords • 2K • K Foundation • One World Orchestra Bill Drummond Jimmy Cauty Singles " All You Need Is Love " " Whitney Joins the JAMs " " Down Town " " Burn the Bastards " " Doctorin' the Tardis " " What Time Is Love?

" " 3 a.m. Eternal " " Kylie Said to Jason " " Last Train to Trancentral " " It's Grim Up North " " Justified & Ancient " " K Cera Cera " " Fuck the Millennium " " The Magnificent " Studio albums 1987 (What the Fuck Is Going On?) Who Killed The JAMs?

Chill Out The White Room The Black Room (unreleased) Compilations 1987 (The JAMs 45 Edits) Shag Times The "What Time Is Love?" Story Samplecity thru Trancentral Solid State Logik Come Down Dawn The White Room Director's Cut Other The Manual 2023: A Trilogy Who Killed the KLF?

Projects Discography Films Space K Foundation K Foundation Burn a Million Quid K Foundation art award K2 Plant Hire Welcome to the Dark Ages Related bands Big in Japan Lori and the Chameleons Brilliant Disco 2000 The Orb Blacksmoke Solid Gold Chartbusters Transit Kings Related people List of the KLF's creative associates Isaac Bello Nick Coler Gimpo Glenn Hughes Ricardo Lyte Tony Thorpe/The Moody Boys Tammy Wynette v t e The Orb Alex Paterson Thomas Fehlmann Jimmy Cauty Kris Weston Simon Phillips Andy Hughes John Roome Studio albums The Orb's Adventures Beyond the Ultraworld U.F.Orb Orbus Terrarum Orblivion Cydonia Bicycles & Tricycles Okie Dokie It's The Orb on Kompakt The Dream Baghdad Batteries (Orbsessions Volume III) Metallic Spheres The Orbserver in the Star House More Tales from the Orbservatory Moonbuilding 2703 AD COW / Chill Out, World!

No Sounds Are Out of Bounds Abolition of the Royal Familia Prism Buddhist Hipsters Live and session albums Live 93 Compilations U.F.Off: The Best of The Orb Orboretum: The Orb Collection Remix and mix albums Aubrey Mixes: The Ultraworld Excursions Auntie Aubrey's Excursions Beyond the Call of Duty Auntie Aubrey's Excursions Beyond the Call of Duty Part 2 EPs Kiss EP Pomme Fritz Daleth of Elphame EP Battersea Shield Singles " A Huge Ever Growing Pulsating Brain That Rules from the Centre of the Ultraworld " " Little Fluffy Clouds " " Perpetual Dawn " " Blue Room " " Assassin " " Oxbow Lakes " " Toxygene " " Asylum " " Once More " Video albums The Orb's Adventures Beyond the Ultraworld: Patterns and Textures C Batter C Related articles Discography Youth The KLF Space FFWD Badorb.com Transit Kings David Gilmour Authority control databases MusicBrainz release group Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Space_(Jimmy_Cauty_album)&oldid=1306231793 " Categories : 1990 albums KLF Communications albums Jimmy Cauty albums 1990s concept albums Albums produced by Jimmy Cauty Ambient house albums Jam sessions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hAudio microformats Album articles lacking alt text for covers This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 17:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Space (Jimmy Cauty album) 2 languages Add topic

