Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subdialects 2 Speakers 3 Dialectal features Toggle Dialectal features subsection 3.1 Phonology 3.1.1 Tuscan gorgia 3.1.2 Weakening of G and C 3.1.3 Affrication of S 3.1.4 No diphthongization of /ɔ/ 3.2 Morphology 3.2.1 Accusative "te" for "tu" 3.2.2 Double dative pronoun 3.2.3 Masculine definite articles 3.2.4 Noi + impersonal si 3.2.5 Fo (faccio) and vo (vado) 3.2.6 Loss of infinitival "-re" 3.3 Lexicon 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Tuscan dialect 23 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština Corsu Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Русский Sardu Српски / srpski Tagalog Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Tuscan language ) Italo-Dalmatian varieties of Romance This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Tuscan dialect" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Tuscan toscano, vernacolo Native to Italy Region Tuscany (except parts of the Province of Massa-Carrara ) Umbria (western border with Tuscany) Corsica (as a variety ) Sardinia , Gallura (as a variety ), Sassari (as a variety ) Language family Indo-European Italic Latino-Faliscan Latin Romance Italo-Western Italo-Dalmatian Italo-Romance Tuscan Dialects Florentine Corsican Bagitto † Language codes ISO 639-3 – Linguist List ita-tus Glottolog None Linguasphere 51-AAA-qa IETF it-u-sd-it52 This article contains IPA phonetic symbols.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA .

This article is part of the series on the Italian language Italo-Dalmatian languages Tuscan ( Florentine ) Regional Italian Accademia della Crusca Enciclopedia Treccani History Veronese Riddle Placiti Cassinesi Sicilian School Dolce Stil Novo The Divine Comedy Pontifical Academy of Arcadia Italian Purism The Last Letters of Jacopo Ortis The Betrothed Literature and other Culture Literature Music Philosophy Poetry Comics Italophilia Grammar Verb conjugation Alphabet Orthography Braille Phonology Syntactic gemination Tuscan gorgia v t e Tuscan ( Italian : dialetto toscano [djaˈlɛtto tosˈkaːno; di.a-] ; locally: vernacolo ) is a set of Italo-Dalmatian varieties of Romance spoken in Tuscany , Corsica , and Sardinia .

Standard Italian is based on Tuscan, specifically on its Florentine dialect , and it became the language of culture throughout Italy [ 1 ] because of the prestige of the works by Dante Alighieri , Petrarch , Giovanni Boccaccio , Niccolò Machiavelli , and Francesco Guicciardini . It later became the official language of all of the historic Italian states and then of the Kingdom of Italy when it was formed.

Subdialects [ edit ] Dialects and languages of Italy by groups (Tuscan group in light shades of azure and violet) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] In De vulgari eloquentia ( c.

1300), Dante Alighieri distinguishes four main subdialects: fiorentino ( Florence ), senese ( Siena ), lucchese ( Lucca ) and aretino ( Arezzo ).

Tuscan is a dialect complex composed of many local variants, with minor differences among them.

The main subdivisions are between Northern Tuscan dialects, the Southern Tuscan dialects and Corsican.

The Northern Tuscan dialects are (from east to west): Fiorentino , the main dialect of Florence , Chianti and the Mugello , also spoken in Prato and along the river Arno as far as the city of Fucecchio .

Pistoiese, spoken in the city of Pistoia and the nearest zones (some linguists include this dialect in Fiorentino ).

Pesciatino or Valdinievolese, spoken in the Valdinievole zone, in the cities of Pescia and Montecatini Terme (some linguists include this dialect in Lucchese ).

Lucchese, spoken in Lucca and the nearby hills ( Lucchesia ).

Versiliese, spoken in the historical area of Versilia .

Viareggino, spoken in Viareggio and vicinity.

Pisano-Livornese, spoken in Pisa , Livorno and vicinity, along the coast from Livorno to Cecina .

The Southern Tuscan dialects are (from east to west): Aretino-Chianaiolo, spoken in Arezzo and the Valdichiana .

Casentinese, spoken in Casentino from Stia to Subbiano in the Arezzo province .

Senese, spoken in the city and province of Siena .

Grossetano, spoken in Grosseto and along the southern coast.

Elbano, spoken on the island of Elba.

Corsican , on the island of Corsica , and the Corso-Sardinian transitional varieties that are spoken in northern Sardinia ( Gallurese and Sassarese ) are classified by scholars as a direct offshoot from medieval Tuscan, [ 6 ] even though they now constitute a distinct linguistic group.

Speakers [ edit ] Excluding the inhabitants of Province of Massa and Carrara , who speak an Emilian dialect, and people in the area of Tuscan Romagna, who speak Romagnol , around 3.5 million people speak Tuscan.

Dialectal features [ edit ] Tuscan as a whole has certain defining features, with subvarieties that are distinguished by minor details. A Romance language variety descending from Vulgar Latin , it also contains a substrate from the Etruscan language of the original inhabitants prior to Romanization.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The Etruscan influence is found most saliently in the toponyms of Tuscany , as well as some parts of neighbouring Umbria and Lazio .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Phonology [ edit ] Tuscan gorgia [ edit ] The Tuscan gorgia affects the voiceless stop consonants /k/ , /t/ , and /p/ . They are usually pronounced as fricatives in post-vocalic position when not blocked by the competing phenomenon of syntactic gemination : /k/ → [ h ] /t/ → [ θ ] /p/ → [ ɸ ] Weakening of G and C [ edit ] A similar phonological alternation is the intervocalic weakening of the Italian "soft" g , the voiced affricate /dʒ/ ( g as in j ud g e ) and "soft" c , the voiceless affricate /tʃ/ ( ch as in ch ur ch ), known as attenuation , or, more commonly, as deaffrication .

Between vowels, the voiced post-alveolar affricate consonant is realized as voiced post-alveolar fricative (s and z in the English mea s ure and a z ure ): / dʒ / → [ ʒ ] .

This phenomenon is very evident in daily speech (common also in Umbria and elsewhere in Central Italy): the phrase la gente 'the people' in Standard Italian is pronounced [la ˈdʒɛnte] , but in Tuscan, it is [la ˈʒɛnte] .

Similarly, the voiceless post-alveolar affricate is pronounced as a voiceless postalveolar fricative between two vowels: / tʃ / → [ ʃ ] .

The sequence /la ˈtʃena/ la cena , 'the dinner', in Standard Italian is pronounced [la ˈtʃeːna] , but in Tuscan, it is [la ˈʃeːna] . As a result of the weakening rule, there are a few minimal pairs distinguished only by length of the voiceless fricative (e.g.

[laʃeˈrɔ] lacerò 'it/he/she ripped' vs.

[laʃʃeˈrɔ] lascerò 'I will leave/let').

Affrication of S [ edit ] A less common phonetic phenomenon is the realization of "voiceless s" ( voiceless alveolar fricative /s/ ) as the voiceless alveolar affricate [ts] when preceded by /r/ , /l/ , or /n/ .

/s/ → [ts] .

For example, il sole (the sun), pronounced in Standard Italian as [il ˈsoːle] , would be in theory pronounced [il ˈtsoːle] in Tuscan. However, since assimilation of the final consonant of the article to the following consonant tends to occur in exactly such cases (see Masculine definite articles ), the actual pronunciation is usually [is ˈsoːle] . Affrication of /s/ can more commonly be heard word-internally, as in falso (false) /ˈfalso/ → [ˈfaltso] . It is a common phenomenon in Central Italy but is not exclusive to that area; for example, it also occurs in Switzerland ( Canton Ticino ). It does not occur in a small area including Florence (except Rifredi [ it ] ) and Prato.

[ 12 ] No diphthongization of /ɔ/ [ edit ] There are two Tuscan historical outcomes of Latin ŏ in stressed open syllables. Passing first through a stage / ɔ / , the vowel has then developed as a diphthong [wɔ] . The phenomenon has never gained universal acceptance, however, and so forms with the diphthong have come to be accepted as Standard Italian (e.g.

fuoco , buono , nuovo , duomo ), but the monophthong remains in popular speech ( foco , bono , novo , domo ).

Morphology [ edit ] Accusative "te" for "tu" [ edit ] A characteristic of Tuscan dialect is the use of the accusative pronoun te in emphatic clauses of the type "You! What are you doing here?".

Standard Italian: tu lo farai, no?

' You' ll do it, won't you?' Tuscan: Te lo farai, no?

Standard Italian: tu , vieni qua!

' You , come here!' Tuscan: Te , vieni qua!

Double dative pronoun [ edit ] A morphological phenomenon, cited also by Alessandro Manzoni in his novel " I promessi sposi " ( The Betrothed ), is the doubling of the dative pronoun .

For the use of a personal pronoun as indirect object ( to someone, to something ), also called dative case , the standard Italian makes use of a construction preposition + pronoun a me (to me), or it makes use of a synthetic pronoun form, mi (to me). The Tuscan dialect makes use of both in the same sentence as a kind of intensification [ citation needed ] of the dative/indirect object: In Standard Italian: a me piace or mi piace ("I like it"; literally, "it pleases me") In Tuscan: a me mi piace or a me mi garba ("I like it") This usage is widespread throughout the central regions of Italy, not only in Tuscany, and is often considered redundant and erroneous by language purists. It is also a standard feature in Spanish: a mí me gusta ("I like it") In some dialects, the double accusative pronoun me mi vedi (lit: Me you see me ) can be heard, but that is considered to be an archaic form.

Masculine definite articles [ edit ] Both the singular and the plural masculine definite articles can be realized phonetically as [i] in Florentine varieties of Tuscan but are distinguished by their phonological effect on following consonants. The singular causes the lengthening of the following consonant: [i kkaːne] 'the dog'. However, the plural permits consonant weakening: [i haːni] 'the dogs'. As in Italian, the masculine singular lo occurs before consonants long by nature or not permitting /l/ in clusters ( lo zio 'the uncle', lo studente 'the student'), but forms such as i zio can be heard in rustic varieties.

Noi + impersonal si [ edit ] A morpholosyntactic phenomenon  that is found throughout Tuscany is the personal use of the particle identical to impersonal si (not to be confused with passive si or the reflexive si ), as the first-person plural. That is basically the same as the use of on in French .

It is possible to use the construction si + third-person in singular verb , which can be preceded by the first-plural person pronoun noi .

Standard Italian: Andiamo a mangiare (We're going to eat), Noi andiamo là (We go there) Tuscan: Si va a mangià (We're going to eat), Noi si va là (We go there) The phenomenon is found in all verb tenses, including compound tenses. In those tenses, the use of si requires a form of essere ( to be ) as auxiliary verb. If the verb is one that otherwise selects auxiliary avere in compound constructions, the past participle does not agree with the subject in gender and number: Italian: Abbiamo mangiato al ristorante.

Tuscan: S'è mangiato al ristorante.

If the verb normally requires essere , the past participle is marked as plural: Italian: Siamo andati al cinema.

Tuscan: S'è andati al cinema.

Usually, si contracts before è : si è → s'è .

Fo (faccio) and vo (vado) [ edit ] Another morphological phenomenon present in Tuscan is what might appear to be shortening of first singular verb forms in the present tense of fare ( to do , to make )  and andare ( to go ).

Fare: It.

faccio Tusc.

fo (I do, I make) Andare: It.

vado Tusc.

vo (I go) These forms have two origins. Natural phonological change alone can account for loss of /d/ and reduction of /ao/ to /o/ in the case of /vado/ > * /vao/ > /vo/ . A case such as Latin sapio > Italian so (I know), however, admits no such phonological account since the expected outcome of /sapio/ would be * /sappjo/ , with a normal lengthening of the consonant preceding /j/ .

What seems to have taken place is a realignment of the paradigm in accordance with the statistically-minor but highly-frequent paradigms of dare (give) and stare (be, stay). Thus, so, sai, sa, sanno (all singulars and the third-person plural of 'know') have come to fit the template of do, dai, dà, danno ('give'), sto, stai, sta, stanno ('be, stay'), and fo, fai, fa, fanno ('make, do'), which have followed the same pattern. The form vo , while quite possibly a natural phonological development, seems to have been reinforced by analogy in that case.

Loss of infinitival "-re" [ edit ] A phonological phenomenon that might appear to be morphological is the loss of the infinitival ending -re of verbs.

andàre → andà pèrdere → pèrde finìre → finì Stress remains on the same vowel that is stressed in the full form and so the infinitive may coincide with various conjugated singulars: pèrde 'to lose', pèrde 's/he loses'; finì 'to finish', finì 's/he finished'. This homophony seldom, if ever, causes confusion, as they usually appear in distinct syntactic contexts.

The infinitive without -re is universal in some subtypes such as Pisano-Livornese, but in the vicinity of Florence , alternations are regular and so the full infinitive (e.g.

vedere 'to see') appears before a pause , and the clipped form ( vedé ) is found otherwise. The consonant of an enclitic is lengthened if it is preceded by stressed vowel ( vedéllo 'to see it', portàcci 'to bring us') but not when the preceding vowel of the infinitive is unstressed ( lèggelo 'to read it', pèrdeti 'to lose you').

A similar process is found in Romanian , with infinitives cited as a ("to") + the verb, and the -re has been dropped. As in Tuscan, the stress is on the same syllable that had it before the loss of -re .

In Catalan and its dialects, in Campidanese Sardinian and for some Portuguese-speakers, final infinitive -r is not pronounced and so anar is pronounced  /ə'na/.

A phenomenon similar in origin in French has led to loss of both /r/ and final /e/ in the - are class of infinitives at an early stage and so the final syllable of Modern French aimer , chanter etc. is pronounced as stressed [e] .

Lexicon [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The most important differences among dialects is in the lexicon , which also distinguishes the different subdialects. The Tuscan lexicon is almost entirely shared with Standard Italian, but many words may be perceived as obsolete or literary by non-Tuscans. There are also many strictly-regional words and expressions.

Characteristically-Tuscan words: accomodare (which means "to arrange" in Standard Italian) for riparare (to repair) babbo (standard form in Italian before the French loanword papa ) for papà (dad), also in Umbria, Marche billo for tacchino (turkey), found also in Umbria and Lazio bove (literary form in Standard Italian) for bue (ox), also in Umbria cacio for formaggio (cheese), especially for Pecorino calzoni (literary form in Standard Italian) for pantaloni (trousers) camiciola for canottiera (undervest) cannella (literary form in Standard Italian) for rubinetto (tap), widespread in Central and Southern Italy capo (literary form in Standard Italian) and chiorba for testa (head) cencio for straccio (rag, tatters) (but also straccio is widely used in Tuscany) chetarsi (literary form in Standard Italian) or chetassi for fare silenzio (to be silent) codesto (literary form in Standard Italian) is a pronoun which specifically identifies an object far from the speaker but near the listener (corresponding in meaning to Latin iste ).

costì or costà is a locative adverb that refers to a place far from the speaker but near the listener. It relates to codesto as qui/qua relates to questo and lì/là to quello desinare (literary form in Standard Italian) for pranzare (to have lunch) diaccio for ghiacciato , freddo (frozen, cold) essi for sii (second-person singular imperative form of 'to be') furia (which means "fury" in Standard Italian) for fretta (hurry) golpe or gorpe for volpe (fox), also in Umbria, Marche, but also found in Anonimo Romano’s Cronica (written in Romanesco Vulgar Latin) garbare for piacere (to like) (but also piacere is sometimes used in Tuscany) gota (literary form in Standard Italian) for guancia (cheek) ire for andare (to go) (only some forms as ito (gone), not unique to Tuscany) lapis for matita (pencil), common throughout Italy popone for melone (cantaloupe) punto for per nulla or niente affatto (not at all) in negative sentences (cf. French ne ... point ) rigovernare for lavare i piatti (to do/wash the dishes) sciocco (which means "silly" or "stupid" in Standard Italian) for insipido (insipid) sistola for tubo da giardinaggio (garden hose) sortire for uscire (to exit) (compare French sortir ) sudicio for spazzatura (garbage) as a noun and for sporco (dirty) as an adjective termosifone or radiatore for calorifero (radiator) tocco for le 13 (one p.m.), lunch time See also [ edit ] Augusto Novelli , Italian playwright known for using the Tuscan dialect for 20th-century Florentine theater The Adventures of Pinocchio , written by Carlo Collodi in Italian but employing frequent Florentinisms Paleo-Corsican language Etruscan language References [ edit ] ^ "storia della lingua in "Enciclopedia dell'Italiano" " .

www.treccani.it .

^ "Ali, Linguistic atlas of Italy" . Atlantelinguistico.it . Retrieved 2013-11-22 .

^ Linguistic cartography of Italy by Padova University Archived May 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Italian dialects by Pellegrini" . Italica.rai.it. Archived from the original on 2009-10-12 . Retrieved 2013-11-22 .

^ AIS, Sprach- und Sachatlas Italiens und der Südschweiz, Zofingen 1928-1940 ^ Harris, Martin; Vincent, Nigel (1997).

Romance Languages . London: Routlegde.

ISBN 0-415-16417-6 .

^ Tuscan and Etruscan: The problem of linguistic substratum influence in central Italy by Herbert J Izzo ^ [1] Reviewed Works: Fonologia etrusca, fonetica toscana: Il problema del sostrato by Luciano Agostiniani, Luciano Giannelli; The Etruscan Language by Giuliano Bonfante, Larissa Bonfante
Review by: Nigel Vincent
Language
Vol. 61, No. 3 (Sep., 1985), pp. 688-691 (4 pages)
Published By: Linguistic Society of America ^ [2] ITALIAN DIALECT CLASSIFICATIONS
Federica CUGNO *
University of Turin.

Dialectologia . Special issue, 10 (2023), 197-230.

^ Bonfante, G.

; L. Bonfante (2002).

The Etruscan Language. An Introduction . Manchester University Press.

^ Dennis, George (1848).

The Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria . London: John Murray.

Available in the Gazetteer of Bill Thayer's Website at [3] ^ Castellani, Arrigo (1993). "Zeta per esse dopo liquida o nasale a Firenze?".

Studi linguistici italiani (in Italian).

19 : 53– 61.

Giannelli, Luciano. 2000.

Toscana . Profilo dei dialetti, 9. Pisa: Pacini.

External links [ edit ] Atlante lessicale toscano (ALT) - Dialectometry The Linguasphere Register v t e Languages of Italy Historical linguistic minorities : Albanian , Catalan , Croatian , French , Franco-Provençal , Friulian , German , Greek , Ladin , Occitan , Romani , Sardinian , Slovene Italo-Romance Italian Regional Italian Venetian [ a ] Venetian Fiuman Triestine Tuscan Florentine Central Italian Central-Northern Latian Marchigiano Marinese Romanesco Sabino Intermediate Southern (Neapolitan) Beneventano Barese Castelmezzanese Cilentan Cosentino Irpinian Arianese Molisan Southern Latian Tarantino Vastese Extreme Southern Central-Southern Calabrian Salentino Manduriano Sicilian Pantesco Other Italo-Dalmatian languages Corsican Gallurese Sassarese Sardinian Sardinian Campidanese Logudorese Occitano-Romance Catalan Algherese Occitan Vivaro-Alpine Mentonasc Niçard Gardiol Gallo-Romance French Aostan Franco-Provençal Valdôtain Faetar Cellese Gallo-Italic Ligurian Brigasc Genoese Intemelio Monégasque Royasc Tabarchino Lombard Western Lombard Brianzöö dialects Canzés Bustocco and Legnanese Legnanese Comasco-Lecchese dialects Comasco Laghée Vallassinese Lecchese Milanese Ticinese Ossolano Varesino Southwestern Lombard Pavese Novarese Cremunés Spasell Eastern Lombard Bergamasque Cremish Emilian–Romagnol Emilian Bolognese Parmigiano Romagnol Forlivese Other Gallo-Italic languages Gallo-Italic of Basilicata Gallo-Italic of Sicily Judeo-Italian Judaeo-Piedmontese Piedmontese Rhaeto-Romance Rhaeto-Romance Friulian Ladin Cadorino Fornes Nones Italy portal Albanian Arbëresh language Arbëresh Vaccarizzo Albanian South Slavic Slovenian Brda Gail Valley Inner Carniolan Istrian Karst Natisone Valley Resian Torre Valley Serbo-Croatian Croatian Montenegrin Slavomolisano Triestine Serbian Greek Italiot Greek Calabrian Greek Griko German Bavarian Cimbrian Mòcheno Southern Bavarian South Tyrolean Other German dialects Austrian German Walser Yiddish Others Hebrew Italian Hebrew Italian Sign Language Romani Sinte Romani Wenzhounese ^ Venetian is either grouped with the rest of the Italo-Dalmatian or the Gallo-Italic languages, depending on the linguist, but the major consensus among linguists is that in the dialectal landscape of northern Italy, Veneto dialects are clearly distinguished from Gallo-Italic dialects.

v t e Romance languages ( classification ) Major branches Eastern Italo-Western Italo-Dalmatian Western Southern Eastern Aromanian Istro-Romanian Megleno-Romanian Daco-Romanian dialects Banat Bukovinian Crișana Maramureș Moldavian Oltenian Transylvanian Wallachian Italo- Dalmatian Central Central Italian Central Marchigiano Ancona Fabriano Macerata Central−Northern Latian Romanesco Sabino Corsican Gallurese Italian Italo-Australian Maltese Italian Regional Italian Swiss Italian Sassarese Tuscan Florentine Southern Extreme Southern Italian Central−Southern Calabrian Salentino Manduriano Sicilian Pantesco Neapolitan–Calabrese Neapolitan Barese Benevento Castelmezzano Cilentan Irpinian Arianese Molisan Southern Latian Tarantino Vastese Northern Calabrian Others Dalmatian Romance Dalmatian Istriot Judeo-Italian Western Gallo-Italic Emilian–Romagnol Emilian Bolognese Judeo-Mantuan Parmigiano Romagnol Forlivese Old Romagnol Sammarinese Ferrarese Gallo-Italic of Basilicata Gallo-Italic of Sicily Gallo-Picene Ligurian Brigasc Genoese Intemelio Monégasque Royasc Tabarchino Judeo-Italian Lombard Eastern Bergamasque Cremish Old Lombard Western Brianzöö Canzés Bustocco–Legnanese Legnanese Comasco–Lecchese Comasco Laghée Lecchese Vallassinese Milanese Ossolano Southwestern Cremunés Novarese Pavese Ticinese Varesino Piedmontese Judeo-Piedmontese Gallo- Romance Langues d'oïl Angevin Berrichon Bourbonnais Burgundian Champenois Ardennais Rémois Frainc-Comtou Gallo French Jersey Legal Meridional North American dialects Canadian Acadian Chiac St. Marys Bay French Brayon Newfoundland Quebec Joual Magoua Franco-Ontarian Métis Muskrat New England Frenchville Louisiana Missouri Creoles Lorrain Gaumais Vosgien Welche Mayennais Moselle Romance Norman Anglo-Norman Auregnais Guernésiais Jèrriais Sercquiais Law French Augeron Cauchois Cotentinais Orléanais Paydret Picard Poitevin–Saintongeais Poitevin Saintongeais Walloon West Walloon Wisconsin Walloon Franco-Provençal /Arpitan Faetar Savoyard Valdôtain Old Gallo-Romance Ibero- Romance ( West Iberian ) Asturleonese Asturian Eastern Western Cantabrian Leonese Bercian Paḷḷuezu Palra Riberan Riunorese Mirandese Old Leonese Galician–Portuguese Fala Galician Galician–Asturian /Eonavian Portuguese dialects African Asian Brazilian Mineiro European Alentejan Oliventine Estremenho Minderico Northern Uruguayan Creoles Portugis Judeo-Portuguese Castilian Extremaduran Judeo-Spanish Haketia Tetuani Spanish dialects Equatoguinean Latin American Chilean Chilote Peruvian Peruvian Ribereño Rioplatense Peninsular Andalusian Llanito Castilian Castrapo Castúo Murcian Philippine Saharan Creoles Old Spanish Pyrenean–Mozarabic Andalusi Romance Navarro-Aragonese Aragonese Central Eastern Ribagorçan Benasquese Judeo-Aragonese Southern Somontanés Navalese Western Aisinian Ansó Aragüés Hecho Community of Villages Aragonese Ebro Valley Aragonese Navarrese Old Riojan Valencian Aragonese Others Barranquenho (mixed Portuguese–Spanish) Caló (mixed Romani–Ibero- and Occitano-Romance) Occitano- Romance Catalan dialects Eastern Algherese Balearic Mallorcan Menorcan Central Northern Judeo-Catalan Patuet Western Ribagorçan Valencian Gardiol Occitan Auvergnat Gascon Aranese Béarnese Aas whistled Landese Judeo-Gascon Judeo-Provençal Languedocien Limousin Provençal Niçard Vivaro-Alpine Gardiol Mentonasc Old Occitan Old Catalan Rhaeto- Romance Friulian Fornes Ladin Cadorino Nones Romansh Jauer Putèr Surmiran Sursilvan Tuatschin Sutsilvan Vallader Others Franco-Italian Mediterranean Lingua Franca (Western Romance-based pidgin) Venetian (unknown further classification) Chipilo Fiuman Talian Triestine Others African Romance British Latin Pannonian Latin Sardinian Campidanese Logudorese Dialects of Latin Reconstructed Proto-Romance Proto-Eastern Romance Italics indicate extinct languages Bold indicates languages with more than 5 million speakers Languages between parentheses are varieties of the language on their left.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qp56m
Cached time: 20250817184205
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.689 seconds
Real time usage: 0.804 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6365/1000000
Revision size: 22387/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 307156/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17622/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 64806/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.399/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16905360/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  641.906      1 -total
 28.87%  185.287     18 Template:Navbox
 22.59%  145.027      1 Template:Infobox_language
 20.18%  129.559      1 Template:Infobox
 17.46%  112.088      2 Template:Reflist
 13.32%   85.491      1 Template:Languages_of_Italy
 12.00%   77.046      4 Template:Lang
 10.43%   66.982      3 Template:Cite_web
 10.36%   66.522      1 Template:Italian_language
 10.16%   65.211      1 Template:Sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1804416:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817184205 and revision id 1297486991. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tuscan_dialect&oldid=1297486991 " Categories : Languages of Italy Tuscany Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Italian-language text Language articles with Linglist code Languages without Glottolog code Language articles with Linguasphere code Language articles with IETF language tag Languages without ISO 639-3 code but with Linguist List code Languages without ISO 639-3 code but with Linguasphere code Ill-formatted infobox-language images Language articles with speakers set to 'unknown' Pages with Italian IPA Pages with plain IPA Pages with Tuscan IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Articles that may contain original research from September 2014 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from September 2014 Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 13:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tuscan dialect 23 languages Add topic

