Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Activities 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Charles Babbage Institute 2.1.1 Babbage Activities 2.1.2 Archival papers and oral histories 2.1.3 CBI History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents IT History Society Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Charles Babbage Institute ) Preservation and study of computer history IT History Society Formation 2007 Purpose Promote and facilitate the preservation and study of the history of Internet Technology and be a "table of contents" of where information technology history is located Origins Charles Babbage Foundation Region served World-wide Membership 700+ [ 1 ] Chairman Jeffery Stein Main organ Board of Directors Website www .ithistory .org The IT History Society ( ITHS ) is an organization that supports the history and scholarship of information technology by encouraging, fostering, and facilitating archival and historical research. Formerly known as the Charles Babbage Foundation , it advises historians, promotes collaboration among academic organizations and museums, and assists IT corporations in preparing and archiving their histories for future studies.

Activities [ edit ] The IT History Society [ 2 ] provides background information to those with an interest in the history of Information Technology , including papers that provide advice on how to perform historical work and how historical activities can benefit private sector organizations. It tracks historical projects seeking funding as well as projects underway and completed. It maintains online, publicly available, lists of events pertaining to IT history, IT history resources, an IT Honor Roll acknowledging more than 700 individuals who have made a noteworthy contribution to the information technology industry, and a database of notable technology quotes.

A continuing project is one of aggregating the locations and content of IT history archival information around the world to facilitate and encourage IT history research and scholarship.

[ 3 ] [ citation needed ] This International Database of Historical and Archival Sites currently consists of 1,663 international information technology historical and archival collections encompassing over 49.8 million documents.

[ 3 ] An IT Hardware database has been added consisting of 12,187 entries, an IT Honor Roll with 1,031 entries, and a  Technical Quotes database with over 1,000 entries. These databases are being added to on a regular basis an IT Software and IT Companies databases will debut soon. ITHS holds an annual meeting and conference.

History [ edit ] The International Charles Babbage Society was founded in 1978 and operated out of Palo Alto, California . The following year the American Federation of Information Processing Societies (AFIPS) became a principal sponsor of the society, which was renamed the Charles Babbage Institute .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In 1980, the institute moved to the University of Minnesota , which contracted with the principals of the Charles Babbage Institute to sponsor and house the institute.

[ 6 ] A new entity, the Charles Babbage Foundation , was created to help support and govern the institute, in partnership with the university. In 1989, CBI became an organized research unit of the university.

Around 2000, CBF broadened its mission to support the history of information technology through other organizations, collaborating, for example, with the Sloan Foundation , Software History Center , and the Computer History Museum in experimenting with Internet-based archival and historical research.  In 2002, the Charles Babbage Foundation broadened its mission to support the entire IT history community.  In 2007, CBF changed its name to the IT History Society and reworked its programs to better support the IT history community.

Charles Babbage Institute [ edit ] The Charles Babbage Institute is a research center at the University of Minnesota specializing in the history of information technology , particularly the history of digital computing, programming/software, and computer networking since 1935. The institute is named for Charles Babbage , the nineteenth-century English inventor of the programmable computer.

[ 7 ] The institute is located in Elmer L. Andersen Library at the University of Minnesota Libraries in Minneapolis , Minnesota .

Babbage Activities [ edit ] In addition to holding important historical archives, in paper and electronic form, its staff of historians and archivists conduct and publish historical and archival research that promotes the study of the history of information technology internationally.

[ 8 ] CBI also encourages research in the area and related topics (such as archival methods ); to do this, it offers graduate fellowships [ 9 ] and travel grants, [ 10 ] organizes conferences and workshops, and participates in public programming. It also serves as an international clearinghouse of resources for the history of information technology.

Also valuable for researchers are its extensive collection of oral history interviews, more than 400 in total.  Oral histories with important early figures in the field have been conducted by CBI staff and collaborating colleagues.

[ 11 ] Owing to the poorly documented state of many early computer developments, these oral histories are immensely valuable documents.  One author called the set of CBI oral histories "a priceless resource for any historian of computing." [ 12 ] Most of CBI's oral histories are transcribed and available online.

[ 13 ] The archival collection also contains manuscripts ; records of professional associations ; corporate records (including the Burroughs corporate records and the Control Data corporate records, among many others); trade publications ; periodicals ; manuals and product literature for older systems, photographic material (stills and moving), and a variety of other rare reference materials.

It is now a center at the University of Minnesota , and is located on its Twin Cities , Minneapolis campus, where it is housed in the Elmer L. Andersen Library on the West Bank.

Archival papers and oral histories [ edit ] The CBI has collections of archival papers and oral histories from many notable figures in computing including: Gene Amdahl Walter L. Anderson Isaac L. Auerbach Rebecca Bace Charles W. Bachman Paul Baran Jean Bartik Edmund Berkeley James Bidzos Gertrude Blanch Vint Cerf John Day Edsger W. Dijkstra Wallace John Eckert Alexandra Illmer Forsythe Margaret R. Fox Gideon Gartner Bruce Gilchrist George Glaser Martin A. Goetz Gene H. Golub Carl Hammer Martin Hellman Frances E. Holberton Cuthbert Hurd Anita K. Jones Brian Kahin Donald Knuth Bryan S. Kocher Mark P. McCahill Daniel D. McCracken Alex McKenzie Carl Machover Michael Mahoney Marvin Minsky Calvin N. Mooers William C. Norris Susan Nycum Donn B. Parker Alan J. Perlis Robert M. Price Claire K. Schultz Erwin Tomash Keith Uncapher Willis Ware Terry Winograd Patrick Winston Konrad Zuse CBI History [ edit ] CBI was founded in 1978 by Erwin Tomash and associates as the International Charles Babbage Society , and initially operated in Palo Alto, California .

In 1979, the American Federation of Information Processing Societies (AFIPS) became a principal sponsor of the Society, which was renamed the Charles Babbage Institute.

In 1980, the institute moved to the University of Minnesota , which contracted with the principals of the Charles Babbage Institute to sponsor and house the institute.  In 1989, CBI became an organized research unit of the university.

See also [ edit ] History of computing History of computing hardware History of operating systems History of the internet Internet governance List of pioneers in computer science Standards Setting Organization References [ edit ] ^ IT History Society's Databases Continue to Grow , PRWeb , November 19, 2010.

^ IT History Society – An IT Teaching and Research Resource , September 2011, archived from the original on May 18, 2024 , retrieved December 10, 2024 ^ a b "What's Your Tech" .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2011 . Retrieved April 26, 2010 .

^ "Paul Berthiaume Dies; Led Information Bank" .

The New York Times . October 17, 1981.

Archived from the original on October 4, 2022 . Retrieved October 4, 2022 .

the Charles Babbage Institute, an organization devoted to the history of information processing.

^ "A N by Any Name is Still a N" .

The New York Times . July 6, 1986.

Archived from the original on October 4, 2022 . Retrieved October 4, 2022 .

^ Steve Lohr (August 12, 2011).

"Daniel D. McCracken, Expert on Computers, Dies at 81" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 18, 2019 . Retrieved October 4, 2022 .

with the Charles Babbage Institute at the University of Minnesota, which conducts historical research on computing.

^ William Aspray, "Leadership in Computing History: Arthur Norberg and the Charles Babbage Institute." IEEE Annals of the History of Computing , 29(4) (October–December 2007): 16–26.

^ "CBI Staff Publication List" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 23, 2010 . Retrieved October 6, 2018 .

^ "CBI Research Program: Tomash Fellowship" .

www.cbi.umn.edu .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2014 . Retrieved October 6, 2018 .

^ "CBI Research Program: Norberg Travel Fund" .

www.cbi.umn.edu .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2014 . Retrieved October 6, 2018 .

^ "Oral history interviews" .

University of Minnesota .

hdl : 11299/59493 .

^ M. Mitchell Waldrop, The Dream Machine: J.C.R. Licklider and the Revolution That Made Computing Personal (2001): quote p. 483.

^ Oral histories Archived July 2, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota.

External links [ edit ] Official website CBI website History of CBI and CBF v t e Western U.S. historical societies Mountain Arizona Arizona Historical Society ( Tempe ) Colorado Denver Colorado Aviation Historical Society History Colorado Pueblo Bessemer Historical Society Pueblo Historical Aircraft Society Others Adventures in Preservation ( Boulder ) Society for French Historical Studies ( Colorado Springs ) St. Vrain Historical Society ( Longmont ) Idaho Idaho State Historical Society ( Moscow ) Montana Helena Montana Historical Society Society of Montana Pioneers Nevada Las Vegas Historical Society ( Las Vegas ) New Mexico New Mexico Historic Preservation Division ( Santa Fe ) Utah Salt Lake City Church History Library Daughters of Utah Pioneers Utah State Historical Society Others Mormon History Association ( Heber City ) Utah Aviation Hall of Fame ( Roy ) Wyoming Wyoming Division of State Parks and Historic Sites ( Cheyenne ) Pacific California Pan-Californian California Historical Society California Register of Historical Resources Native Sons of the Golden West Society of California Pioneers E Clampus Vitus Bay Area Berkeley Architectural Heritage Association Berkeley Historical Society California Trolley and Railroad Corporation GLBT Historical Society Hayward Area Historical Society History San José IT History Society Oakland Heritage Alliance San Francisco Museum and Historical Society Silicon Valley Historical Association Sonoma County Historical Society South Bay Historical Railroad Society Walnut Creek Historical Society Western Society for French History Central Coast Carpinteria Historical Society Conejo Valley Historical Society Goleta Valley Historical Society Pajaro Valley Historical Association San Buenaventura Conservancy Central Valley Fort Tejon Historical Association San Joaquin County Historical Society and Museum Greater Los Angeles Association of Moving Image Archivists Centinela Valley Historical Society Chinese Historical Society of Southern California Getty Conservation Institute Glendora Historical Society H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society Los Angeles Conservancy San Fernando Valley Historical Society Society for the Preservation of Downtown Los Angeles West Adams Heritage Association Westminster Historical Society Whittier Conservancy South Coast American Aviation Historical Society Association of Ancient Historians La Jolla Historical Society Orange County Historical Society San Diego History Center Save Our Heritage Organisation Santee Historical Society Museum The Conference on Faith and History Others Humboldt County Historical Society ( Eureka ) Modoc County Historical Society ( Alturas ) Nevada County Historical Society ( Nevada City ) Perris Valley Historical and Museum Association ( Perris ) Hawaii Hawaiian Historical Society ( Honolulu ) Oregon Association for Recorded Sound Collections ( Eugene ) Oregon Electric Railway Historical Society Oregon Historical Society ( Portland ) Restore Oregon ( Eugene ) Washington Olympia Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation Washington Women's History Consortium Seattle Historic Seattle Puget Sound Maritime Historical Society Tacoma American Society for Environmental History Washington State Historical Society Others Disability History Association ( Mountlake Terrace ) Eastside Heritage Center ( Bellevue ) Mercer Island Historical Society ( Mercer Island ) United States Lighthouse Society ( Hansville ) Whitman County Historical Society ( Whitman County ) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐sqr9b
Cached time: 20250817082226
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.418 seconds
Real time usage: 0.532 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2648/1000000
Revision size: 14030/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 108743/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2717/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 45254/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.244/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6842331/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  459.522      1 -total
 30.57%  140.483      1 Template:Reflist
 22.72%  104.398      8 Template:Navbox
 18.90%   86.867      1 Template:Western_U.S._historical_societies
 18.09%   83.114      1 Template:Infobox_organization
 16.63%   76.427      1 Template:Infobox
 15.65%   71.912      1 Template:Citation
 13.80%   63.406      1 Template:Short_description
  8.44%   38.785      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.38%   33.919      1 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21368780:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817082226 and revision id 1279094233. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=IT_History_Society&oldid=1279094233#Charles_Babbage_Institute " Categories : Charles Babbage 1978 establishments in Minnesota Historical societies of the United States History of science organizations History of computing Information technology organizations International organizations based in the United States Oral history Organizations established in 2007 Organizations based in Minnesota Research institutes established in 1978 University of Minnesota Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from October 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from October 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011 Pages using div col with small parameter Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 6 March 2025, at 14:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents IT History Society Add languages Add topic

