Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Geodynamics 3 Ocean dynamics 4 Marine ecology 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Lion 46 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°59′47″N 4°00′01″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.99639°N 4.00028°E ﻿ / 42.99639; 4.00028 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wide embayment of the Mediterranean coastline of France You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(January 2021) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Golfe du Lion]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Golfe du Lion}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Map of the Gulf of Lion The Gulf of Lion or Gulf of Lions [ 1 ] is a wide embayment of the Mediterranean coastline of Catalonia in Spain with Languedoc-Roussillon and Provence in France , extending from Begur in the west to Toulon in the east.

The chief port on the gulf is Marseille . Toulon is another important port. The fishing industry in the gulf is based on hake ( Merluccius merluccius ), being bottom-trawled, long-lined and gill-netted and currently declining from overfishing .

Rivers that empty into the gulf include the Tech , Têt , Aude , Orb , Hérault , Vidourle , and the Rhône .

The continental shelf is exposed here as a wide coastal plain, and the offshore terrain slopes rapidly to the Mediterranean's abyssal plain . Much of the coastline is composed of lagoons and salt marsh .

This is the area of the cold, blustery winds called the Mistral and the Tramontane .

[ clarification needed ] Etymology [ edit ] The current name of the gulf appeared at least during the 13th century (in medieval Latin sinus Leonis , mare Leonis ) and could come from comparison with a lion : it would simply suggest that this part of the sea is as dangerous as a lion because it has very violent, surprising winds that threaten boats (sailors and fishermen know these dangers very well [ 2 ] ). This comparison with a lion is suggested by various converging sources: Deroy and Mulon's dictionary of French place names, [ 3 ] Mistral 's comprehensive Occitan dictionary, [ 4 ] Diderot and D'Alembert 's famous French encyclopedia [ 5 ] and several texts in Latin since the 13th century.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] These sources, especially Deroy and Mulon, Diderot and D'Alembert, reject the hypothesis according to which the name would be related to the city of Lyon , since it is too far from the gulf.

A former name in classical Latin during Roman antiquity was sinus Gallicus (that is, " Gallic gulf").

Geodynamics [ edit ] The Gulf of Lion is not a simple passive continental margin ; it results from Oligocene - Miocene anti-clockwise rotation of the Corsican-Sardinian Block against the European Craton . This extension rejuvenated a very complex tectonic framework inherited from the Tethyan evolution and the Pyrenean orogeny. The Eocene mountain-building event that built the Pyrenees compressed and thickened the entire crust. Oil geologists predict that there will be considerable oil deposits at the seaward margins of the gulf.

Ocean dynamics [ edit ] The gulf's bottom topography, the Mistral , extended cold weather, and evaporation combine to create a sinking of surface waters which forms the Levantine Intermediate Water of the Mediterranean Sea.

[ 8 ] Marine ecology [ edit ] The Gulf of Lion is notable, according to C. Michael Hogan, for occurrences of biodiversity associated with the reef building organism Lophelia pertusa .

[ 9 ] A wind park is planned.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ ( French : golfe du Lion , Spanish : golfo de León , Italian : Golfo del Leone , Occitan : golf del/dau Leon , Catalan : golf del Lleó , Medieval Latin : sinus Leonis , mare Leonis , Classical Latin: sinus Gallicus ) ^ Louis Michel, 1964, La langue des pêcheurs du golfe du Lion , Paris: D'Artrey ^ Louis Deroy, & Marianne Mulon, 1994, Dictionnaire des noms de lieux , Paris: Le Robert ^ Frederic Mistral, 1878-1886 (1979), Lou Tresor dóu Felibrige ou dictionnaire provençal-français , Aix-en-Provence: Edisud, see. articles gou ( golf , 'gulf') and lioun ( leon , 'lion').

^ (in French) Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers Archived 2011-06-08 at the Wayback Machine ^ (in French) Supplément à l'Encyclopédie, Sinus Gallicus ^ (in French) Mémoires pour l'histoire naturelle de la province de Languedoc ^ Wunsch, Carl. (2015). Modern Observational Physical Oceanography: Understanding the Global Ocean. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. pp. 271-274.

ISBN 978-0-691-15882-2 .

^ C. Michael Hogan. 2011.

Alboran Sea . eds. P. Saundry & C. J. Cleveland.

Encyclopedia of Earth . National Council for Science and the Environment. Washington DC ^ https://www.meretmarine.com/fr/energies-marines/eolien-flottant-la-construction-du-parc-pilote-efgl-bat-son-plein External links [ edit ] Marine topography of the Golfe du Lion v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Other Yale LUX 42°59′47″N 4°00′01″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.99639°N 4.00028°E ﻿ / 42.99639; 4.00028 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_of_Lion&oldid=1293911496 " Categories : Gulf of Lion Gulfs of Metropolitan France Gulfs of the Mediterranean Landforms of Occitania (administrative region) Landforms of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur History of lions in Europe Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Geography articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2021 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 11:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Lion 46 languages Add topic

