Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Latin poetry 5 languages Bahasa Indonesia Македонски 日本語 Simple English Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Poetry of the Latin language This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Latin poetry" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Memorial Stone of Quintus Sulpicius Maximus , Rome, Italy. First century AD; located at the Porta Salaria , Rome, commemorating an 11-year-old who won a poetry contest in 95 AD.

The history of Latin poetry can be understood as the adaptation of Greek models. The verse comedies of Plautus , the earliest surviving examples of Latin literature , are estimated to have been composed around 205–184 BC.

History [ edit ] Scholars conventionally date the start of Latin literature to the first performance of a play in verse by a Greek slave, Livius Andronicus , at Rome in 240 BC. Livius translated Greek New Comedy for Roman audiences, using meters that were basically those of Greek drama , modified to the needs of Latin. His successors Plautus ( c.

254 – 184 BC) and Terence ( c.

195/185 – c.

159? BC) further refined the borrowings from the Greek stage and the prosody of their verse is substantially the same as for classical Latin verse.

[ 1 ] Ennius (239 – 169 BC), virtually a contemporary of Livius, introduced the traditional meter of Greek epic, the dactylic hexameter , into Latin literature; he substituted it for the jerky Saturnian meter in which Livius had been composing epic verses. Ennius moulded a poetic diction and style suited to the imported hexameter, providing a model for "classical" poets such as Virgil and Ovid .

[ 2 ] The late republic saw the emergence of Neoteric poets , notably Catullus —rich young men from the Italian provinces, conscious of metropolitan sophistication, and looking to the scholarly Alexandrian poet Callimachus for inspiration.

[ 3 ] Catullus shared the Alexandrian's preference for short poems and wrote within a variety of meters borrowed from Greece, including Aeolian forms such as hendecasyllabic verse , the Sapphic stanza and Greater Asclepiad , as well as iambic verses such as the choliamb and the iambic tetrameter catalectic (a dialogue meter borrowed from Old Comedy ).

[ 4 ] Horace , whose career crossed the divide between the Roman republic and empire , followed Catullus' lead in employing Greek lyrical forms, identifying with Alcaeus of Mytilene , composing Alcaic stanzas , and also with Archilochus , composing poetic invectives in the Iambus tradition (in which he adopted the metrical form of the Epode or "Iambic Distich"). Horace was a contemporary of Virgil and, like the epic poet, he wrote verses in dactylic hexameter, but in a conversational and epistolary style. Virgil's hexameters are generally regarded as "the supreme metrical system of Latin literature ." [ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Prosody (Latin) - the structural basis of verse in Latin References [ edit ] ^ R.H. Martin, Terence: Adelphoe , Cambridge University Press (1976), pages 1 and 32.

^ P.G. McBrown, 'The First Roman Literature' in The Oxford History of the Classical World , J. Boardman, J. Griffin and O. Murray (eds), Oxford University Press (1995) page 450-52 ^ Robin Nisbet , 'The Poets of the Late Republic' in The Oxford History of the Classical World , J. Boardman, J. Griffin and O. Murray (eds), Oxford University Press (1995) page 487-90 ^ Peter Green, The Poems of Catullus , University of California Press (2005), pages 32-7 ^ Richard F. Thomas, Virgil: Georgics Vol. I, Cambridge University Press (1988), page 28.

Further reading [ edit ] Allen, William Sidney (2003).

Vox Latina — a Guide to the Pronunciation of Classical Latin (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-37936-9 .

v t e Poetry of different cultures and languages Afghan Albanian American Anglo-Welsh Arabic Assamese Australian Bengali Biblical British Bosnian Bulgarian Byzantine Canadian Chinese Cantonese Cornish English Estonian Finnish French Greek Guernésiais Gujarati Hindi Hebrew Indian Indian epic Irish Italian Japanese Javanese Jèrriais Kannada Kashmiri Korean Latin Latin American Latino Manx Marathi Malayalam Nepali New Zealand Old English Old Norse Ottoman Pakistani Pashto Persian Polish Portuguese Punjabi Rajasthani Russian Sanskrit Classical Vedic Scottish Serbian Serbian epic Sindhi Slovak Spanish Tamil Telugu Thai Turkish Urdu Vietnamese Welsh Poetry portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Latin_poetry&oldid=1299499974 " Categories : Latin poetry Poetry movements Latin-language literature Poetry by language Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2008 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 19:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Latin poetry 5 languages Add topic

