Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of food chemistry 2 Water in food systems 3 Carbohydrates 4 Lipids 5 Food proteins 6 Enzymes 7 Vitamins 8 Minerals 9 Colour 10 Flavours 11 Food additives 12 See also 13 References 14 Bibliography 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Food chemistry 29 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bosanski Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt Winaray ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of chemical processes in food For the journal, see Food Chemistry (journal) .

Food chemistry is the study of chemical processes and interactions of all biological and non-biological components of foods.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The biological substances include such items as meat , poultry , lettuce , beer , and milk as examples. It is similar to biochemistry in its main components such as carbohydrates , lipids , and protein , but it also includes substances such as water, vitamins , minerals , enzymes , food additives , flavors , and colors . This discipline also encompasses how products change under certain food processing techniques and ways either to enhance or to prevent those changes from happening. An example of enhancing a process would be to encourage fermentation of dairy products with microorganisms that convert lactose to lactic acid ; an example of preventing a process would be stopping the browning on the surface of freshly cut apples using lemon juice or other acidulated water .

History of food chemistry [ edit ] The scientific approach to food and nutrition arose with attention to agricultural chemistry in the works of J. G. Wallerius , Humphry Davy , and others. For example, Davy published Elements of Agricultural Chemistry, in a Course of Lectures for the Board of Agriculture (1813) in the United Kingdom which would serve as a foundation for the profession worldwide, going into a fifth edition. Earlier work included that by Carl Wilhelm Scheele , who isolated malic acid from apples in 1785.

Some of the findings of Liebig on food chemistry were translated and published by Eben Horsford in Lowell Massachusetts in 1848.

[ 3 ] In 1874 the Society of Public Analysts was formed, with the aim of applying analytical methods to the benefit of the public.

[ 4 ] Its early experiments were based on bread, milk, and wine.

It was also out of concern for the quality of the food supply, mainly food adulteration and contamination issues that would first stem from intentional contamination to later with chemical food additives by the 1950s. The development of colleges and universities worldwide, most notably in the United States, would expand food chemistry as well as research of the dietary substances, most notably the Single-grain experiment during 1907-11. Additional research by Harvey W. Wiley at the United States Department of Agriculture during the late 19th century would play a key factor in the creation of the United States Food and Drug Administration in 1906. The American Chemical Society established its Agricultural and Food Chemistry Division in 1908 while the Institute of Food Technologists established its Food Chemistry Division in 1995.

Food chemistry concepts are often drawn from rheology , theories of transport phenomena , physical and chemical thermodynamics , chemical bonds , and interaction forces, quantum mechanics and reaction kinetics , biopolymer science , colloidal interactions , nucleation , glass transitions and freezing/disordered or noncrystalline solids, and thus has Food Physical Chemistry as a foundation area.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Water in food systems [ edit ] Main article: Water A major component of food is water, which can encompass anywhere from 50% in meat products to 95% in lettuce , cabbage , and tomato products. It is also an excellent place for bacterial growth and food spoilage if it is not properly processed. One way this is measured in food is by water activity which is very important in the shelf life of many foods during processing. One of the keys to food preservation in most instances is reduce the amount of water or alter the water's characteristics to enhance shelf-life. Such methods include dehydration , freezing , and refrigeration [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] This field encompasses the "physiochemical principles of the reactions and conversions that occur during the manufacture, handling, and storage of foods" .

[ 11 ] Carbohydrates [ edit ] Main article: Carbohydrate Sucrose : ordinary table sugar and probably the most familiar carbohydrate Comprising 75% of the biological world and 80% of all food intake for human consumption, the most common known human carbohydrate is sucrose [ citation needed ] . The simplest version of a carbohydrate is a monosaccharide which contains carbon , hydrogen , and oxygen in a 1:2:1 ratio under a general formula of C n H 2n O n where n is a minimum of 3.

Glucose and fructose are examples of monosaccharides. When combined in the way that the image to the right depicts, sucrose , one of the more common sugar products found in plants, is formed.

A chain of monosaccharides form to make a polysaccharide . Such polysaccharides include pectin , dextran , agar , and xanthan .

[ 12 ] Some of these carbohydrate polysaccharides are accessible for digestion by human enzymes and mainly absorbed in the small intestine, whereas dietary fiber passes to the large intestine where some of these polysaccharides are fermented by the gastrointestinal microbiota.

[ 13 ] Sugar content is commonly measured in degrees brix .

Lipids [ edit ] Main article: Lipid The term lipid comprises a diverse range of molecules and to some extent is a catchall for relatively water-insoluble or nonpolar compounds of biological origin, including waxes , fatty acids (including essential fatty acids ), fatty-acid derived phospholipids, sphingolipids, glycolipids and terpenoids, such as retinoids and steroids . Some lipids are linear aliphatic molecules, while others have ring structures. Some are aromatic , while others are not. Some are flexible, while others are rigid.

Most lipids have some polar character in addition to being largely nonpolar. Generally, the bulk of their structure is nonpolar or hydrophobic ("water-fearing"), meaning that it does not interact well with polar solvents like water. Another part of their structure is polar or hydrophilic ("water-loving") and will tend to associate with polar solvents like water. This makes them amphiphilic molecules (having both hydrophobic and hydrophilic portions). In the case of cholesterol , the polar group is a mere -OH group ( hydroxyl or alcohol).

Lipids in food include the oils of such grains as corn , soybean , from animal fats, and are parts of many foods such as milk, cheese , and meat. They also act as vitamin carriers.

Food proteins [ edit ] Main article: Protein (nutrient) Proteins comprise over 50% of the dry weight of an average living cell [ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ] and are very complex macromolecules. They also play a fundamental role in the structure and function of cells.

[ 14 ] Consisting mainly of carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, oxygen , and some sulfur , they also may contain iron , copper , phosphorus , or zinc .

In food, proteins are essential for growth and survival, and requirements vary depending upon a person's age and physiology (e.g., pregnancy). Protein is commonly obtained from animal sources: eggs , milk , and meat .

Nuts , grains and legumes provide vegetable sources of protein, and protein combining of vegetable sources is used to achieve complete protein nutritional quotas from vegetables.

Protein sensitivity as food allergy is detected with the ELISA test.

Enzymes [ edit ] Main article: Enzyme Enzymes are biochemical catalysts used in converting processes from one substance to another. They are also involved in reducing the amount of time and energy required to complete a chemical process. Many aspects of the food industry use catalysts, including baking , brewing , dairy , and fruit juices , to make cheese, beer , and bread .

Vitamins [ edit ] Main article: Vitamin Riboflavin (vitamin B 2 ), water-soluble Vitamins are nutrients required in small amounts for essential metabolic reactions in the body. These are broken down in nutrition as either water-soluble ( vitamin C ) or fat -soluble ( vitamin E ). An adequate supply of vitamins can prevent diseases such as beriberi , anemia , and scurvy while an overdose of vitamins can produce nausea and vomiting or even death.

Minerals [ edit ] Main article: Dietary mineral Dietary minerals in foods are large and diverse with many required to function while other trace elements can be hazardous if consumed in excessive amounts. Bulk minerals with a Reference Daily Intake (RDI, formerly Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA)) of more than 200 mg/day are calcium , magnesium , and potassium while important trace minerals (RDI less than 200 mg/day) are copper, iron, and zinc. These are found in many foods, but can also be taken in dietary supplements.

Colour [ edit ] Main article: Food colouring Food colouring is added to change the colour of any food substance. It is mainly for sensory analysis  purposes. It can be used to simulate the natural colour of a product as perceived by the customer, such as red dye (like FD&C Red No.40 Allura Red AC) to ketchup or to add unnatural colours to a product like Kellogg's Froot Loops .  Caramel is a natural food dye; the industrial form, caramel colouring, is the most widely used food colouring and is found in foods from soft drinks to soy sauce , bread, and pickles .

Flavours [ edit ] Main article: Taste Flavour in food is important in how food smells and tastes to the consumer, especially in sensory analysis. Some of these products occur naturally like salt and sugar , but flavour chemists (called a " flavourist ") develop many of these flavours for food products. Such artificial flavours include methyl salicylate which creates the wintergreen odor and lactic acid which gives milk a tart taste.

Food additives [ edit ] Main article: Food additive Food additives are substances added to food for preserving flavours, or improving taste, look, smell and freshness. The processes are as old as adding vinegar for pickling or as an emulsifier for emulsion mixtures like mayonnaise . These are generally listed by " E number " in the European Union or GRAS (" generally recognized as safe ") by the United States Food and Drug Administration .

See also [ edit ] Food portal Chemistry portal Physics portal Food physical chemistry Dietary supplement Food and Bioprocess Technology (journal) Food Chemistry (journal) Food composition Food engineering Food fortification Food microbiology Food packaging Food preservation Food rheology Food safety Food science Food storage Food supplements Food technology Nutraceutical Nutrification (also called food enrichment or fortification) References [ edit ] ^ John M. de Man.1999.

Principles of Food Chemistry (Food Science Text Series), Springer Science, Third Edition ^ John M. de Man. 2009. Food process engineering and technology, Academic Press, Elsevier: London and New York, 1st edn.

^ Eben Horsford (editor) (1848) Liebig's Researches on the Chemistry of Food and the Motion of the Juices in the Animal Body , Lowell Massachusetts ^ Proc. Soc. Analyt. Chem p. 234 ^ Pieter Walstra. 2003.

Physical Chemistry Of Foods . Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York, 873 pages ^ Physical Chemistry Of Food Processes: Fundamental Aspects .1992.van Nostrand-Reinhold vol.1., 1st Edition, ^ Pieter Walstra. 2003.

Physical Chemistry Of Foods . Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York, 873 pages ^ Physical Chemistry Of Food Processes: Fundamental Aspects .1992.van Nostrand-Reinhold vol.1., 1st Edition, ^ Henry G. Schwartzberg, Richard W. Hartel. 1992.

Physical Chemistry of Foods . IFT Basic Symposium Series, Marcel Dekker, Inc.:New York, 793 pages ^ Physical Chemistry of Food Processes, Advanced Techniques, Structures and Applications .1994. van Nostrand-Reinhold vols.1-2., 1st Edition, 998 pages; 3rd edn. Minuteman Press, 2010; vols. 2-3, fifth edition ( in press ) ^ Pieter Walstra. 2003.

Physical Chemistry Of Foods . Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York, 873 pages ^ Ostrowski, Matthew P.; La Rosa, Sabina Leanti; Kunath, Benoit J.; Robertson, Andrew; Pereira, Gabriel; Hagen, Live H.; Varghese, Neha J.; Qiu, Ling; Yao, Tianming; Flint, Gabrielle; Li, James; McDonald, Sean P.; Buttner, Duna; Pudlo, Nicholas A.; Schnizlein, Matthew K.; Young, Vincent B.; Brumer, Harry; Schmidt, Thomas M.; Terrapon, Nicolas; Lombard, Vincent; Henrissat, Bernard; Hamaker, Bruce; Eloe-Fadrosh, Emiley A.; Tripathi, Ashootosh; Pope, Phillip B.; Martens, Eric C. (April 2022).

"Mechanistic insights into consumption of the food additive xanthan gum by the human gut microbiota" .

Nature Microbiology .

7 (4): 556– 569.

doi : 10.1038/s41564-022-01093-0 .

hdl : 11250/3003739 .

PMC 11537241 .

PMID 35365790 .

S2CID 247866305 .

^ Makki, Kassem; Deehan, Edward C.; Walter, Jens; Bäckhed, Fredrik (June 2018).

"The Impact of Dietary Fiber on Gut Microbiota in Host Health and Disease" .

Cell Host & Microbe .

23 (6): 705– 715.

doi : 10.1016/j.chom.2018.05.012 .

PMID 29902436 .

S2CID 49211123 .

^ Food and Nutrition Board of Institute of Medicine (2005) Dietary Reference Intakes for Protein and Amino Acids , page 685, from National Academies Press Bibliography [ edit ] Fennema, O.R., Ed. (1985).

Food Chemistry - Second Edition, Revised and Expanded.

New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.

Francis, F.J. (2000). "Harvey W. Wiley: Pioneer in Food Science and Quality." In A Century of Food Science.

Chicago: Institute of Food Technologists. pp. 13–14.

Potter, N.N. and J.H. Hotchkiss. (1995).

Food Science, Fifth Edition.

New York: Champman & Hall. pp. 24–68.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (1993).

Everything Added to Food in the United States.

Boca Raton, Florida: C.K. Smoley (c/o CRC press, Inc.).

External links [ edit ] American Chemical Society – Agricultural and Food Chemistry Division Institute of Food Technologists Food Chemistry Division The Penn State University, Food Chemistry, US Wageningen University, Laboratory of Food Chemistry, The Netherlands v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Food science General Allergy Engineering Food Human Nutritional rating systems Glycemic index Insulin index Satiety value Microbiology Nutrition Diet Clinical Processing Processing aids Psychology Quality Sensory analysis Discrimination testing Rheology Storage Technology v t e Food chemistry Additives Carbohydrates Coloring Enzymes Essential fatty acids Flavors Fortification Lipids "Minerals" (Chemical elements) Proteins Vitamins Water v t e Food preservation Biopreservation Burying in ground Canning Cold chain Curing Drying Fermentation Freeze-drying Freezing Hurdle technology Irradiation Jamming Jellying Jugging Modified atmosphere Pascalization Pickling Potting Confit Potjevleesch Rillettes Salting Smoking Sugaring Tyndallization Vacuum packing Food portal Category: Food preservation Food industry Manufacturing Packaging Marketing Foodservice Fortification v t e Consumer food safety Adulterants , food contaminants 3-MCPD Aldicarb Antibiotic use in livestock Cyanide Formaldehyde HGH controversies Lead poisoning Melamine Mercury in fish Sudan I Food additives Flavorings Monosodium glutamate (MSG) Salt Sugar High-fructose corn syrup Vegetable oil controversy Intestinal parasites , parasitic disease Amoebiasis Anisakiasis Cryptosporidiosis Cyclosporiasis Diphyllobothriasis Enterobiasis Fasciolopsiasis Fasciolosis Giardiasis Gnathostomiasis Paragonimiasis Toxocariasis Toxoplasmosis Trichinosis Trichuriasis Microorganisms Botulism Campylobacter jejuni Clostridium perfringens Cronobacter Enterovirus Escherichia coli O104:H4 Escherichia coli O157:H7 Hepatitis A Hepatitis E Listeria Norovirus Rotavirus Salmonella Shigatoxigenic and verotoxigenic E. coli Vibrio cholerae Pesticides Chlorpyrifos DDT Lindane Malathion Methamidophos Preservatives Benzoic acid Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) Sodium benzoate Sugar substitutes Acesulfame potassium Aspartame controversy Saccharin Sodium cyclamate Sorbitol Sucralose Toxins , poisons , environment pollution Aflatoxin Arsenic contamination of groundwater Benzene in soft drinks Bisphenol A Dieldrin Diethylstilbestrol Dioxins Mycotoxins Nonylphenol Shellfish poisoning Food fraud Bread Breast milk Egg Olive oil Prawn Seafood Shrimp Tea Wine Food processing 4-Hydroxynonenal Acid-hydrolyzed vegetable protein Acrylamide Food additives Food irradiation Heterocyclic amines Modified starch Nitrosamines Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon Shortening Trans fat Variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Water fluoridation controversy Food contamination incidents Devon colic Swill milk scandal Esing Bakery incident 1858 Bradford sweets poisoning 1900 English beer poisoning Morinaga Milk arsenic poisoning incident Minamata disease 1959 Moroccan oil poisoning disaster [ ar ] 1971 Iraq poison grain disaster Toxic oil syndrome 1985 Austrian diethylene glycol wine scandal United Kingdom BSE outbreak Australian meat substitution scandal Jack in the Box E. coli outbreak 1996 Odwalla E. coli outbreak 2006 North American E. coli outbreaks ICA meat repackaging controversy 2008 Canada listeriosis outbreak 2008 Chinese milk scandal 2008 Irish pork crisis 2008 United States salmonellosis outbreak 2011 Germany E. coli outbreak 2011 United States listeriosis outbreak Bihar school meal poisoning 2013 horse meat scandal 2015 Mozambique funeral beer poisoning 2017 Brazil Operation Weak Meat 2017–2018 South African listeriosis outbreak 2018 Australian strawberry contamination 2024 United Kingdom Shigatoxigenic E. coli outbreak Kobayashi red yeast rice scandal Food safety incidents in China Food safety incidents in Taiwan Foodborne illness outbreaks death toll United States Regulation , standards , watchdogs Acceptable daily intake E number Food labeling regulations Food libel laws Food safety in Australia International Food Safety Network ISO 22000 Nutrition facts label Organic certification Quality Assurance International United Kingdom food information regulations Institutions Centre for Food Safety (Hong Kong) European Food Safety Authority Food and Drug Administration Food Information and Control Agency (Spain) Food Standards Agency (United Kingdom) Institute for Food Safety and Health International Food Safety Network Ministry of Food and Drug Safety (South Korea) Spanish Agency for Food Safety and Nutrition Related topics Curing (food preservation) Food and drink prohibitions Food marketing Food politics Food preservation Food quality Genetically modified food Conspiracy theories Food portal Drink portal Category Commons Cookbook WikiProject v t e Artificial foods Artificial fat substitutes Olestra Artificial protein substitutes Acid-hydrolyzed vegetable protein Artificial sugar substitutes Acesulfame potassium Alitame Advantame Aspartame Aspartame-acesulfame salt Carrelame Dulcin Glucin Hydrogenated starch hydrolysates Lugduname Neohesperidin dihydrochalcone Neotame Saccharin Sodium cyclamate Sucralose Natural food substitutes Cheese analogues Coffee substitutes Egg substitutes Meat substitutes bacon list Milk substitutes Phyllodulcin Salt substitutes Brands Tang Related topics Food safety List of food additives Food politics Food power Food security Famine Food desert Food swamp List of nutrition guides Malnutrition Overnutrition Institutions International Association for Food Protection Food and Drug Administration Food and Agriculture Organization National Agriculture and Food Research Organization National Food and Drug Authority v t e Public health General Auxology Biological hazard Chief medical officer Cultural competence Deviance Environmental health Eugenics History of Liberal Euthenics Genomics Globalization and disease Harm reduction Health economics Health literacy Health policy Health system Health care reform Housing First Human right to water and sanitation Management of depression Public health law National public health institute Health politics Labor rights Maternal health Medical anthropology Medical sociology Mental health ( Ministers ) Occupational safety and health Pharmaceutical policy Pollution Air Water Soil Radiation Light Prisoners' rights Public health intervention Public health laboratory Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to rest and leisure Right to sit Security of person Sexual and reproductive health Social psychology Sociology of health and illness Unisex changing rooms Unisex public toilets Workers' right to access the toilet Preventive healthcare Behavior change Theories Drug checking Family planning Harm reduction Health promotion Human nutrition Healthy diet Preventive nutrition Hygiene Food safety Hand washing Infection control Oral hygiene Needle and syringe programmes Occupational safety and health Human factors and ergonomics Hygiene Controlled Drugs Injury prevention Medicine Nursing Patient safety Organization Pharmacovigilance Reagent testing Safe sex Sanitation Emergency Fecal–oral transmission Open defecation Sanitary sewer Waterborne diseases Worker School hygiene Smoking cessation Supervised injection site Vaccination Vector control Population health Biostatistics Child mortality Community health Epidemiology Global health Health impact assessment Health system Infant mortality Open-source healthcare software Multimorbidity Public health informatics Social determinants of health Commercial determinants of health Health equity Race and health Social medicine Biological and epidemiological statistics Case–control study Randomized controlled trial Relative risk Statistical hypothesis testing Analysis of variance (ANOVA) Regression analysis ROC curve Student's t -test Z -test Statistical software Infectious and epidemic disease prevention Asymptomatic carrier Epidemics List Notifiable diseases List Public health surveillance Disease surveillance Quarantine Sexually transmitted infection Social distancing Tropical disease Vaccine trial WASH Food hygiene and safety management Food Additive Chemistry Engineering Microbiology Processing Safety Safety scandals Good agricultural practice Good manufacturing practice HACCP ISO 22000 Health behavioral sciences Diffusion of innovations Health belief model Health communication Health psychology Positive deviance PRECEDE–PROCEED model Social cognitive theory Social norms approach Theory of planned behavior Transtheoretical model Organizations, education and history Organizations Caribbean Caribbean Public Health Agency China Center for Disease Control and Prevention Europe Centre for Disease Prevention and Control Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Russia Rospotrebnadzor India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Canada Health Canada Public Health Agency U.S.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Health departments in the United States Council on Education for Public Health Public Health Service World Health Organization World Toilet Organization ( Full list ) Education Health education Higher education Bachelor of Science in Public Health Doctor of Public Health Professional degrees of public health Schools of public health History History of public health in the United Kingdom History of public health in the United States History of public health in Australia Sara Josephine Baker Samuel Jay Crumbine Carl Rogers Darnall Joseph Lister Margaret Sanger John Snow Typhoid Mary Radium Girls Germ theory of disease Social hygiene movement Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia 2 Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐cb6hf
Cached time: 20250812033356
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.653 seconds
Real time usage: 0.878 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2842/1000000
Revision size: 16118/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 232778/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3146/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51595/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.364/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7303111/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  654.693      1 -total
 47.12%  308.496     10 Template:Navbox
 20.04%  131.169      1 Template:Reflist
 17.58%  115.121      2 Template:Cite_journal
 14.05%   92.006      1 Template:BranchesofChemistry
 12.74%   83.390      1 Template:For
 12.52%   81.988      1 Template:Food_science
  9.67%   63.279      1 Template:Authority_control
  9.53%   62.396      1 Template:Short_description
  8.00%   52.348      2 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7888444:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812033356 and revision id 1303061173. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Food_chemistry&oldid=1303061173 " Category : Food chemistry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2016 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 22:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Food chemistry 29 languages Add topic

