Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Earlier personifications 2 Evolution Toggle Evolution subsection 2.1 Samuel Wilson legend 2.2 Development of the character 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Uncle Sam 57 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National personification of the United States This article is about the national personification of the United States federal government. For its comic book adaptation, see Uncle Sam (comics) . For other uses, see Uncle Sam (disambiguation) .

J. M. Flagg 's 1917 poster was based on the original British Lord Kitchener poster of three years earlier. It was used to recruit soldiers for both World War I and World War II into the US Army . Flagg used a modified version of his own face for Uncle Sam, [ 1 ] and veteran Walter Botts provided the pose.

[ 2 ] Uncle Sam (with the same initials as United States ) is a common national personification of the United States, depicting the federal government or the country as a whole. Since the early 19th century, Uncle Sam has been a popular symbol of the U.S. government in American culture and a manifestation of patriotic emotion.

[ 3 ] Uncle Sam has also developed notoriety for his appearance in military propaganda , popularized by a 1917 World War I recruiting poster by James Montgomery Flagg .

[ 4 ] According to legend, the character came into use during the War of 1812 and may have been named after Samuel Wilson . The actual origin is obscure.

[ 5 ] The first reference to Uncle Sam in formal literature (as distinct from newspapers) was in the 1816 allegorical book The Adventures of Uncle Sam, in Search After His Lost Honor .

[ 6 ] While the figure of Uncle Sam specifically represents the government , the female figure of Columbia represents the United States as a nation. An archaic character, Brother Jonathan , was known to represent the American populace.

Earlier personifications [ edit ] Columbia , a female personification of the US, by American illustrator Paul Stahr The earliest known personification of the United States was as a woman named Columbia , who first appeared in 1738 ( pre-US ) and sometimes was associated with another female personification, Lady Liberty .

With the American Revolutionary War of 1775 came Brother Jonathan , a male personification. Brother Jonathan saw full literary development into the personification of American national character through the 1825 novel Brother Jonathan by John Neal .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Uncle Sam finally appeared after the War of 1812 .

[ 9 ] Columbia appeared with either Brother Jonathan or Uncle Sam, but her use declined as a national person in favor of Liberty, and she was effectively abandoned once she became the mascot of Columbia Pictures in the 1920s.

Uncle Sam and Columbia in an 1869 cartoon by Thomas Nast A March 24, 1810, journal entry by Isaac Mayo (a midshipman in the US Navy ) states: weighed anchor stood down the harbor, passed Sandy Hook , where there are two light-houses, and put to sea, first and the second day out most deadly stomach ache, oh could I have got onshore in the hight [ sic ] of it, I swear that uncle Sam, as they call him, would certainly forever have lost the services of at least one sailor.

[ 10 ] Evolution [ edit ] An 1810 edition of Niles' Weekly Register has a footnote defining Uncle Sam as "a cant term in the army for the United States ." [ 11 ] Presumably, it came from the abbreviation of the United States of America: U.S.

Samuel Wilson legend [ edit ] Photograph of Samuel Wilson of Troy, New York The precise origin of the Uncle Sam character is unclear, but a popular legend is that the name "Uncle Sam" was derived from Samuel Wilson , a meatpacker from Troy, New York , who supplied rations for American soldiers during the War of 1812. There was a requirement at the time for contractors to stamp their name and where the rations came from onto the food they were sending. Wilson's packages were labeled "E.A.—U.S." When someone asked what that stood for, a co-worker jokingly said, "Elbert Anderson [the contractor] and Uncle Sam," referring to Wilson, though the U.S.

actually stood for "United States".

[ 12 ] Doubts have been raised as to the authenticity of this story, as the claim did not appear in print until 1842.

[ 13 ] Additionally, the earliest known mention definitely referring to the metaphorical Uncle Sam is from 1810, predating Wilson's contract with the government.

[ 10 ] Development of the character [ edit ] Uncle Sam often personified the United States in political cartoons , such as this one in 1897 about the U.S. annexation of Hawaii .

In 1835, Brother Jonathan made a reference to Uncle Sam, implying that they symbolized different things: Brother Jonathan was the country itself, while Uncle Sam was the government and its power.

[ 14 ] A clockmaker in an 1849 comedic novel explains "we call...the American public Uncle Sam, as you call the British John Bull ." [ 15 ] By the 1850s, the names Brother Jonathan and Uncle Sam were being used nearly interchangeably, to the point that images of what had previously been called "Brother Jonathan" were being called "Uncle Sam". Similarly, the appearance of both personifications varied wildly. For example, one depiction of Uncle Sam in 1860 showed him looking like Benjamin Franklin , [ 16 ] while a contemporaneous depiction of Brother Jonathan [ 17 ] looks more like the modern version of Uncle Sam, though without a goatee .

Uncle Sam taking the lead in cutting up China in J. S. Pughe 's cartoon ( Puck magazine , August 23, 1899) An 1893 article in The Lutheran Witness claims Uncle Sam was simply another name for Brother Jonathan : When we meet him in politics we call him Uncle Sam; when we meet him in society we call him Brother Jonathan . Here of late Uncle Sam alias Brother Jonathan has been doing a powerful lot of complaining, hardly doing anything else.  [ sic ] [ 18 ] The "wily Yankee " was a stock character in mid-19th century American regional theater. His hat and striped pants were adopted for Uncle Sam.

[ 19 ] Uncle Sam did not get a standard appearance, even with the effective abandonment of Brother Jonathan near the end of the American Civil War , until the well-known recruitment image of Uncle Sam was first created by James Montgomery Flagg during World War I . The image was inspired by a British recruitment poster showing Lord Kitchener in a similar pose.

[ citation needed ] It is this image more than any other that has influenced the modern appearance of Uncle Sam: an elderly white man with white hair and a goatee , wearing a white top hat with white stars on a blue band, a blue tail coat , and red-and-white-striped trousers.

Poster by the United States Fuel Administration during World War One: "Uncle Sam needs that extra shovelful" Flagg's depiction of Uncle Sam was shown publicly for the first time, according to some, on the cover of the magazine Leslie's Weekly on July 6, 1916, with the caption "What Are You Doing for Preparedness?" [ 1 ] [ 20 ] More than four million copies of this image were printed between 1917 and 1918. Flagg's image was also used extensively during World War II , during which the US was codenamed "Samland" by the German intelligence agency Abwehr .

[ 21 ] The term was central in the song " The Yankee Doodle Boy ", which was featured in 1942 in the musical Yankee Doodle Dandy .

There are two memorials to Uncle Sam, both of which commemorate the life of Samuel Wilson: the Uncle Sam Memorial Statue in Arlington, Massachusetts , his birthplace; and a memorial near his long-term residence in Riverfront Park, Troy, New York . Wilson's boyhood home can still be visited in Mason, New Hampshire . Samuel Wilson died on July 31, 1854, aged 87, and is buried in Oakwood Cemetery , Troy, New York.

In 1976, Uncle Sam was depicted in " Our Nation's 200th Birthday , The Telephone's 100th Birthday " by Stanley Meltzoff for Bell System .

[ 22 ] In 1989, "Uncle Sam Day" became official. A Congressional joint resolution [ 23 ] designated September 13, 1989, as "Uncle Sam Day", the birthday of Samuel Wilson . In 2015, the family history company MyHeritage researched Uncle Sam's family tree and claims to have tracked down his living relatives.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Uncle Sam billboard Personification of the Americas Propaganda in the United States References [ edit ] ^ a b "The Most Famous Poster" .

American Treasures of the Library of Congress .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2016.

^ "Walter Botts, the Man Who Modeled Uncle Sam's Pose for J.M. Flagg's Famous Poster" .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2017 . Retrieved February 21, 2018 .

^ Terry Allan Hicks (2006).

Uncle Sam . Marshall Cavendish 2006, 40 pages. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0761421375 .

Archived from the original on August 14, 2021 . Retrieved August 1, 2015 .

^ "What's the deal with Uncle Sam?" .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2022 . Retrieved September 27, 2020 .

^ Schauffler, Robert Haven (1912).

Flag day; its history . New York : Moffat, Yard and Co. p.

145 .

^ pp. 40–41 of Albert Matthews, "Uncle Sam".

Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society , v.19, 1908. pp. 21–65.

Google Books Archived October 3, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ Morgan, Winifred (1988).

An American Icon: Brother Jonathan and American Identity . Newark, New Jersey: University of Delaware Press. p. 143.

ISBN 0-87413-307-6 .

^ Kayorie, James Stephen Merritt (2019). "John Neal (1793–1876)". In Baumgartner, Jody C. (ed.).

American Political Humor: Masters of Satire and Their Impact on U.S. Policy and Culture . Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. p. 88.

ISBN 978-1-4408-5486-6 .

^ "Uncle Sam" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2013 . Retrieved June 9, 2012 .

^ a b Zimmer, Ben (July 4, 2013).

"New Light on "Uncle Sam" referencing work at USS Constitution Museum in Charlestown, Mass" .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2015 . Retrieved July 2, 2015 .

^ Niles' Weekly Register . Vol. 7. Franklin Press, Baltimore. 1815. p. 187.

^ Wyandott Herald, Kansas City, August 17, 1882, p. 2 ^ Matthews, Albert (1908).

"Uncle Sam" .

Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society, Volume 19 .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2015 . Retrieved July 2, 2015 .

^ Morgan, Winifred (1988).

An American icon: Brother Jonathan and American identity .

University of Delaware Press . pg. 81.

^ Haliburton, Thomas Chandler (1839).

The Clockmaker, Or the Sayings and Doings of Sam. Slick of Slickville: To which is Added, the Bubbles of Canada, by the Same Author . Baudry. p. 20.

^ An appearance echoed in Harper's Weekly , June 3, 1865 "Checkmate" political cartoon (Morgan, Winifred (1988) An American icon: Brother Jonathan and American identity University of Delaware Press pg 95) ^ On page 32 of the January 11, 1862, edition Harper's Weekly.

^ December 7, 1893 "A Bit of Advice" The Lutheran Witness he pg 100 ^ "Unknown | [Man Whittling a Stick]" .

The Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

^ "Who Created Uncle Sam?" .

Life's Little Mysteries . Live Science. Archived from the original on December 3, 2008 . Retrieved February 16, 2012 .

^ Macintyre, Ben.

Operation Mincemeat , p. 57.

ISBN 978-1-4088-0921-1 ^ "Stanley Meltzoff Archives: The 1976 Bell System Telephone Book Cover" Archived August 13, 2021, at the Wayback Machine JKL Museum of Telephony (December 19, 2015); retrieved March 16, 2021 ^ "Bill Summary & Status – 100th Congress (1987–1988) – H.J.RES.626 – All Congressional Actions – THOMAS" .

Library of Congress .

Archived from the original on July 5, 2016 . Retrieved September 13, 2013 .

^ "New York Butcher is Named as Real Live Uncle Sam" .

The New York Times . July 3, 2015.

Archived from the original on July 8, 2015 . Retrieved July 3, 2015 .

^ "The History Behind Uncle Sam's Family Tree" .

Fox News . July 3, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2021 . Retrieved July 3, 2015 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bivins, Thomas H. "The body politic: the changing shape of Uncle Sam." Journalism Quarterly 64.1 (1987): 13-20.

Dewey, Donald.

The art of ill will: The story of American political cartoons (NYU Press, 2007).

online Gerson, Thomas I.

The Story of Uncle Sam: Godfather of America (March 1959) West Sand Lake, NY: "Uncle Sam" Enterprises, Inc.

Mouraux, Cecile, and Jean-Pierre Mouraux.

Who Was "Uncle Sam": Illustrated Story of the Life of Our National Symbol .

Sonoma, CA: Poster Collector (2006).

OCLC 70129530 Jacques, George W.

The Life and Times of Uncle Sam (2007). Troy, NY: IBT Global.

ISBN 978-1933994178 .

Palczewski, Catherine H. "The male Madonna and the feminine Uncle Sam: Visual argument, icons, and ideographs in 1909 anti-woman suffrage postcards." Quarterly Journal of Speech 91.4 (2005): 365-394.

online [ dead link ] Wilde, Lukas RA, and Shane Denson. "Historicizing and Theorizing Pre-Narrative Figures—Who is Uncle Sam?." Narrative 30.2 (2022): 152-168.

online A collection of reviews of the book "Who Was Uncle Sam" by Jean-Pierre and Cecile Moreaux.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Uncle Sam .

Look up Uncle Sam in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Knauer, Kelly (April 6, 2017).

"I Want You: The Story Behind the Iconic Recruitment Poster" .

Time . Retrieved May 30, 2025 .

Uncle Sam: The man and the meme by Natalie Elder (National Museum of American History) Historical Uncle Sam pictures James Montgomery Flagg's 1917 "I Want You" Poster and other works at the Wayback Machine (archived October 28, 2004) What's the origin of Uncle Sam?

The Straight Dope Uncle Sam online , links to 550 books v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e National symbols of the United States Symbols Flag Great Seal Bald eagle Uncle Sam Columbia Phrygian cap General Grant Tree American Creed Pledge of Allegiance Rose Oak Bison Landmarks Statue of Liberty ( Liberty Enlightening the World ) Liberty Bell Mount Rushmore National Mall West Potomac Park Mottos In God We Trust E pluribus unum Novus ordo seclorum Annuit cœptis Songs " The Star-Spangled Banner " " Dixie " " America the Beautiful " " Columbia, the Gem of the Ocean " " The Stars and Stripes Forever " " Hail to the Chief " " Hail, Columbia " " America (My Country, 'Tis of Thee) " " God Bless America " " Lift Every Voice and Sing " " The Army Goes Rolling Along " " Anchors Aweigh " " Marines' Hymn " " Semper Fidelis " " The Air Force Song " " Semper Paratus " " Semper Supra " " National Emblem March " " The Washington Post March " " Battle Hymn of the Republic " " Yankee Doodle " " You're a Grand Old Flag " " When Johnny Comes Marching Home " " This Land Is Your Land " " Battle Cry of Freedom " " God Bless the U.S.A.

" v t e National personifications Africa Kenya Wanjiku America Personification of the Americas Argentina Effigies of Argentina Gaucho Brazil Efígie da República Canada Johnny Canuck Chile Huaso Roto Colombia Juan Valdez Dominican Republic Conchoprimo Haiti Ezili Dantor Catherine Flon Mexico es:Alegoría de la Patria Mexicana Peru Madre Patria United States Billy Yank Northern states Brother Jonathan Columbia Johnny Reb Southern states Lady Justice Lady Liberty Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam Uruguay es:Representaciones alegóricas del Uruguay Venezuela Juan Bimba obsolete Asia Afghanistan Rostam Armenia Mother Armenia Bangladesh Bangamata Cambodia Preah Thong and Neang Neak China Chinese dragon Jade Emperor Panda Snow Lion Tibet Georgia Kartvlis Deda India Bharat Mata Indian elephant The Common Man Indonesia Ibu Pertiwi Iran Rostam Israel Srulik Japan Yamato-hime samurai Korea Korean tiger Kyrgyzstan Manas Lebanon Abu Abed Malaysia Hang Tuah Pakistan Shaheen Māder-e Millat Palestine Handala Philippines Juan dela Cruz Maria Clara Singapore Merlion Thailand Siam Devadhiraj Tajikistan Rostam Turkmenistan Oghuz Khagan Europe Europa Europa regina Albania Mother Albania Belgium Manneken Pis es:La Belgique (alegoría) Leo Belgicus Croatia Mother Croatia Czech Republic Čechie Czech Vašek Švejk Denmark Holger Danske Mother Denmark Finland Finnish Maiden France Gallic rooster Marianne Germany Deutscher Michel Germania Greece Hellas Hungary Lady of Hungaria Prince Csaba Székely Land Turul Iceland Lady of the Mountain Ireland Ériu Hibernia Kathleen Ni Houlihan Italy Italia turrita Roma Malta Melita Netherlands Dutch Maiden Leo Belgicus Norway no:Mor Norge Nór Ola Nordmann Poland Polonia Portugal Efígie da República Angel of Portugal Zé Povinho Serbia Kosovo Maiden Mother Serbia Spain Hispania es:León hispano Sweden Mother Svea Switzerland Helvetia Russia Mother Russia Russian Bear Russian Winter Ukraine Cossack Mamay Mother Ukraine United Kingdom Britannia John Bull Dame Wales Scota Welsh Dragon Oceania Australia Boxing kangaroo Digger Little Boy from Manly New Zealand Southern man (South Island) Zealandia Countryballs Symbols of Liberty v t e American folklore Folk heroes Johnny Appleseed Elfego Baca Daniel Boone Br'er Rabbit Jim Bridger Paul Bunyan Davy Crockett Mike Fink Geronimo John Henry Calamity Jane Casey Jones Molly Pitcher Ola Värmlänning Idiomatic figures Average Joe Cooter Brown Jack Robinson Sam Hide Uncle Sam Fearsome critters Agropelter Axehandle hound Ball-tailed cat Belled buzzard Cactus cat Champ Dungavenhooter Fur-bearing trout Gillygaloo Glawackus Goofus bird Gumberoo Hidebehind Hodag Hoop snake Hugag Jackalope Jersey Devil Joint snake Sidehill gouger Snallygaster Snipe Snow snake Splintercat Squonk Teakettler Wampus cat Ghosts Bell Witch Ghosts of the American Civil War Lincoln's ghost La Llorona Red Ghost White Lady Legends Bear Lake Monster Bigfoot Black Irish Bloodstopping Campfire story Confederate gold Fouke Monster Fountain of Youth Goatman Great Salt Lake whale Honey Island Swamp monster Lost Dutchman's Gold Mine Lost Ship of the Desert Madstone Mercy Brown vampire incident Mothman North Shore Monster Seven Cities of Gold Skunk ape Tailypo Westerns Cowboys / Vaqueros Ethnic Native Alaska California Lelawala Salishan African Flying Africans Gullah Jack Uncle Remus Cajun Letiche Rougarou Traiteur Pennsylvania Dutch Fraktur Hex sign Pow-wow Literary folk heroes Alfred Bulltop Stormalong Annie Christmas Brother Jonathan Casey at the Bat Cordwood Pete Evangeline Febold Feboldson Ichabod Crane Joe Magarac Johnny Kaw Kemp Morgan Mose Humphrey Ole Pete Pecos Bill Rip Van Winkle Tony Beaver Windwagon Smith Folk art Appalachia Ledger Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany People DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Uncle_Sam&oldid=1300065420 " Categories : Uncle Sam Culture of the United States Fictional American people Legendary American people National symbols of the United States National personifications Holiday characters Fictional characters introduced in the 19th century Tall tales American mascots Fictional characters based on real people American folklore American legends Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from June 2021 Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 03:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Uncle Sam 57 languages Add topic

