Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Trotskyism 1.3 OSS and National Review 2 Ideas Toggle Ideas subsection 2.1 The Managerial Revolution 2.2 Later writings 3 In fiction 4 Works 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents James Burnham 19 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Latina Lietuvių مصرى 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (1905–1987) James Burnham Born November 22, 1905 Chicago , Illinois , U.S.

Died July 28, 1987 ( 1987-07-29 ) (aged 81) Kent, Connecticut , U.S.

Spouse Marcia Lightner ​ ( m.

1934) ​ Relatives David Burnham (brother) Academic background Education Princeton University Balliol College, Oxford Influences Machiavelli Sorel Pareto Mosca Michels Marx Trotsky Academic work Discipline Philosophy Sub-discipline Political philosophy School or tradition Trotskyism (early) American conservatism (late) Institutions New York University Notable students Maurice Natanson Notable works The Managerial Revolution (1941) The Machiavellians: Defenders of Freedom (1943) Notable ideas Managerial class Managerial state Influenced Orwell Francis Macdonald Rahv Gottfried Moldbug James Burnham (November 22, 1905 – July 28, 1987) was an American philosopher and political theorist. He chaired the New York University Department of Philosophy .

His first book was An Introduction to Philosophical Analysis (1931). Burnham became a prominent Trotskyist activist in the 1930s. His most famous book, The Managerial Revolution (1941), speculated on the future of an increasingly proceduralist hence sclerotic society. A year before he wrote the book, he rejected Marxism and became an influential theorist of the political right as a leader of the American conservative movement .

[ 1 ] Burnham was an editor and a regular contributor to William F. Buckley 's conservative magazine National Review on a variety of topics. He rejected containment of the Soviet Union and called for the rollback of communism worldwide.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Born in Chicago , Illinois , on November 22, 1905, [ 4 ] James Burnham was the son of Claude George Burnham, an English immigrant and executive with the Burlington Railroad .

[ 5 ] James was raised as a Roman Catholic but rejected Catholicism as a college student, professing atheism for the rest of his life.

[ 6 ] He graduated at the top of his class at Princeton University before attending Balliol College, Oxford , where his professors included J. R. R. Tolkien and Martin D'Arcy . In 1929, he became a professor of philosophy at New York University .

[ 7 ] In 1934, he married Marcia Lightner.

[ 8 ] Trotskyism [ edit ] In 1933, along with Sidney Hook , Burnham helped to organize the American Workers Party led by the Dutch-born pacifist minister A. J. Muste .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Burnham supported the 1934 merger with the Communist League of America which formed the US Workers Party . In 1935, he allied with the Trotskyist wing of that party and favored fusion with the Socialist Party of America . During this period, he became a friend to Leon Trotsky . Writing for Partisan Review , Burnham was also an important influence on writers including Dwight Macdonald and Philip Rahv .

[ 11 ] However, Burnham's engagement with Trotskyism was short-lived: from 1937 a number of disagreements came to the fore.

In 1937, the Trotskyists were expelled from the Socialist Party, an action which led to the formation of the Socialist Workers Party (SWP) at the end of the year. Inside the SWP, Burnham allied with Max Shachtman in a faction fight over the position of the SWP's majority faction, led by James P. Cannon and backed by Leon Trotsky, defending the Soviet Union as a degenerated workers state against the incursions of imperialism . Shachtman and Burnham, especially after witnessing the Nazi–Soviet pact of 1939 and the invasions of Poland , Latvia , Lithuania , and Estonia by Joseph Stalin 's regime, as well as the Soviet invasion of Finland in November 1939, came to contend that the USSR was a new form of imperialistic class society and was thus not worthy of even critical support from the socialist movement.

[ citation needed ] In February 1940 he wrote Science and Style: A Reply to Comrade Trotsky , in which he broke with dialectical materialism . In this text he responds to Trotsky's request to draw his attention to "those works which should supplant the system of dialectic materialism for the proletariat" by referring to Principia Mathematica by Russell and Whitehead and "the scientists, mathematicians and logicians now cooperating in the new Encyclopedia of Unified Science ".

[ 12 ] After a protracted discussion inside the SWP, in which the factions argued their case in a series of heated internal discussion bulletins, the special 3rd National Convention of the organization in early April 1940 decided the question in favor of the Cannon majority by a vote of 55–31.

[ 13 ] Even though the majority sought to avoid a split by offering to continue the debate and to allow proportional representation of the minority on the party's governing National Committee, Shachtman, Burnham, and their supporters resigned from the SWP to launch their own organization, again called the Workers Party .

This break also marked the end of Burnham's participation in the radical movement, however. On May 21, 1940, he addressed a letter to the National Committee of the Workers Party resigning from the organization. In it he made it clear the distance he had moved away from Marxism : I reject, as you know, the "philosophy of Marxism," dialectical materialism . ...

The general Marxian theory of "universal history", to the extent that it has any empirical content, seems to me disproved by modern historical and anthropological investigation.

Marxian economics seems to me for the most part either false or obsolete or meaningless in application to contemporary economic phenomena. Those aspects of Marxian economics which retain validity do not seem to me to justify the theoretical structure of the economics.

Not only do I believe it meaningless to say that "socialism is inevitable" and false that socialism is "the only alternative to capitalism"; I consider that on the basis of the evidence now available to us a new form of exploitive society (which I call "managerial society") is not only possible but is a more probable outcome of the present than socialism. ...

On no ideological, theoretic or political ground, then, can I recognize, or do I feel, any bond or allegiance to the Workers Party (or to any other Marxist party). That is simply the case, and I can no longer pretend about it, either to myself or to others.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In 1941, Burnham wrote a book analyzing the development of economics and society as he saw it, called The Managerial Revolution: What is Happening in the World . The book was included in Life magazine's list of the 100 outstanding books of 1924–1944.

[ 16 ] OSS and National Review [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e During World War II , Burnham took a leave from NYU to work for the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), a forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency . Recommended by George F. Kennan , Burnham was invited to lead the semi-autonomous "Political and Psychological Warfare" division of the Office of Policy Coordination.

[ 7 ] Subsequently, during the Cold War , he called for an aggressive strategy against the Soviet Union . A contributor to The Freeman in the early 1950s, he considered the magazine too focused on economic issues, though it presented a wide range of opinion on the Soviet threat. In The Struggle for the World (1947), he called for common citizenship between the United States, Great Britain, and the British dominions, as well as a "World Federation" against communism. Burnham thought in terms of a hegemonic world, instead of a balance of power: A World Federation initiated and led by the United States would be, we have recognized, a World Empire. In this imperial federation, the United States, with a monopoly of atomic weapons, would hold a preponderance of decisive material power over all the rest of the world. In world politics, that is to say, there would not be a balance of power.

[ 17 ] In 1955, he helped William F. Buckley Jr.

found National Review magazine, which from the start took positions in foreign policy consistent with Burnham's own. In the National Review , he wrote a column titled "Third World War," which referred to the Cold War.

[ 18 ] Burnham became a lifelong contributor to the journal, and Buckley referred to him as "the number one intellectual influence on National Review since the day of its founding." [ 7 ] His approach to foreign policy has caused some to regard him as the first " neoconservative ," although Burnham's ideas have been an important influence on both the paleoconservative and neoconservative factions of the American Right.

[ 19 ] In 1983, President Ronald Reagan awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom .

In early November 1978 he suffered a stroke which affected his health and short-term memory .

[ 20 ] He died of kidney and liver cancer [ 21 ] at home in Kent, Connecticut , on July 28, 1987.

[ 22 ] He was buried in Kent on August 1, 1987.

[ 23 ] Ideas [ edit ] The Managerial Revolution [ edit ] Dust jacket of the 1941 edition of Burnham's seminal work Burnham's seminal work, The Managerial Revolution (1941), theorized about the future of world capitalism based upon its development in the interwar period. Burnham begins by saying that "It is a historical law, with no apparent exceptions so far known, that all social and economic groups of any size strive to improve their relative position with respect to power and privilege in society". He then weighed three possibilities: (1) that capitalism was a permanent form of social and economic organization and would continue indefinitely; (2) that it was temporary and destined by its nature to collapse and be replaced by socialism; (3) that it was currently being transformed into some non-socialist future form of society.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Since capitalism had a more or less definite beginning in the 14th century, it could not be regarded as an immutable and permanent form.

[ 26 ] Moreover, in the last years of previous economic systems such as those of Ancient Greece and the Roman Empire , mass unemployment was "a symptom that a given type of social organization is just about finished." [ 27 ] The worldwide mass unemployment of the depression era thus indicated that capitalism was itself "not going to continue much longer." [ 27 ] Burnham agreed with Marxists that the capitalist class would inevitably lose the class struggle, but disagreed that they would lose to the working class due to this class being too disorganized and weak. He instead argued that a new class called the managerial class would win against the capitalist class. Burnham defines this new class as the individuals responsible for "the tasks of the technical direction and coordination of the process of production." The managerial class is responsible for directing technical experts, including "operating executives, superintendents, administrative engineers, supervisory technicians; or, in government ... administrators, commissioners, bureau heads, and so on." According to Burnham, the managerial class has risen due to the increasing complexity and large scope of modern economies. Because doing certain tasks requires hyper specific technical knowledge, the capitalist class cannot perform all of the necessary tasks by themselves. This means that the capitalist class has to employ individuals who manage other individuals engaged in technical work. By doing this, the capitalist class has made themselves obsolete, since the managers are the individuals who actually control production. Although the managerial class is still employed by the capitalist class, Burnham argued that this arrangement was irreconcilable. This would eventually result in the managerial class who actually owns production seizing it from the capitalist class who owns it in name only. According to Burnham, the managerial class would seize power by implementing state ownership of production. Due to the complexity and large scale of modern economies, Burnham argues that this form of state ownership would prove more efficient than rule by individual capitalists. The "managerial revolution", according to Burnham, would result in the decline of capitalist democracy and the rise of managerial control of production while using "the unlimited state" as a vehicle.

[ 25 ] Analyzing the emerging forms of society around the world, Burnham saw certain commonalities between the economic formations of Nazi Germany , Stalinist Russia, and America under Roosevelt's New Deal . Burnham argued that in the short period since the First World War , a new society had emerged in which a social group or class of "managers" had waged a "drive for social dominance, for power and privilege, for the position of ruling class." [ 28 ] For at least the previous decade, there had grown in America the idea of a "separation of ownership and control" of the modern corporation, notably expounded in The Modern Corporation and Private Property by Berle and Means.

[ 29 ] Burnham expanded this concept, arguing that whether ownership was corporate and private or statist and governmental, the essential demarcation between the ruling elite (executives and managers backed by bureaucrats and functionaries) and the mass of society was not ownership so much as control of the means of production.

Burnham emphasized that "New Dealism", as he called it, "is not, let me repeat, a developed, systematized managerial ideology." Still, this ideology had contributed to American capitalism's moving in a "managerial direction": In its own more confused, less advanced way, New Dealism too has spread abroad the stress on the state as against the individual, planning as against private enterprise, jobs (even if relief jobs) against opportunities, security against initiative, "human rights" against "property rights." There can be no doubt that the psychological effect of New Dealism has been what the capitalists say it has been: to undermine public confidence in capitalist ideas and rights and institutions. Its most distinctive features help to prepare the minds of the masses for the acceptance of the managerial social structure.

[ 30 ] Burnham argued that the power of the capitalist class would decline, while a new managerial class would rise to take its place, directing the state and industry. He described both Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union as having a managerial class based on an economic model he considered to be superior to liberal capitalism. Because of this, he incorrectly predicted that the Nazis would win World War II.

[ 25 ] Later writings [ edit ] In The Machiavellians , he developed his theory that the emerging new élite would prosper better if it retained some democratic trappings—political opposition, a free press, and a controlled "circulation of the élites." His 1964 book Suicide of the West became a classic text for the post-war conservative movement in American politics, proclaiming Burnham's new interest in traditional moral values, classical liberal economics and anti-communism . He defined political ideologies as syndromes afflicting their proponents with various internal contradictions. His works greatly influenced paleoconservative author Sam Francis , who wrote two books about Burnham, and based his political theories upon the "managerial revolution" and the resulting managerial state .

In fiction [ edit ] British writer George Orwell was inspired by Burnham's The Managerial Revolution and his explanation of power, [ 31 ] which informed Orwell's 1949 novel Nineteen Eighty-Four . Orwell noted in 1945, "For Burnham's geographical picture of the new world has turned out to be correct. More and more obviously the surface of the earth is being parceled off into three great empires ...".

[ 32 ] The superpowers of Oceania, Eurasia, and Eastasia in the novel are partly influenced by Burnham's assessment of Roosevelt 's America, Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union as being managerial states. In 1946 Orwell, summarized Burnham's managerial revolution and outlined the geopolitical landscape of Nineteen Eighty-Four : The rulers of this new society will be the people who effectively control the means of production: that is, business executives, technicians, bureaucrats and soldiers, lumped together by Burnham, under the name of 'managers'. These people will eliminate the old capitalist class, crush the working class, and so organise society that all power and economic privilege remain in their own hands. Private property rights will be abolished, but common ownership will not be established. The new 'managerial' societies will not consist of a patchwork of small, independent states, but of great super-states grouped round the main industrial centres in Europe, Asia, and America. These super-states will fight among themselves for possession of the remaining uncaptured portions of the earth, but will probably be unable to conquer one another completely. Internally, each society will be hierarchical, with an aristocracy of talent at the top and a mass of semi-slaves at the bottom." [ 33 ] While Orwell partly agreed with Burnham's analysis, he never fully accepted Burnham's attitude towards Machiavellian managerial power. This unresolved thought helped to inspire the character of O'Brien , who talks about power and regimes in Nineteen Eighty-Four .

[ 34 ] Works [ edit ] Books Introduction to Philosophical Analysis (with Philip Wheelwright ). New York: Henry Holt and Company , 1932.

The Managerial Revolution: What is Happening in the World .

New York: John Day Co.

, 1941.

The Machiavellians: Defenders of Freedom . New York: John Day Co.

, 1943.

ISBN 0-89526785-3 .

The Struggle for the World .

New York: John Day Co.

, 1947.

The Case for De Gaulle: A Dialogue Between André Malraux and James Burnham . New York: Random House , 1948.

The Coming Defeat of Communism . New York: John Day Co.

, 1949.

Containment or Liberation? An Inquiry into the Aims of United States Foreign Policy . New York: John Day Co.

, 1953.

The Web of Subversion: Underground Networks . New York: John Day Co.

, 1954.

Congress and the American Tradition . Chicago: Regnery, 1959.

ISBN 0-76580997-4 .

Bear and Dragon: What is the Relation Between Moscow and Peking?

New York: National Review , in cooperation with the American-Asian Exchange, 1960.

Suicide of the West: An Essay on the Meaning and Destiny of Liberalism .

New York: John Day Co.

, 1964.

The War We Are In: The Last Decade and the Next . New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House , 1967.

Book contributions Introduction. In: Dobriansky, Lev E.

Veblenism: A New Critique . Washington: Public Affairs Press , 1957.

Pamphlets War and the Workers (as John West). New York: Workers Party of the United States , 1935.

Marxists .

Why Did They "Confess"? A Study of the Radek-Piatakov Trial .

New York: Pioneer Publishers, 1937.

Marxists .

The People's Front: The New Betrayal .

New York: Pioneer Publishers, 1937.

Bolshevik .

How to Fight War: Isolation, Collective Security, Relentless Class Struggle?

New York: Socialist Workers Party & Young Peoples Socialist League ( 4th Internationalists ), 1938.

Let the People Vote on War!

New York: Pioneer Publishers, 1939?.

In Defense of Marxism (Against the Petty-Bourgeois Opposition) (with Leon Trotsky , Joseph Hansen and William Warde). New York: Pioneer Publishers, 1942.

Public speaking Why Does a Country Go Communist? An address delivered at the Indian Congress for Cultural Freedom on March 31, 1951 . Bombay: Democratic Research Service, 1951.

Selected articles "The Case Against Adlai Stevenson." American Mercury , Vol. 76, October 1952, pp. 11–19.

"Can Washington Conduct Political Warfare?" American Mercury , December 1952, pp. 10-24.

"Does ADA Run the New Frontier?" National Review , Vol. 14, No. 18, May 7, 1963, pp. 355–62.

See also [ edit ] Circulation of elites Sam Francis Paul Gottfried References [ edit ] ^ Kelly, Daniel (2002).

James Burnham and the Struggle for the World: A Life . Wilmington, DE : ISI Books.

ISBN 1-882926-76-5 .

OCLC 50158918 .

^ James Burnham, 82, National Review Editor Archived 2018-06-29 at the Wayback Machine , Washington Post ^ Burnham, James (1967).

The War We Are In: The Last Decade and the Next . New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House.

OCLC 654685307 .

OL 26318667M .

^ Manfred Overesch, Friedrich Wilhelm Saal (1986).

Chronik deutscher Zeitgeschichte: Politik, Wirtschaft, Kultur . Vol. 3, Part 2. Droste. p. 791.

ISBN 3-7700-0719-0 .

^ "James Burnham (I)" .

Sempa . UNC. 2000-12-03.

Archived from the original on 2012-10-04 . Retrieved 2012-11-25 .

^ Priscilla Buckley, "James Burnham 1905–1987." National Review, July 11, 1987, p. 35.

^ a b c Kimball, Roger (September 2002).

"The power of James Burnham" .

The New Criterion .

Archived from the original on 2019-10-14 . Retrieved 2020-06-03 .

^ Burnham, James (November 25, 2014).

Suicide of the West: An Essay on the Meaning and Destiny of Liberalism . Encounter Books.

ISBN 978-1-59403784-9 – via Google Books.

^ Diggins 1975 , pp. 169–70.

^ "The Cerebral Communist: James Burnham", pp. 160–201.

^ Diggins 1975 , p. 180.

^ Burhham J. (1940) Science and Style A Reply to Comrade Trotsky , in In Defence of Marxism by Leon Trotsky, London 1966, pp. 232–56.

^ James P. Cannon, "The Convention of the Socialist Workers Party," The Fourth International, v. 1, no. 1 (May 1940), p. 16.

^ James Burnham, "Burnham's Letter of Resignation," The Fourth International, v. 1, no. 4 (August 1940), pp. 106–07.

^ " James Burnham: Letter of Resignation (1940) Archived 2010-03-14 at the Wayback Machine " on Marxists Internet Archive . Retrieved January 5, 2010.

^ Canby, Henry Seidel. "The 100 Outstanding Books of 1924–1944".

Life , 14 August 1944. Chosen in collaboration with the magazine's editors.

^ James Burnham, The Struggle for the World (Toronto: Longmans, 1947), 190, 210.

^ Sempa, Francis P. (May 27, 2020).

"Forget About a 'New' Cold War. The Old One Never Ended" .

The Diplomat .

Archived from the original on 2020-06-03 . Retrieved 2020-06-03 .

^ Kampmark, Binoy (October 2011). "The first neo-conservative: James Burnham and the origins of a movement".

Review of International Studies .

37 (4): 1885– 1902.

doi : 10.1017/S0260210510001117 .

ISSN 0260-2105 .

S2CID 145548819 .

^ Kupferberg, Feiwel (2002).

The rise and fall of the German Democratic Republic . New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers. p. 60.

ISBN 0-7658-0122-1 .

^ Hart, Jeffrey D. (2005).

The making of the American conservative mind: National review and its times . Wilmington, Del.: ISI Books. p.

255 .

ISBN 1-932236-81-3 .

^ Francis, Samuel T.

(1994).

Beautiful Losers: Essays on the Failure of American Conservatism . Univ of Missouri Pr. p.

129 .

ISBN 0-8262-0976-9 .

^ Smant, Kevin J. (1992).

How great the triumph: James Burnham, anticommunism, and the conservative movement . Lanham: University Press of America. p. 152.

ISBN 0-8191-8464-0 .

^ Burnham, James (1941), The Managerial Revolution: What is Happening in the World , New York: John Day Co., p. 29 .

^ a b c Beauchamp, Zack (2022-12-14).

"The 80-year-old book that explains Elon Musk and tech's new right-wing tilt" .

Vox . Retrieved 2023-08-17 .

^ Burnham 1941 , p. 30.

^ a b Burnham 1941 , p. 31.

^ Burnham 1941 , p. 71.

^ Burnham 1941 , p. 88.

^ Burnham 1941 , pp. 201–2.

^ "George Orwell 1984 Critical commentary" .

PT faculty . Gordon state.

Archived from the original on 2021-09-03 . Retrieved 2021-12-30 .

^ "You and the Atom Bomb" .

The Orwell Foundation . 19 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 2019-12-18 . Retrieved 2021-10-08 .

^ "Second Thoughts on James Burnham" .

The Orwell Foundation .

^ "1984 Historical and Social Context" .

eNotes .

Archived from the original on 2021-12-30 . Retrieved 2021-12-30 .

Sources [ edit ] Diggins, John P. (1975), Up From Communism , New York: Columbia University Press – via The Internet archive Further reading [ edit ] David T. Byrne, James Burnham: An Intellectual Biography , Northern Illinois University Press, 2025 Samuel Francis , Power and History, The Political Thought of James Burnham.

London: Claridge Press, 1999.

Grant Havers, "James Burnham's Elite Theory and the Postwar American Right," Telos 154 (Spring 2011): 29–50.

Benjamin Guy Hoffman, The Political Thought of James Burnham.

PhD dissertation. University of Michigan, 1969.

Daniel Kelly, James Burnham and the Struggle for the World: A Life.

Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, 2002.

C. Wright Mills and Hans Gerth , "A Marx for the Managers", 1942. Reprinted in Power, Politics, and People: The Collected Essays of C. Wright Mills edited by Irving Horowitz . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1967.

George Orwell , " Second Thoughts on James Burnham ," Polemic, No. 3, May 1946.

Paul Sweezy , "The Illusion of the 'Managerial Revolution,'" Science & Society, vol. 6, no. 1 (Winter 1942), pp. 1–23.

In JSTOR .

External links [ edit ] Library resources about James Burnham Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By James Burnham Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Quotations related to James Burnham at Wikiquote James Burnham Internet Archive at Marxists Internet Archive Register of the James Burnham Papers, 1928-1983 , the Online Archive of California (OAC) initiative of the California Digital Library Obituary of James Burnham , National Review , September 11, 1987 Lenin's heir . By Victor Serge . At Victor Serge Archive  ( Marxists Internet Archive ) James Burnham, the First Cold Warrior by Francis P. Sempa Appearances on C-SPAN Links to related articles v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Neoconservatism General American exceptionalism Democratization Globalization Humanitarian intervention Interventionism Liberal internationalism Bush Doctrine Axis of evil Pax Americana Constitutional Federalism Figures William Kristol Robert Kagan Frederick Kagan Irving Kristol Paul Wolfowitz Richard Perle Charles Krauthammer David Frum Elliott Abrams Norman Podhoretz David Wurmser Douglas Feith Paul Bremer Peter Berkowitz Douglas Murray David Aaronovitch Anne Applebaum Oliver Kamm Max Boot Eliot A. Cohen Jeane Kirkpatrick Michael Novak Jonah Goldberg Joshua Muravchik Jennifer Rubin Irwin Stelzer Bret Stephens Zalmay Khalilzad Scooter Libby Yuval Levin Michael Ledeen James Kirchick Michael Gerson Dan Senor Eli Lake Reuel Marc Gerecht James Woolsey Clifford May Larry Diamond Niall Ferguson Major influences Leo Strauss Bernard Lewis Henry M. Jackson James Burnham John Courtney Murray Organisations Project for the New American Century National Endowment for Democracy Foundation for Defense of Democracies Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs Henry Jackson Society Emergency Committee for Israel American Enterprise Institute Foreign Policy Initiative NGO Monitor Publications Commentary The Weekly Standard The Public Interest National Affairs Encounter Harry's Place First Things Crisis Related articles Timeline of modern American conservatism Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism British neoconservatism Clash of Civilizations Idealism in international relations Liberal hawk Pro-war Left Anti-Stalinist left ( New York Intellectuals and Trotskyism ) Republican in Name Only (pejorative) Cuckservative (pejorative) Never Trump movement Euston Manifesto v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Argentina Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐666f86d675‐6lhwb
Cached time: 20250817044844
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.234 seconds
Real time usage: 1.571 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8686/1000000
Revision size: 28949/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 443031/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 137011/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 143096/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.693/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22520359/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1182.036      1 -total
 28.38%  335.455      1 Template:Navboxes
 21.12%  249.694      1 Template:Infobox_academic
 12.18%  143.993      1 Template:Reflist
 10.09%  119.263      1 Template:Conservatism_navbox
  8.86%  104.698      2 Template:Excerpt
  8.44%   99.758     10 Template:Lang
  8.42%   99.568      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  7.65%   90.382      3 Template:Navbox
  7.36%   86.971      1 Template:Conservatism_US_footer Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:292083:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044844 and revision id 1293307545. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_Burnham&oldid=1293307545 " Categories : 1905 births 1987 deaths 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers Alumni of Balliol College, Oxford American anti-communist propagandists American male non-fiction writers American segregationists American sociologists American political philosophers Converts to Roman Catholicism from atheism or agnosticism Critics of dialectical materialism History of United States isolationism Members of the American Workers Party Members of the Socialist Party of America Members of the Socialist Workers Party (United States) Members of the Workers Party (United States) Members of the Workers Party of the United States National Review people New Right (United States) Philosophers from Chicago People of the Office of Strategic Services Philosophers of history Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Princeton University alumni New York University faculty Writers from Chicago Catholics from Illinois Former Marxists People associated with Kultura (magazine) People of the Central Intelligence Agency Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles with excerpts People appearing on C-SPAN Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 00:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents James Burnham 19 languages Add topic

