Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Publishing 2.2 Associations 3 Personal life and death 4 Works Toggle Works subsection 4.1 Legacy 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Henry Regnery Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American publisher (1912–1996) Henry Francis Regnery Born ( 1912-01-05 ) January 5, 1912 Hinsdale, Illinois , U.S.

Died June 18, 1996 (1996-06-18) (aged 84) Chicago, Illinois , U.S.

Other names Henry Francis Regnery, Sr.

Education Massachusetts Institute of Technology BS Mathematics 1933 Harvard University MA Economics Alma mater Harvard University Occupation Publisher Known for Henry Regnery Company founder Human Events cofounder American Friends Service Committee member America First Committee member Spouse Eleanor Scattergood Children 4, including Alfred S. Regnery Parent(s) William Henry Regnery Francis Susan Thrasher Relatives William Henry Regnery II (nephew) This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Henry Francis Regnery (1912–1996) was a conservative American publisher who founded the newspaper Human Events (1944) and the Henry Regnery Company (1947) and published Russell Kirk 's classic work The Conservative Mind (1953).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Background [ edit ] Regnery was born on January 5, 1912, [ 5 ] in Hinsdale, Illinois , the second-youngest of five children of Frances Susan Thrasher and William Henry Regnery , a wealthy Catholic textile manufacturer who had emigrated from Ensch , Germany.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] He obtained a BS in Mathematics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1933, [ 8 ] and an MA from Harvard University , where he worked with Joseph Schumpeter .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] He also studied at Armour Institute of Technology , and from 1934 to 1936 at the University of Bonn .

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] [ 6 ] Career [ edit ] After graduation, Regnery worked for the New Deal 's Resettlement Administration [ 2 ] (around the time that Ware Group member Lee Pressman left to go work for John L. Lewis at the Congress of Industrial Organizations ).

[ improper synthesis?

] Publishing [ edit ] Regnery published Russell Kirk 's book The Conservative Mind In 1944, Regnery financed the creation of the conservative newspaper Human Events .

[ 2 ] In 1947, he founded the Henry Regnery Company, now Regnery Publishing .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] "[I]t was a measure of the grip that liberal-minded editors had on American publishing at the time that Regnery, which was founded in 1947, was one of only two houses known to be sympathetic to conservative authors," according to Henry Regnery's 1996 obituary.

[ 2 ] In 1951, Regnery published God and Man at Yale , the first book written by William F. Buckley, Jr.

At that time, Regnery had a close affiliation with the University of Chicago and published classics for the Great Books series at the University, but he lost the contract as a result of publishing Buckley's book.

[ 2 ] In 1953, Regnery published Russell Kirk 's The Conservative Mind ,  as well as books by Albert Jay Nock , James J. Kilpatrick , and James Burnham . He also published paperback editions of literary works by novelist Wyndham Lewis and poets T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound .

[ 2 ] In 1954, Regnery published McCarthy and His Enemies by William F. Buckley and L. Brent Bozell Jr.

"Although Mr. Buckley [...] had criticized the senator for 'gross exaggerations,' Mr. McCarthy said he would not dispute the merits of the book with the authors," according to a news article in The New York Times . While criticizing McCarthy, the book was sympathetic to him (and in fact was harsher on McCarthy's critics than it was on the senator for making false allegations [ 9 ] ), and McCarthy attended a reception for the authors.

[ 10 ] In the early 1950s, Regnery published two books by Robert Welch , who went on to found the John Birch Society in 1958. In May God Forgive Us , Welch criticized influential foreign-policy analysts and policymakers and accused many of working to further Communism as part of a conspiracy.

[ 11 ] In 1954, Regnery published Welch's biography of John Birch , an American Baptist missionary in China who was killed by Chinese Communists after he became a U.S. intelligence officer in World War II.

Regnery sold Henry Regnery Company and started Regnery Publishing, which son Alfred inherited.

[ 2 ] Associations [ edit ] In the latter 1930s, Regnery became a member of the America First Committee , [ 6 ] of which his father was a co-founder.
Regnery was a member of 
the American Friends Service Committee ,
the American Conservatory of Music ,
and the Chicago Literary Club .

[ 8 ] He was a trustee of Shimer College in the early 1960s [ 12 ] and president of the Philadelphia Society .

[ 13 ] Personal life and death [ edit ] Regnery married Eleanor Scattergood; they had four children: Alfred S. Regnery (1942), 
Henry Francis Regnery Jr. (1945),
Susan Regnery Schnitzler, and Margaret Regnery Caron.

[ 2 ] [ 14 ] Their son Henry Francis Regnery Jr. was killed with the crash of American Airlines Flight 191 in 1979.

[ 15 ] Regnery died age 84 on June 18, 1996, in Chicago of complications of brain surgery.

[ 2 ] His nephew, William Regnery II , became the founder of the white nationalist organizations Charles Martel Society and National Policy Institute .

Works [ edit ] Works written by Regnery include: Books Memoirs of a Dissident Publisher (1985) [ 16 ] The Cliff Dwellers : The History of a Chicago Cultural Institution (1990) [ 17 ] Creative Chicago: From the Chap-Book to the University (1993) [ 18 ] A Few Reasonable Words: Selected Writings (1996) [ 19 ] Chapbooks, pamphlets Congruences and Residues (1934) [ 20 ] Wyndham Lewis : A Man Against His Time (1969) [ 21 ] Russell Kirk : An Appraisal (1980) [ 22 ] William H. Regnery and His Family (1981) [ 23 ] The Present State of Book Publishing (1984) [ 24 ] A Prophet Without Honor in His Own Country: Francis F. Browne and The Dial (1985) [ 25 ] To Edit or Not to Edit (1995) [ 26 ] Legacy [ edit ] Henry Regnery's papers are kept at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University .

[ 27 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Henry Regnery" .

www.nndb.com .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Thomas Jr., Robert Mcg. (June 23, 1996).

"Henry Regnery, 84, Ground-Breaking Conservative Publisher" .

The New York Times . p. 33 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ a b c d Jeffrey O. Nelson, 'Henry Regnery: Missionary of Culture', in The Intercollegiate Review , Fall 1996, pp. 14–22 ^ a b c d e "First Principles Journal biography" .

^ "Regnery, Henry | Encyclopedia.com" .

^ a b c "Home – The Chicago Literary Club" .

www.chilit.org .

^ "First Principles – Regnery, Henry" .

www.firstprinciplesjournal.com . Archived from the original on April 2, 2015.

^ a b "Henry Regnery" .

Member Biographies . Chicago Literary Club. March 1, 1999 . Retrieved July 30, 2023 .

^ White, William S., "What the McCarthy Method Seeks to Establish", book review of McCarthy and His Enemies , The New York Times , April 4, 1954.

^ Conklin, William R., "M'Carthy Seeking To Push Inquiries: Would Turn to Other Cases if Army Dispute Is Delayed by Hunt for Counsel" [apostrophe in title is correct], news article, The New York Times , March 31, 1954.

^ Smith, Robert Aura, "One Man's Opinions", book review in The New York Times , November 16, 1952.

^ "Board of Trustees".

Shimer College Record . Vol. 52, no. 4. December 1960.

^ "The Philadelphia Society" . Archived from the original on February 23, 2010.

^ "Intercollegiate Studies Institute biography" .

^ "HENRY REGNERY, AUTHOR AND PUBLISHER" .

Chicago Tribune . June 19, 1996.

^ Regnery, Henry (1985).

Memoirs of a Dissident Publisher . Regnery. p. 260.

ISBN 978-0-89526-802-0 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ Regnery, Henry (1990).

The Cliff Dwellers: The History of a Chicago Cultural Institution . Chicago: Chicago Historical Bookworks. p. 12.

ISBN 0-924772-08-5 .

^ Regnery, Henry (1993).

Creative Chicago: From the Chap-book to the University . Chicago Historical Bookworks. p. 200.

ISBN 978-0-924772-24-5 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ Regnery, Henry (1996).

A Few Reasonable Words: Selected Writings . Intercollegiate Studies Institute. p. 366.

ISBN 978-1-882926-13-8 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ Regnery, Henry (1934).

Congruences and Residues . Massachusetts Institute of Technology – Department of Mathematics. p. 60 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ Regnery, Henry (1969).

Wyndham Lewis: A Man Against His Time . Chicago Literary Club. p. 33 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ Regnery, Henry (1980).

Russell Kirk: An Appraisal . Clarke Historical Library – Central Michigan University. p. 15 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ Regnery, Henry (1981).

William H. Regnery and His Family . Regnery. p. 75 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ Regnery, Henry (1984).

The Present State of Book Publishing . Regnery Gateway. p. 24 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ Regnery, Henry (1985).

A Prophet Without Honor in His Own Country: Francis F. Browne and The Dial . Chicago Literary Club. p. 14 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ Regnery, Henry (1995).

To Edit or Not to Edit . Chicago Literary Club. p. 13 . Retrieved July 17, 2021 .

^ "Regnery (Henry) papers" .

www.oac.cdlib.org .

External links [ edit ] Henry Regnery Papers at the Newberry Library Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Netherlands Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henry_Regnery&oldid=1243539311 " Categories : American publishers (people) American book publishing company founders American people of German descent MIT School of Engineering alumni University of Bonn alumni Harvard University alumni Businesspeople from Chicago Human Events people New Right (United States) People from Hinsdale, Illinois 20th-century American businesspeople Regnery family 1912 births 1996 deaths American anti-communists Hidden categories: Use American English from July 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using infobox person with multiple parents Articles with hCards Articles that may contain original research from April 2022 This page was last edited on 2 September 2024, at 00:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Henry Regnery Add languages Add topic

