Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Pluralistic metaphysics 2.2 Determinism 2.3 Philosophy of biology 3 Works 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents John Dupré 9 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Malagasy Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British philosopher of science This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "John Dupré" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) John A. Dupré ( / d uː ˈ p r eɪ / ; born 3 July 1952) is a British philosopher of science . He is the director of Egenis, the Centre for the Study of Life Sciences, and professor of philosophy at the University of Exeter .

[ 1 ] Dupré's chief work area lies in philosophy of biology , philosophy of the social sciences , and general philosophy of science. Dupré, together with Nancy Cartwright , Ian Hacking , Patrick Suppes and Peter Galison , are often grouped together as the " Stanford School " of philosophy of science .
In 2023, he was elected to the American Philosophical Society .

[ 2 ] Education and career [ edit ] Dupré was educated at the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge and taught at Oxford, Stanford University and Birkbeck, University of London before moving to Exeter.

In 2010 Dupré was elected a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in recognition of his work on Darwinism, and is a former president of the British Society for the Philosophy of Science. In 2018 he was elected vice-president (and president-elect) of the Philosophy of Science Association (USA).  In 2020, he was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences .

[ 3 ] In 2022, he delivered the Gifford Lectures on A Brief History of Form at the University of Aberdeen , [ 4 ] and again in 2023 at the University of Edinburgh on A Process Perspective on Human Life .

[ 5 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Pluralistic metaphysics [ edit ] Dupré advocates a pluralistic model of science as opposed to the common notion of reductionism . Physical reductionism suggests that all science may be reduced to physical explanations due to causal or mereological links that obtain between the objects studied in the higher sciences and the objects studied by physics . For example, a physical reductionist would see psychological facts as (in principle) reducible to neurological facts, which is in turn are reducible to biological facts. Biology could then be explained in terms of chemistry , and chemistry could then be explained in terms of physical explanation . While reductionism of this sort is a common position among scientists and philosophers, Dupré suggests that such reduction is not possible as the world has an inherently pluralistic structure.

Determinism [ edit ] A classical argument for reductionism relies on a particular conception of causality, according to which each event must have a sufficient physical cause. Physical interactions are therefore sufficient to account for all causal interactions. Under this assumption, psychological or biological facts must be eliminable in favour of physical facts, given that the physical conditions do all the causal work. This makes all the other, non-physical conditions causally superfluous.

Dupré tries to escape this problem by rejecting determinism , and the assumption that there is a physical cause for each and every event. In place of determinism, Dupré proposes a conception of indeterministic, probabilistic causality . His ideas are influenced by Nancy Cartwright .

Philosophy of biology [ edit ] Dupré is an important critic of biological research programs in the life science community. In particular, he criticises evolution-biological stories and how they are related in sociobiology and evolutionary psychology . Dupré argues that such projects must remain speculative and reflect on the prejudices of the researchers as circumstances in the world.

Dupré is also concerned with the handling of biological taxonomy . Biological classifications are made by humans, and are thus open to criticism and modification. This applies in particular to the classifications of humans – for instance after race or sex .  Dupré's arguments in this area reflect and mirror the sentiments and criticism of evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould .

Works [ edit ] Books The Disorder of Things. Metaphysical foundations of the disunity of science . Harvard University Press, Cambridge (Massachusetts) 1993, ISBN 0-674-21260-6 Human Nature and the Limits of Science . Clarendon Press, Oxford 2003, ISBN 0-19-924806-0 Humans and Other Animals . Clarendon Press, Oxford 2002, ISBN 0-19-924709-9 Darwin's Legacy: What Evolution Means Today.

Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005, ISBN 978-0-19-280337-5 Darwin's Legacy: German translation Darwins Vermächtnis , Suhrkamp, Frankfurt/M. 2005, ISBN 978-3-518-29504-5 ; Darwin's Legacy: Spanish translation El legado de Darwin. Qué significa hoy la evolución , Buenos Aires/Madrid, Katz editores S.A, 2006, ISBN 978-84-96859-10-4 Value-Free Science: Ideal or Illusion (with Harold Kincaid and Alison Wylie). New York: Oxford University Press, 2007, ISBN 978-0-19-530896-9 The Constituents of Life (the Spinoza lectures). Amsterdam: Van Gorcum, 2008, ISBN 978-90-232-4380-9 with S. B. Barnes, Genomes and What to Make of Them . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-226-17295-8 with S. Parry, Nature After the Genome.

Oxford: Wiley Blackwell, 2010, ISBN 978-1-4443-3396-1 Processes of Life: Essays in the Philosophy of Biology.

Oxford University Press, 2012.

with D. J. Nicholson.

Everything Flows: Towards a Processual Philosophy of Biology.

Oxford University Press, 2018.

Journal articles Dupré, John (June 1998). "Against reductionist explanations of human behaviour".

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes .

72 (1): 153– 172.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8349.00040 .

JSTOR 4107016 .

Appearances Such That Cast philosophy podcast http://suchthatcast.com/dupre/#more-463 Philosophy TV in conversation with Alex Rosenberg on Non-reductive physicalism.

https://vimeo.com/15442250 References [ edit ] ^ "Starch 'fuel of human evolution' " .

BBC . 9 September 2007 . Retrieved 26 September 2011 .

^ "The American Philosophical Society Welcomes New Members for 2023" .

^ "New Members" .

^ "The Gifford Lectures" .

abdn.ac.uk . University of Aberdeen.

^ "Gifford Lectures" .

ed.ac.uk . University of Edinburgh. 28 August 2024.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to John Dupré .

Dupré's homepage v t e Philosophy of biology Themes Ethics Eugenics Dysgenics Kin selection Naturalism Reductionism Holism Emergence Evolutionary taxonomy Evolution Adaptationism Alternatives to Darwinian evolution Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Darwinism Evolutionary epistemology Teleology Tree of life Philosophers of biology John Beatty Lindley Darden Daniel Dennett John Dupré Carla Fehr Marjorie Grene Peter Godfrey-Smith James R. Griesemer Paul E. Griffiths David Hull Hans Jonas Philip Kitcher Tim Lewens Helen Longino Jane Maienschein Roberta Millstein Sandra Mitchell Susan Oyama Alex Rosenberg Michael Ruse Sahotra Sarkar Elliott Sober Kim Sterelny Alfred I. Tauber Francisco Varela Gerard Verschuuren William C. Wimsatt Biologists Francisco J. Ayala Patrick Bateson Charles Darwin Richard Dawkins Jared Diamond Michael Ghiselin François Jacob Stephen Jay Gould Richard Lewontin Konrad Lorenz Humberto Maturana Ernst Mayr Jacques Monod Denis Noble Joan Roughgarden Rolf Sattler John Maynard Smith E. O. Wilson Jonas Salk Related Philosophy of mind History of biology v t e University of Exeter People Chancellor Sir Michael Barber Vice-Chancellor Professor Lisa Roberts List of academics List of alumni List of honorary graduates Departments and centres Bill Douglas Centre Business School Camborne School of Mines Institute of Cornish Studies Campus Exeter Science Park Penryn Campus St Luke's Campus Streatham Campus Halls of Residence University Chapel (Holy Trinity) University Chapel (St Luke) Student life Exeposé (newspaper) Hockey Club Northcott Theatre Rugby Football Club Xpression FM XTV Bottle Match Affiliates eSTAR Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital University of St Mark & St John Other Academic dress CSM Association Exoniensis University of Exeter Press Category Portals : United Kingdom Biography Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Argentina Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Dupré&oldid=1277987561 " Categories : 1952 births Living people Alumni of the University of Oxford Fellows of St John's College, Oxford Harkness Fellows Academics of Birkbeck, University of London Academics of the University of Exeter British philosophers of science Alumni of the University of Cambridge Philosophers of biology Fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science 21st-century British philosophers International members of the American Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from February 2018 Use dmy dates from February 2018 BLP articles lacking sources from September 2011 All BLP articles lacking sources This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 21:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Dupré 9 languages Add topic

