Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Criteria 2 Honorifics and post-nominal letters 3 Insignia 4 Imperial society 5 Nonequivalence 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Knight Bachelor 25 languages العربية Беларуская Bikol Central Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Title indicating a knight not part of an order of chivalry Knight Bachelor Knight Bachelor's badge Awarded by Monarch of the United Kingdom Awarded for Public service Sovereign Charles III Knight Principal Sir Gary Hickinbottom Ribbon bar The title of Knight Bachelor is the basic rank granted to a man who has been knighted by the monarch but not inducted as a member of one of the organised orders of chivalry ; it is a part of the British honours system .

[ 1 ] Knights Bachelor are the most ancient sort of British knight [ 2 ] (the rank existed during the 13th-century reign of King Henry III ), but Knights Bachelor rank below knights of chivalric orders. A man who is knighted is formally addressed as " Sir [First Name] [Surname]" or "Sir [First Name]" and his wife as " Lady [Surname]".

The designation "Bachelor" in this context conveys the concept of "junior in rank".

[ 3 ] Criteria [ edit ] Knighthood is usually conferred for public service; amongst its recipients are all male judges of His Majesty's High Court of Justice in England . It is possible to be a Knight Bachelor and a junior member of an order of chivalry without being a knight of that order; this situation has become rather common, especially among those recognized for achievements in entertainment. For instance, Sir Michael Caine , Sir Billy Connolly , Sir Mo Farah , Sir Michael Gambon , Sir Barry Gibb , Sir Anthony Hopkins , Sir Derek Jacobi , Sir Elton John , Sir Brian May , Sir Roger Daltrey , and Sir Ian McKellen are Commanders of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (CBE); Sir Tom Jones , Sir Van Morrison , Sir Cliff Richard , and Sir Patrick Stewart are Officers of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (OBE); while Sir Nick Faldo , Sir Lewis Hamilton , Sir Paul McCartney , and  Sir Richard Starkey ( Ringo Starr )  are Members of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (MBE). None of them would be entitled to use the honorific "Sir" by virtue of their membership of the order alone, but as they are all also Knights Bachelor, they are entitled to preface their names with that title.

[ citation needed ] Honorifics and post-nominal letters [ edit ] Knights Bachelor may prefix " Sir " to their forenames, and wives of Knights may prefix "Lady" to their surnames.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The award originated in the Middle Ages . There are no post-nominal letters associated with the honour nor can it be awarded to women. (They are appointed Dames Commander of the Order of the British Empire instead.) [ 6 ] Insignia [ edit ] A type II Knight Bachelor's badge Until 1926, Knights Bachelor had no specific insignia which they could wear, but in that year, King George V issued a warrant authorising the wearing of a breast badge on all appropriate occasions by Knights Bachelor.

[ 7 ] This badge is worn on the left side of the coat or outer garment. Measuring 2 + 3 ⁄ 8 inches (60 mm) in length and 1 + 3 ⁄ 8 inches (35 mm) in width, it is described in heraldic terms as follows: [ 8 ] Upon an oval medallion of vermilion , enclosed by a scroll a cross-hilted sword belted and sheathed, pommel upwards, between two spurs, rowels upwards, the whole set about with the sword belt, all gilt.

In 1973, Queen Elizabeth II issued a further warrant authorising the wearing on appropriate occasions of a neck badge (of smaller size) and a miniature medal.

[ 7 ] In 1988, a new certificate of authentication, a Knight Bachelor's only personal documentation, was designed by the College of Arms .

[ 8 ] Imperial society [ edit ] The Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor was founded for the maintenance and consolidation of the Dignity of Knights Bachelor in 1908, and obtained official recognition from the Sovereign in 1912. The Society keeps records of all Knights Bachelor, in their interest.

[ 9 ] Nonequivalence [ edit ] There is no female counterpart to Knight Bachelor.

[ 10 ] The lowest knightly honour that can be conferred upon a woman is Dame Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (DBE), which is one rank higher than Knight Bachelor (being the female equivalent of KBE or Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, which is the next male knightly rank above Knight Bachelor).

[ citation needed ] Only citizens of Commonwealth realms can be created Knights Bachelor; people of other nationalities are generally made honorary KBEs.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] British honours system § Knighthood Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood Knight banneret Lists of knights bachelor References [ edit ] ^ a b "The British Honours System" .

www.churchill-society-london.org.uk . Retrieved 23 May 2017 .

^ Neave, F.G.; Turner, Grange (1930).

Mozley & Whiteley's Law Dictionary (5th ed.). London: Butterworth & Co. p. 183.

^ "bachelor" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "Form of address" . Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor . Retrieved 17 April 2014 .

^ "Knight Bachelor" .

Forms of address . Debrett's. Archived from the original on 5 April 2014 . Retrieved 17 April 2014 .

^ "Orders of Chivalry" . British Government. Archived from the original on 19 August 2007 . Retrieved 30 August 2007 .

^ a b "Insignia" . Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor . Retrieved 28 December 2024 .

^ a b Debrett's Peerage & Baronetage 2019 . Debrett's. 2019.

ISBN 9781999767006 .

^ "Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor" . Heraldry of the World. Archived from the original on 9 February 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ "Orders, Decorations and Medals" .

UK Honours System . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

^ "Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor" .

www.iskb.co.uk . Retrieved 23 May 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Knight Bachelor at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Knight Bachelor – UK Cabinet Office Insignia of a Knight Bachelor – Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor The British honours system – UK Government v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom Orders Current Garter Thistle Bath Merit St Michael and St George Royal Victorian Distinguished Service British Empire Imperial Service Companions of Honour St John Royal family orders George VI Elizabeth II Charles III Dormant St Patrick Crown of India Star of India Indian Empire Indian Merit British India Burma Defunct Royal Guelphic Royal family orders George IV Victoria & Albert Edward VII George V Other Royal Victorian Chain Hereditary peerage Life peerage Privy counsellor Baronet Knight Bachelor Aide-de-camp Current decorations and medals Level 1 Victoria Cross George Cross Level 2A Distinguished Service Order Conspicuous Gallantry Cross Royal Red Cross (class I) Level 2B George Medal King's Police Medal, for Gallantry King's Fire Service Medal, for Gallantry Level 3A Distinguished Service Cross Military Cross Distinguished Flying Cross Air Force Cross Royal Red Cross (class II) Level 3B Sea Gallantry Medal King's Gallantry Medal Royal Victorian Medal British Empire Medal King’s Police Medal, for Distinguished Service King's Fire Service Medal, for Distinguished Service King's Ambulance Service Medal King's Volunteer Reserves Medal Polar Medal Imperial Service Medal Overseas Territories Police Medal Merchant Navy Medal for Meritorious Service Level 4 Mentioned in Despatches King's Commendation for Bravery King's Commendation for Bravery in the Air King's Commendation for Valuable Service Other Badge of Honour Elizabeth Cross Elizabeth Emblem Obsolete decorations and medals Level 1 Indian Order of Merit (1st class) Albert Medal (1st class) Edward Medal (1st class) Empire Gallantry Medal Level 2A Indian Order of Merit (2nd class) Distinguished Conduct Medal Conspicuous Gallantry Medal Conspicuous Gallantry Medal (Flying) Level 2B Albert Medal (2nd class) Edward Medal (2nd class) Union of South Africa King's Medal for Bravery, Gold Level 3A Order of British India (1st class) Order of British India (2nd class) Indian Order of Merit (3rd class) Title Badge (India) (1st class) Title Badge (India) (2nd class) Title Badge (India) (3rd class) Royal West African Frontier Force Distinguished Conduct Medal King's African Rifles Distinguished Conduct Medal Indian Distinguished Service Medal Distinguished Service Medal Military Medal Distinguished Flying Medal Air Force Medal Burma Gallantry Medal Level 3B Constabulary Medal (Ireland) Union of South Africa King's Medal for Bravery, Silver Kaisar-i-Hind Medal (Gold, Silver, Bronze) Indian Police Medal, for Gallantry Ceylon Police Medal, for Gallantry Sierra Leone Police Medal, for Gallantry Sierra Leone Fire Brigades Medal, for Gallantry Mauritius Police Medal for Meritorious Service Colonial Police Medal, for Gallantry Canada Medal Queen's Medal for Chiefs Indian Police Medal, for Meritorious Service Ceylon Police Medal, for Merit Sierra Leone Police Medal, for Meritorious Service Sierra Leone Fire Brigades Medal, for Meritorious Service Level 4 Queen's Commendation for Brave Conduct Queen's Commendation for Valuable Service in the Air See also Order of Wear British campaign medals Degradation (knighthood) Revocations v t e Former decorations of Australia Australian Honours Order of Precedence prior to 6 October 1992 Orders of chivalry Most Honourable Order of the Bath Knight/Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath (GCB) Knight/Dame Commander of the Order of the Bath (KCB/DCB) Companion of the Order of the Bath (CB) Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George Knight/Dame Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George (GCMG) Knight/Dame Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG/DCMG) Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George (CMG) Most Excellent Order of the British Empire / Knight/Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire (GBE) / Knight/Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE/DBE) / Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) / Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) / Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) Imperial Service Order Companion of the Imperial Service Order (ISO) Order of the Companions of Honour Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) Miscellaneous Hereditary peer Life peer Baronet Knight Bachelor Military gallantry/bravery decorations In the face of the enemy Victoria Cross (VC) Distinguished Service Cross (DSC) Military Cross (MC) Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC) Conspicuous Gallantry Medal (CGM) Distinguished Conduct Medal (DCM) Conspicuous Gallantry Medal (Flying) (CGM) Distinguished Service Medal (DSM) Military Medal (MM) Distinguished Flying Medal (DFM) Mentioned in despatches Not the face of the enemy Air Force Cross (AFC) Air Force Medal (AFM) Queen's Commendation for Brave Conduct Distinguished service decorations In the face of the enemy Distinguished Service Order (DSO) Not the face of the enemy King's Police Medal for Distinguished Service (KPM) King's Fire Service Medal for Distinguished Service (KFSM) Civil bravery decorations George Cross (GC) Albert Medal, First Class (AM) Albert Medal, First Class (Sea) (AM) Albert Medal, Second Class (AM) Albert Medal, Second Class (Sea) (AM) George Medal (GM) King's Police Medal for Gallantry (KPM) King's Fire Service Medal for Gallantry (KFSM) Sea Gallantry Medal (SGM) Queen's Gallantry Medal (QGM) Edward Medal (EM) Queen's Commendation for Brave Conduct Nursing service Member of the Royal Red Cross (RRC) Associate of the Royal Red Cross (ARRC) Meritorious service / British Empire Medal (BEM) King's Commendation for Valuable Service Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Knight_Bachelor&oldid=1296890718 " Categories : Knights Bachelor Henry III of England Orders of chivalry Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom British knights High Court of Justice Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2017 Use British English from February 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 23:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Knight Bachelor 25 languages Add topic

