Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Topics covered 2 Indexing 3 Awards 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Teaching Philosophy 3 languages Deutsch فارسی 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the journal. For an academic's written statement of his or her general views on teaching, see teaching philosophy .

Academic journal Teaching Philosophy Discipline Philosophy , education Language English Edited by Maralee Harrell Publication details History 1975–present Publisher Philosophy Documentation Center Frequency Quarterly Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Teach. Philos.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 0145-5788 (print) 2153-6619 (web) LCCN 76-649637 OCLC no.

2773264 Links Journal homepage Online access Special issues Teaching Philosophy is a peer-reviewed academic journal devoted to the practical and theoretical discussion of teaching and learning philosophy , that is philosophy education . Established by Arnold Wilson in 1975, it has published more than 2,500 articles and reviews in this field. Notable contributors include Norman Bowie , Myles Brand , Peter Caws , Angela Davis , Daniel Dennett , Alasdair MacIntyre , Rosalind Ladd, Michael Pritchard, Anita Silvers , and Robert C. Solomon . Members of the American Association of Philosophy Teachers and the Philosophy Learning and Teaching Organization have access as a benefit of membership. This journal has a Level 1 classification from the Publication Forum of the Federation of Finnish Learned Societies.

[ 1 ] and a SHERPA/RoMEO "green" self-archiving policy.

[ 2 ] It is published on behalf of the Teaching Philosophy Association by the Philosophy Documentation Center .

[ 3 ] Topics covered [ edit ] Topics frequently covered include: Teaching methods and the use of new instructional material Experimental and interdisciplinary courses with philosophical content Evaluation of teaching and assessment of learning in philosophy Critical examination of pedagogical problems Reviews of books, instructional media, software, and Web-based resources Indexing [ edit ] Teaching Philosophy is abstracted and indexed in Academic Search Premier, Arts & Humanities Citation Index , Contents Pages in Education, Education Research Index, ERIH PLUS , [ 4 ] Expanded Academic ASAP, FRANCIS , Google Scholar , Index Philosophicus, InfoTrac OneFile, International Bibliography of Book Reviews of Scholarly Literature, International Bibliography of Periodical Literature, International Philosophical Bibliography, MLA International Bibliography, Periodicals Index Online, Philosopher's Index, PhilPapers , Scopus , [ 5 ] and TOC Premier.

Awards [ edit ] The following articles have received the biennial 'Mark Lenssen Prize for Publishing on Teaching Philosophy' from the American Association of Philosophy Teachers: [ 6 ] Ann J. Cahill and Stephen Bloch-Schulman, "Argumentation Step-By-Step: Learning Critical Thinking through Deliberative Practice", Vol.35, Nr.1 (March 2012), pp. 41–62.

John Rudisill, "The Transition from Studying Philosophy to Doing Philosophy", Vol.34, Nr.3 (September 2011), pp. 241–271.

[1] Daryl Close, "Fair Grades", Vol.32, Nr. 4 (December 2009), pp. 361–398.

[2] David W. Concepción, "Reading Philosophy with Background Knowledge and Metacognition", Vol.27, Nr.4 (December 2004), pp. 351–368.

[3] James Campbell,  "The Ambivalence toward Teaching in the Early Years of the American Philosophical Association", Vol.25, Nr.1 (March 2002), pp. 53–68.

[4] Deborah Barnbaum, "Teaching Empathy in Medical Ethics: The Use of Lottery Assignments", Vol.24, Nr.1 (March 2001), pp. 63–75.

[5] See also [ edit ] List of philosophy journals References [ edit ] ^ "Publication Forum web site" . Retrieved 6 May 2018 .

^ "SHERPA/RoMEO web site" . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ " Teaching Philosophy website" . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ "ERIH PLUS website" . Retrieved 6 May 2018 .

^ "Scopus website" . Retrieved 6 May 2018 .

^ "AAPT website, Awards - Lenssen Prize Winners" . Retrieved 2 August 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Philosophy Documentation Center v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Teaching_Philosophy&oldid=1184032199 " Categories : Education journals English-language journals Philosophy journals Academic journals established in 1975 Quarterly journals Teaching Philosophy Documentation Center academic journals Philosophy education Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Quarterly journals (infobox) Pages using infobox journal with unknown parameters Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 7 November 2023, at 23:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Teaching Philosophy 3 languages Add topic

