Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Recognition and awards 4 References Toggle the table of contents Robert Corell Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American climate scientist For the Mexican film actor, see Roberto Corell .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Robert Corell" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This biographical article is written like a résumé .

Please help improve it by revising it to be neutral and encyclopedic .

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Robert W. Corell (born November 4, 1934) is an American global climate scientist .

Early life and education [ edit ] Robert W. Corell was born on November 4, 1934, in Detroit , Michigan , United States.

[ 1 ] Corell is an oceanographer and engineer by background and training, having received Ph.D., M.S., and B.S. degrees at Case Western Reserve University and MIT.

Career [ edit ] Corell is principal for the Global Environment & Technology Foundation , an ambassador for ClimateWorks Foundation , professor II at the University of the Arctic's new Institute of Circumpolar Reindeer Husbandry, a professor II at the University of Tromso in Norway, and director of the Sarasota, Florida-based Climate Adaptation Center (CAC). He is a partner of the Sustainability Institute and its C-ROADS Climate Interactive Initiative, and head of US Office for the Global Energy Assessment .

He contributed to the assessment reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , an organisation that was co-awarded the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize , and in 2010 he was awarded an honorary Doctor of Veterinarian Medicine by the Norges veterinærhøgskole (Norwegian School of Veterinarian Science).
He joined the H. John Heinz III Center for Science, Economics and the Environment in 2006 as vice president for programs and policy (until January 2010).

Corell served as an affiliate of the Washington Advisory Group and is a senior policy fellow at the Policy Program of the American Meteorological Society . He recently [ when?

] completed an appointment that began in January 2000 as a senior research fellow in the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government. Corell has been quoted in the Washington Post , Vanity Fair, Golf Digest, CBS News' 60 Minutes, and many additional public media outlets such as Skavlan. Corell is actively engaged in research concerned with the sciences of global change and the interface between science and public policy, particularly research activities that are focused on global and regional climate change, related environmental issues, and science to facilitate understanding of vulnerability and sustainable development. He co-chairs an international strategic planning group that is developing a strategy designed to harness science, technology, and innovation for sustainable development; serves as the chair of the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment ; counsels as senior science advisor to ManyOne.Net; and is chair of the board of the Digital Universe Foundation. Corell was assistant director for Geosciences at the National Science Foundation, where he had oversight for the Atmospheric, Earth, and Ocean Sciences and the global change programs of the National Science Foundation (NSF). He was also a professor and academic administrator at the University of New Hampshire.

He has also held appointments at the Woods Hole Institution of Oceanography, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, the University of Washington, and Case Western Reserve University.

Recognition and awards [ edit ] In 1996 he was Awarded Brazilian Order of Scientific Merit by the President of Brazil. In 2003 a Mountain region in Antarctic was named the "Corell Cirque" in his honor.

References [ edit ] ^ "IEEE Transactions on Geoscience Electronics, November 1968" .

IEEE Transactions on Geoscience Electronics .

6 (4): 253– 256. November 1968.

doi : 10.1109/TGE.1968.271253 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Belgium Academics ORCID Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_Corell&oldid=1252413029 " Categories : Living people 1934 births 21st-century American engineers American oceanographers American climatologists Harvard Kennedy School staff Commanders of the National Order of Scientific Merit (Brazil) Case Western Reserve University alumni Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni University of Washington faculty University of New Hampshire faculty Case Western Reserve University faculty Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from April 2024 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with a promotional tone from April 2024 All articles with a promotional tone Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use mdy dates from December 2014 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2020 This page was last edited on 21 October 2024, at 06:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert Corell Add languages Add topic

