Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Education and self-consecration 1.3 Return to Savoy 1.4 Priest and provost 1.4.1 Chamblais 1.5 Bishop of Geneva 1.6 Author 1.7 Founder 1.8 Death 2 Posthumous veneration 3 Patronage 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 Congregations 4.2 Influence on other saints 5 Namesakes Toggle Namesakes subsection 5.1 Educational institutions 5.2 Others 6 Bibliography 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources 10 External links Toggle External links subsection 10.1 Works Toggle the table of contents Francis de Sales 52 languages العربية Arpetan Беларуская Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Deitsch Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kapampangan Kiswahili Latina Magyar മലയാളം مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sardu Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bishop of Geneva and Catholic saint (1567–1622) This article is about the Catholic saint. For the American actor, see Francis DeSales . For other uses, see Francis de Sales (disambiguation) .

"Saint François de Sales" redirects here. For the commune, see Saint-François-de-Sales .

Saint Francis de Sales CO , OM Bishop and Doctor of the Church Born 21 August 1567 Château de Sales , Duchy of Savoy , Holy Roman Empire Residence Annecy, France Died 28 December 1622 (1622-12-28) (aged 55) Lyon , Lyonnais , Kingdom of France Beatified 8 January 1661, Rome, Papal States , by Pope Alexander VII Canonized 8 April 1665, Rome, Papal States, by Pope Alexander VII Feast 24 January (General Roman Calendar of 1969) 29 January (General Roman Calendar of 1960 and local communities) Attributes Heart of Jesus , Crown of Thorns Patronage Baker, Oregon ; Cincinnati, Ohio ; Diocese of Houma-Thibodaux, Louisiana ; Catholic press ; Columbus, Ohio ; confessors ; deaf people ; educators ; Upington , South Africa ; Wilmington, Delaware ; writers ; journalists ; the Institute of Christ the King Sovereign Priest ; Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales ; Oblates of St. Francis de Sales ; Salesians of Don Bosco Saint Francis de Sales Bishop of Geneva Native name François de Sales Province Vienne Diocese Geneva Appointed 15 July 1602 (Coadjutor) Installed 8 December 1602 Term ended 28 December 1622 Predecessor Claude de Granier Successor Jean-François de Sales Previous post(s) Titular Bishop of Nicopolis ad Iaterum (1602) Orders Ordination 18 December 1593 Consecration 8 December 1602 Personal details Motto Non-excidet Coat of arms Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Francis de Sales , C.O.

, O.M.

( French : François de Sales ; Italian : Francesco di Sales ; 21 August 1567 – 28 December 1622) was a Savoyard Catholic prelate who served as Bishop of Geneva and is a saint of the Catholic Church . He became noted for his deep faith and his gentle approach to the religious divisions in his land resulting from the Protestant Reformation . He is known also for his writings on the topic of spiritual direction and spiritual formation, particularly the Introduction to the Devout Life and the Treatise on the Love of God .

Life [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Francis de Sales was born two months premature on 21 August 1567 in the Château de Sales into the noble Sales family of the Duchy of Savoy , in what is today Thorens-Glières , Haute-Savoie, France. His father was François de Sales, Lord of Sales , and Novel, and by marriage, de Boisy. His mother was a noblewoman, Françoise de Sionnaz, the only child of the prominent magistrate, Melchior de Sionnaz, Seigneur de Vallières, de la Thuile, and de Boisy. This being one of the noblest families in Savoy, Francis's father was generally known as M. de Boisy.

[ 1 ] He was baptized Francis Bonaventura after his godparents, François de la Fléchère and Damoiselle Bonaventure de Chevron-Villette, who was also his widowed, maternal grandmother.

[ 2 ] His father wanted him, the first of his six sons, to attend the best schools in preparation for a career as a magistrate . He therefore enjoyed a privileged education in the nearby town of La Roche-Sur-Foron , and at the age of eight at the Capuchin college in Annecy .

[ 3 ] Education and self-consecration [ edit ] Francis de Sales age 12 In 1578, de Sales went to the Collège de Clermont , then a Jesuit institution, to study rhetoric and humanities . On this first visit to Paris, he lived near the Église Sainte-Geneviève with his three cousins.

[ 4 ] As a nobleman, he was accompanied by his servant and by a priest tutor, Abbé Déage. To please his father, he took lessons in the gentlemanly pursuits of riding, dancing, and fencing. De Sales is described as intelligent and handsome, tall and well built with blue-grey eyes, somewhat reserved and quiet, and a welcome guest in the homes of the nobility among whom his father had connections.

In 1586, Francis de Sales attended a theological discussion about predestination that convinced him of his damnation to hell . A personal crisis of despair resulted. That conviction lasted through December 1586. His great despair made him physically ill and even bedridden for a time. Sometime in either late December or early January 1587, he visited the old parish of Saint-Étienne-des-Grès, Paris , where he prayed the " Memorare " before a famed statue of Our Lady of Good Deliverance, a Black Madonna . He consecrated himself to the Blessed Virgin Mary and decided to dedicate his life to God with a vow of chastity.

[ 3 ] He then became a tertiary of the Minim Order .

De Sales ultimately concluded that God had good in store for him because "God is love", as the First Epistle of John attests. This faithful devotion to God not only expelled his doubts but also influenced the rest of his life and his teachings. His way of teaching Catholic spirituality is often referred to as the Way of Divine Love, or the Devout Life, taken from a book he wrote of a similar name: Introduction to the Devout Life .

De Sales completed his studies at Collège de Clermont and enrolled at the University of Padua , in Italy , where he studied both law and theology.

[ 5 ] He was accompanied by his twelve-year-old brother, Gallois, also a student in Padua. De Sales took Antonio Possevino , a priest in the Society of Jesus , as his spiritual director .

Return to Savoy [ edit ] St Francis de Sales, by Giovanni Battista Lucini In 1592, de Sales received his doctorate in law and theology and made up his mind to become a priest. He made a pilgrimage to Loreto , Italy, famous for its Basilica Della Santa Casa (Shrine of the Holy House) and then returned home to Savoy . As the eldest son and heir, he held the title of Seigneur de Villeroget. The Senate of Chambéry admitted him as a lawyer. Meanwhile, his father secured various positions for Francis, including an appointment as a senator. His father also chose a wealthy noble heiress as his bride, but Francis refused to marry, preferring to stay focused on his chosen path. His father initially refused to accept that Francis had chosen the priesthood rather than fulfill his expectations with a political-military career. His cousin, Canon Louis de Sales, persuaded the Bishop of Geneva, Claude de Granier, to obtain for Francis the position of provost of the cathedral chapter of Geneva, a post in the patronage of the pope. It was the highest office in the diocese; M. de Boisy yielded. After signing over to his younger brother, Louis, his title and right of succession, Francis was ordained in 1593.

[ 5 ] Priest and provost [ edit ] Because the Calvinists controlled Geneva, the bishop resided about twenty miles south, in Annecy . De Sales preached in the Cathedral of Annecy , at parish churches and before confraternities. He was an effective speaker; his voice was deep and rich in tone and his speech somewhat slow and measured. His sermons were comparatively short and without the customary displays of erudition . He avoided controversy and focused on a particular point of duty, a specific virtue or the correction of some vice.

[ 1 ] The cathedral chapter recommended that although he was only twenty-seven years of age, the provost be named Grand Penitentiary of the diocese, with the result that de Sales found himself taking many more confessions.

Chamblais [ edit ] In 1594, the Duke of Savoy requested the bishop of Geneva to send a missionary to Chamblais, an area that had been long held by the Swiss and only recently returned to Savoy. The task would be both difficult and dangerous, and the most qualified for the assignment was the provost. Despite his family's objections, de Sales readily accepted. Accompanied only by his cousin, the Canon Louis, they made their base the fortress of Allinges to which the Governor of the Province, Baron d'Hermance, insisted they return each night. Gradually they expanded their efforts, with de Sales concentrating on Thonon-les-Bains, which had become almost completely Calvinist . He also attended the Savoyard soldiers garrisoned at Allinges.

They met great opposition from the Geneva ministers, who accused de Sales of being a sorcerer. He moved to Thonon, where he boarded with a widow, who on one occasion hid him from some armed men. More than once, he escaped death at the hands of assassins. His mother managed to send him some linen and money, which he distributed to the poor. A good deal of his religious instruction was handled individually and privately. It was at this time that Francis began writing pamphlets which were later collected and published as The Catholic Controversy . Gradually, the mission began to show some small success.

In 1599 he was appointed coadjutor bishop of Geneva. In 1602, he was sent on a diplomatic mission to Henry IV of France to negotiate the restoration of Catholic worship in Gex , a part of the diocese that had been returned to France.

[ 6 ] He was invited to give the Lenten sermons at the Chapel Royal . The morals at court reflected those of the King, which were notorious, but King Henry became personally attached to Francis and is said to have observed, "A rare bird, this Monsieur de Genève, he is devout and also learned; and not only devout and learned but at the same time a gentleman. A very rare combination".

[ This quote needs a citation ] While in Paris, he also met Cardinal Berulle and Madame Acarie .

[ 7 ] They consulted with him on matters such as the introduction of Teresa of Ávila 's Carmelites into France and plans for the reforming of monasteries and convents. He was consulted on matters of conscience by persons at court.

Arms of St Francis de Sales Bishop of Geneva [ edit ] In 1602, Bishop Granier died, and Sales was consecrated Bishop of Geneva by Vespasien Gribaldi , assisted by Thomas Pobel and Jacques Maistret, O.Carm., as co-consecrators. He resided in Annecy (now in France) because Geneva remained under Calvinist control and was therefore closed to him. His diocese became famous throughout Europe for its efficient organization, zealous clergy and well-instructed laity, an achievement in those days.

[ 8 ] He worked closely with the Order of Friars Minor Capuchin , which was very active in preaching the Catholic faith in his diocese. It appreciated his cooperation so much that in 1617 it made him an official associate of the Order, the highest honour possible for a non-member. It is said that at Evian , on the south shore of Lake Geneva , Francis of Assisi appeared to him and said: "You desire martyrdom , just as I once longed for it. But, like me, you will not obtain it. You will have to become an instrument of your own martyrdom".

[ 9 ] During his years as bishop, de Sales acquired a reputation as a spellbinding preacher and something of an ascetic . His motto was, "He who preaches with love, preaches effectively". His goodness, patience and mildness became proverbial.

[ 10 ] Author [ edit ] These last qualities come through in de Sales' books, the most famous of which was Introduction to the Devout Life , which, unusually for the time, was written for laypeople , especially for women. In it, he counseled charity over penance as a means of progressing in the spiritual life. De Sales also left a mystical work, the Treatise on the Love of God , and many highly valued letters of spiritual direction , including those with Jane Frances de Chantal compiled in the Letters of Spiritual Direction .

[ 11 ] Founder [ edit ] San Francisco de Sales, by Francisco Bayeu y Subías Francis de Sales and Jane Frances de Chantal, medal 1867 Along with Chantal, de Sales founded the women's Order of the Visitation of Holy Mary (Visitandines) in Annecy on 6 June 1610. Archbishop Denis-Simon de Marquemont required the order's members to maintain cloistered lives.

[ 12 ] Sales also established a community of men, an Oratory of St. Philip Neri , at Thonon-les-Bains , with himself as the superior, or Provost . That work, however, was crippled by his death, and the community soon died out.

[ 13 ] Death [ edit ] In December 1622, de Sales was required to travel in the entourage of Charles Emmanuel I , Duke of Savoy , for the Duke's Christmas tour of his domain. Upon arrival in Lyon, de Sales chose to stay in the gardener's hut at the Visitandine monastery in that city. While there he suffered a stroke, from which he died on 28 December 1622.

[ 6 ] Posthumous veneration [ edit ] De Sales has been styled "Gentleman Saint" because of his patience and gentleness.

[ 9 ] His autopsy revealed many gallstones . Despite the resistance of the populace of Lyon to moving his remains from that city, he was buried on 24 January 1623 in the church of the Monastery of the Visitation in Annecy, which he had founded with Chantal, who was also buried there. Their remains were venerated there until the French Revolution .

[ 14 ] Many miracles have been reported at his shrine .

His heart was kept in Lyon, in response to the popular demand of the citizens of the city to retain his remains. During the French Revolution, however, it was saved from the revolutionaries by being carried by the Visitation nuns from Lyon to Venice .

[ 3 ] De Sales was beatified in 1661 by Pope Alexander VII , who then canonized him four years later. De Sales was declared a Doctor of the Church by Pope Pius IX in 1877.

[ 15 ] The Roman Catholic Church celebrates de Sales' feast on 24 January, the day of his burial in Annecy in 1624.

[ 16 ] From 1666, when his feast day was inserted into the General Roman Calendar to its 1969 revision , it was celebrated on 29 January.

Francis is remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival on 24 January.

[ 17 ] In 2022, Francis de Sales was officially added to the Episcopal Church liturgical calendar with a feast day shared with Jane Frances de Chantal on 12 December.

[ 18 ] Patronage [ edit ] In 1923, Pope Pius XI proclaimed him a patron of writers and journalists because de Sales made extensive use of broadsheets and books in spiritual direction and in his efforts to convert the Calvinists of the region.

[ 5 ] Sales developed a sign language to teach a deaf man about God; this has made him the patron saint of the deaf.

Having been founded as one of the first non-cloistered group of sisters, after attempts had been with the Visitation Sisters founded by de Sales and de Chantal, the Sisters of St. Joseph (founded in Le Puys, France, in 1650) take de Sales as one of their patrons. The Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales, founded by the Abbé Pierre Mermier in 1838, were the first Religious congregation to adopt his spirituality in the 19th century.

The religious institute of the Salesians of Don Bosco , founded by John Bosco in 1859 (approved by the Holy See in 1874), is also known as the Society of Saint Francis de Sales, and is placed under his patronage.

The Oblate Sisters of St. Francis de Sales were founded by Léonie Aviat and Louis Brisson , under the spiritual guidance of the Marie de Sales Chappuis in 1866. The Oblates of St. Francis de Sales order for men was later founded by Brisson, also under the guidance of Marie de Sales, in 1875.

[ 8 ] The Congregation of the Oratory of St. Philip Neri count him as one of their patrons, given his close association with St. Philip Neri's disciples and his founding of the Oratory in Thonon, France (now defunct), of which he was the first superior.

The Paulist Fathers in the United States count him as their patron.

Legacy [ edit ] Congregations [ edit ] In the 19th century, his vision for religious communities was revived. Several religious institutes were founded during that period for men and women desiring to live out the spiritual path that de Sales had developed.

The Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales (MSFS), founded by the Abbé Pierre Mermier in 1838, were the first congregation to adopt his spirituality in the 19th century.

The religious institute of the Salesians of Don Bosco (SDB), founded by John Bosco in 1859 (approved by the Holy See in 1874), is also known as the Society of Saint Francis de Sales, and is placed under his patronage.

The Oblate Sisters of St. Francis de Sales (OSFS) were founded by Léonie Aviat and Louis Brisson , under the spiritual guidance of the Marie de Sales Chappuis in 1866.

The Oblates of St. Francis de Sales (OSFS) order for men was later founded by Brisson, also under the guidance of Marie de Sales, in 1875.

[ 8 ] The Paulist Fathers in the United States count him as one of their patrons.

Mosaic of Francis de Sales on the exterior of St. Francis de Sales Oratory in St. Louis, Missouri The Institute of Christ the King Sovereign Priest , a society of priests founded in the 20th century, also has Francis de Sales as one of its three primary patrons. One of the major apostolates of the Institute in the United States is the Oratory of St. Francis de Sales in St. Louis, Missouri .

[ 19 ] Influence on other saints [ edit ] In 1618 or 1619 Vincent de Paul met in Paris Francis de Sales, whose spirituality and writings, especially An Introduction to the Devout Life , and Treatise on the Love of God , were to have a profound influence on Vincent.

[ 10 ] His work Treatise on the Love of God , also heavily features in the writings of Paul of the Cross , founder of the Passionists .

His writings on the perfections of the heart of Mary as the model of love for God influenced John Eudes to develop the devotion to the Hearts of Jesus and Mary .

[ 20 ] Namesakes [ edit ] Educational institutions [ edit ] St. Francis de Sales School, Newark, Ohio St Francis’ College, Letchworth Garden City, Hertfordshire , England St. Francis de Sales Catholic Junior School, Liverpool, England School of Sacred Heart St. Francis de Sales, Bennington, Vermont St. Francis de Sales Catholic School, Toronto, ON, Canada St Francis De Sales Catholic School, Houston, TX St. Francis de Sales Catholic School Riverside CA St. Francis de Sales Catholic School, Lake Zurich, IL St. Francis de Sales School, Morgantown , WV , United States St Francis de Sales School, Beckley, West Virginia St Francis de Sales School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania St. Francis de Sales Catholic High School, Walla Walla, Washington DeSales High School in Louisville, Kentucky DeSales University , located in Center Valley, Pennsylvania (formerly Allentown College of St. Francis de Sales) Mount de Sales Academy, Catonsville, Maryland Mount de Sales Academy, Georgia Saint Francis de Sales Seminary Milwaukee, Wisconsin Salesianum School , Wilmington , DE , United States St. Francis DeSales High School in Columbus , OH , United States St. Francis de Sales High School in Chicago , IL , United States St. Francis de Sales High School in Toledo , OH , United States St. Francis de Sales College , in Mount Barker, South Australia , Australia St. Francis de Sales – St. Stephen School, in Geneva, NY, United States St. Francis de Sales School , in Nagpur , India , managed by the Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales St. Francis de Sales School , in New Delhi , India , managed by the Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales St. Francis de Sales School, in Gangapur City , India , managed by the Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales St.Francis De sales School, in Nallasopara, India, managed by the Missionaries of St.Francis de Sales St. Francis de Sales School, in Dhemaji , India , managed by the Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales St. Francis de Sales School, Nizamabad, Telangana , India .

[ 21 ] St. Francis de Sales School (Wellington, New Zealand) St. Francis de Sales High School, Francis Nagar, Korutla St. Francis de Sales School for the Deaf in Brooklyn , New York [ 22 ] St. Francis de Sales College , in Nagpur , India The three seminary departments in the Archdiocese of Lipa are named after St. Francis de Sales (St. Francis de Sales Minor, Major, and Theological Seminary) St Francis de Sales College, Bengaluru, India SFS Public School and Junior College, Kerala(Ettumanoor), India St. Francis de Sales elementary school, Lake Geneva, WI, United States St. Francis de Sales School, Salisbury, MD, United States St. Francis de Sales Regional Catholic School, Herkimer, NY, United States St. Francis de Sales Catholic School, Lockport, NY, United States (formerly St. Francis de Sales High School) St. Francis de Sales School, Sherman Oaks, CA, United States St. Francis Sales Senior Secondary School, Kerala (Vizhinjam), India St. Francis De Sales, Guwahati, Assam, India Others [ edit ] St. Francis de Sales Catholic Church, Paducah, Kentucky St. Francis de Sales Parish,  Cincinnati, Ohio St. Francis de Sales Parish, Newark, Ohio St. Francis De Sales Parish, Akron, Ohio St. Francis De Sales and All Souls, Devonport. Auckland, New Zealand The island of St. François Atoll Saint Francis Hospital & Medical Center in Hartford , CT , United States .

St. Francis de Sales Broadcast Center in Batangas City , Philippines houses two radio stations under the Catholic Media Network : 99.1 Spirit FM and ALFM 95.9 Radyo Totoo St. Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church St. Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church (Charlestown, Mass.) St Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church (Purcellville, Virginia) St. Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church, Morgantown , WV , United States St. Francis de Sales Church (Norton Shores, Michigan) , Norton Shores , MI , United States St Francis de Sales, Hampton Hill and Upper Teddington St. Francis De Sales Catholic Church, Ajax, Ontario , Canada St. Francis De Sales Parish, Lakeview, Michigan St. Francis De Sales Parish, Dalugama, Kelaniya, Sri Lanka St. Francis de Sales Catholic Parish, Miami Beach, Florida St. Francis de Sales Parish, Estelline, South Dakota St. Francis de Sales Catholic Church, Lamar, Colorado Bibliography [ edit ] Francis de Sales, Introduction to the Devout Life , London, 2012. limovia.net ISBN 978-1-78336-023-9 Francis de Sales, Treatise on the Love of God [known as "Theotimus"], London, 2012. limovia.net ISBN 978-1-78336-024-6 Introduction to the Devout Life (Translated and Edited by John K. Ryan) , Doubleday, 1972.

ISBN 978-0-385-03009-0 The Catholic Controversy: St. Francis de Sales' Defense of the Faith , TAN Books, 1989.

ISBN 978-0-89555-387-4 Set Your Heart Free (Edited by John Kirvan) , Ave Maria Press, 2008.

ISBN 978-1-59471-153-4 Sermons of St. Francis de Sales on Prayer , TAN Books, 1985.

ISBN 978-0-89555-258-7 Sermons of St. Francis de Sales on Our Lady , TAN Books, 1985.

ISBN 978-0-89555-259-4 Sermons of St. Francis de Sales For Lent , TAN Books, 2009.

ISBN 978-0-89555-260-0 Sermons of St. Francis de Sales for Advent and Christmas , TAN Books, 1987.

ISBN 978-0-89555-261-7 See also [ edit ] Saint Francis de Sales, patron saint archive Savoy References [ edit ] ^ a b Lear, H.L.S. (1877).

S. Francis de Sales: Bishop and Prince of Geneva . Christian biog. Rivingtons. p. 268.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Ravier, A. (2007).

Francis de Sales Sage & Saint (in Spanish). DeSales Resource Center.

ISBN 978-0-9713199-6-7 .

^ a b c Pernin, Raphael. "St. Francis de Sales." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 6. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. 11 March 2020.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Wiseman, N.P. (1889).

The Dublin Review . Early British periodicals. Tablet Publishing Company. p. 26.

^ a b c " "Saint Francis de Sales", Franciscan Media" . Archived from the original on 1 April 2020 . Retrieved 11 March 2020 .

^ a b "The Life Story of St. Francis de Sales", Salesians of Don Bosco in the United States (USA West Province) ^ Mackey O.S.B., Henry Benedict. "The Land and Works of St. Francis de Sales", The Dublin Review , vol.22, Burns & Oates, London, July 1889, p.2 ^ a b c "Oblate History", Oblates of St. Francis De Sales, Wilmington-Philadelphia Province .

Archived 28 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b The Franciscan Book of Saints , edited by Marion Habig, OFM, Franciscan Herald Press, 1959 .

Archived 15 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b "Francis de Sales – Vincentian Encyclopedia" .

famvin.org . Retrieved 18 December 2018 .

^ Saint Jeanne-Françoise de Chantal (1988).

Francis de Sales, Jane de Chantal: Letters of Spiritual Direction . Paulist Press.

ISBN 978-0-8091-2990-4 .

^ Boundaries of Faith: Catholics and Protestants in the Diocese of Geneva by Jill Fehleison ( Truman State University Press , 2011) ^ Türks, Paul (1995).

Philip Neri:The Fire of Joy . Translated by Utrecht, Daniel. Edinburgh: T&T Clark. pp.

144– 145.

ISBN 0-567-29303-3 .

^ Diocese of Annency "Salesian Sites" Archived 26 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine (in French) .

^ John J. Crawley.

"St. Francis de Sales, Bishop, Doctor of the Church" .

Lives of Saints .

EWTN . Archived from the original on 5 July 2019 . Retrieved 14 January 2008 .

^ "Calendarium Romanum" (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 1969), p. 115.

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ "General Convention Virtual Binder" .

www.vbinder.net . Archived from the original on 13 September 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

^ " "Who we are", Institute of Christ the King" . Archived from the original on 31 October 2017 . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

^ Murphy, John F.

Mary's Immaculate Heart , p. 24, 2007 ISBN 1-4067-3409-8 ^ De Sales, St. Francis.

"St Francis De Sales School in Nizamabad" .

St Francis Nizamabad Official . Archived from the original on 10 January 2016.

^ St. Francis de Sales School for the Deaf, Brooklyn, NY Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " St. Francis de Sales ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Francis de Sales .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Francis de Sales .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Author:Francis de Sales Works by Francis de Sales at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Francis de Sales at the Internet Archive Works by Francis de Sales at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) International Commission on Salesian Studies All about St. Francis de Sales worldwide Statue in St Peter's Square Founder Statue in St Peter's Basilica Saint Francis de Sales papers, Vault MSS 447 at L. Tom Perry Special Collections , Harold B. Lee Library , Brigham Young University Brief except from Treatise on the Love of God Mackey, Henry Benedict; Phillips, Walter Alison (1911).

"Francis of Sales, St" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 10 (11th ed.). pp.

940– 941.

Works [ edit ] Introduction to the Devout Life Frederick Pustet & Co. (192X) Set Your Heart Free Readings from De Sales Spiritual Conferences from Oblates of St. Francis de Sales An Abridgment of the Interior Spirit of the Religious of the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary George Templeman (1834) The Mystical Flora of St. Francis de Sales; or, The Christian Life Under the Emblem of Plants M.H. Gill & Son (1877) Maxims and Counsels of St. Francis de Sales for Every Day in the Year M.H. Gill & Son (1884). Also at Project Gutenberg Of the Love of God Rivington's (1888) The Month of Mary, According to the Spirit of St. Francis of Sales . Robert Washbourne (1890) The Secret of Sanctity, According to St. Francis de Sales and Father Crasset, S.J.

Benziger Brothers (1893) Letters to Persons of the World Benziger Brothers (1894) The Catholic Controversy Burns and Oates (1909) Letters to Persons in Religion Burns and Oates (1909) Catholic Church titles Preceded by Giovanni Fontana — TITULAR — Bishop of Nicopolis ad Iaterum 15 July 1602 – 17 September 1602 Succeeded by Bernardin Corneillan Preceded by Claude de Granier Bishop of Geneva 17 September 1602 – 28 December 1622 Succeeded by Jean-François de Sales v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Portals : Saints Biography Catholicism France Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea 2 Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Francis_de_Sales&oldid=1301378539 " Categories : 1567 births 1622 deaths People from Haute-Savoie French Roman Catholic saints French Roman Catholic writers Canonizations by Pope Alexander VII Doctors of the Church 17th-century Roman Catholic bishops in the Republic of Geneva Founders of Catholic religious communities Early modern Christian devotional writers Capuchins Minims (religious order) Oratorians Oratorian saints Roman Catholic mystics Counter-Reformation Incorrupt saints French religious writers French male writers 16th-century French writers 16th-century male writers 17th-century French writers 17th-century male writers Lycée Louis-le-Grand alumni University of Padua alumni Anglican saints Beatifications by Pope Alexander VII Hidden categories: Source attribution CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2022 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles with unsourced quotes Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 13:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Francis de Sales 52 languages Add topic

