Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geologic history 2 Stratigraphy 3 Fossil content Toggle Fossil content subsection 3.1 Sites and quarries 3.1.1 Colorado 3.1.2 Utah 3.1.3 Wyoming 3.1.4 Montana 4 Economic geology 5 See also 6 Citations 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Morrison Formation 22 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rock formation in the western United States Morrison Formation Stratigraphic range : Upper Jurassic ( Kimmeridgian to Tithonian ), 156.3–146.8 Ma PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N The distinctive banding of the Morrison Formation, a group of rock layers that occur throughout Dinosaur National Monument and the source of fossils like those found at the Dinosaur Quarry Type Geologic formation Underlies Cedar Mountain Formation , Cloverly Formation , Lakota Formation , Burro Canyon Formation Overlies Summerville Formation , Beclabito Formation , Curtis Formation , Bell Ranch Formation , Sundance Formation Thickness Up to 200 m Lithology Primary Mudstone Other Sandstone , siltstone , limestone Location Coordinates 39°39′04″N 105°11′17″W ﻿ / ﻿ 39.651°N 105.188°W ﻿ / 39.651; -105.188 Approximate paleocoordinates 40°24′N 53°12′W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.4°N 53.2°W ﻿ / 40.4; -53.2 Region Arizona , Colorado , Idaho , Kansas , Montana , Nebraska , New Mexico , North Dakota , Oklahoma , South Dakota , Texas , Utah , Wyoming Country United States [ 1 ] Extent Stratotypes for members of the Morrison Formation Type section Named for Morrison, Colorado Type locality for the Morrison Formation above the town of Morrison, Colorado.

The Morrison Formation is a distinctive sequence of Upper Jurassic sedimentary rock found in the western United States which has been the most fertile source of dinosaur fossils in North America. It is composed of mudstone , sandstone , siltstone , and limestone and is light gray, greenish gray, or red. Most of the fossils occur in the green siltstone beds and lower sandstones, relics of the rivers and floodplains of the Jurassic period.

It is centered in Wyoming and Colorado , with outcrops in Montana , North Dakota , South Dakota , Nebraska , Kansas , the panhandles of Oklahoma and Texas , New Mexico , Arizona , Utah , and Idaho . Equivalent rocks under different names are found in Canada.

[ 2 ] It covers an area of 1.5 million square kilometers (600,000 square miles), although only a tiny fraction is exposed and accessible to geologists and paleontologists . Over 75% is still buried under the prairie to the east, and much of its western paleogeographic extent was eroded during exhumation of the Rocky Mountains .

It was named after Morrison, Colorado , where some of the first fossils in the formation were discovered by Arthur Lakes in 1877. That same year, it became the center of the Bone Wars , a fossil-collecting rivalry between early paleontologists Othniel Charles Marsh and Edward Drinker Cope . In Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah, the Morrison Formation was a major source of uranium ore.

Geologic history [ edit ] According to radiometric dating , the Morrison Formation dates from 156.3 ± 2 million years old ( Ma ) at its base, [ 3 ] to 146.8 ± 1 million years old at the top, [ 4 ] which places it in the earliest Kimmeridgian , and early Tithonian stages of the late Jurassic. This is similar in age to the Solnhofen Limestone Formation in Germany and the Tendaguru Formation in Tanzania . The age and much of the fauna is similar to the Lourinhã Formation in Portugal.

[ 5 ] Throughout the western United States, it variously overlies the Middle Jurassic Summerville, Sundance , Bell Ranch, Wanakah, and Stump Formations.

At the time, the supercontinent of Laurasia had recently split into the continents of North America and Eurasia, although they were still connected by land bridges. North America moved north and was passing through the subtropical regions .

The Morrison Basin, which stretched from New Mexico in the south to Alberta and Saskatchewan in the north, was formed during the Nevadan orogeny , a precursor event to later orogenic episodes that created the Rocky Mountains started pushing up to the west. The deposits from their east-facing drainage basins , carried by streams and rivers from the Elko Highlands (along the borders of present-day Nevada and Utah) and deposited in swampy lowlands, lakes, river channels and floodplains , became the Morrison Formation.

[ 6 ] In the north, the Sundance Sea , an extension of the Arctic Ocean , stretched through Canada down to the United States.

Coal is found in the Morrison Formation of Montana, which means that the northern part of the formation, along the shores of the sea, was wet and swampy, with more vegetation.

Aeolian , or wind-deposited sandstones, are found in the southwestern part, which indicates it was much more arid—a desert , with sand dunes .

Stratigraphy [ edit ] Type locality of the Salt Wash Member near White Wash, Grand County, Utah. The Morrison Formation is underlain by the brick-red Summerville Formation.

The Jurassic-Cretaceous boundary is seen where the red and purple beds of the Morrison Formation abruptly contact the drab, gray bed of the overlying Cedar Mountain Formation. The contact is the K1 unconformity. Jessie's Twist, southwest of Green River City, Utah.

Brushy Basin Member showing the purple and red colors of paleosols (ancient soils). East side of the San Rafael Swell, Emery County, Utah.

Gypsiferous facies of the Ralston Creek Member exposed in a road cut, Fremont County, Colorado.

The Morrison Formation is subdivided into several members, the occurrence of which are varied across the geographic extent of the Morrison. Members are (in alphabetical order): [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Bluff Sandstone Member (AZ, CO, NM, UT): Well-sorted, light brown to white sandstone with large grains and components of chert. Interpreted as being deposited in an aeolian setting, at the edge of a dune field.

[ 9 ] Reddish mudstones of the Tidwell Member underlying the whitish sandstones of the Saltwash Member, south of Cisco, Utah.

Brushy Basin Member on the Colorado Plateau Brushy Basin Member (AZ, CO, NM, UT): conglomerate interbedded with mudstone; up to fifty percent by volume is made up of altered vitric ash, which originated as felsic ash falls. Deposition likely occurred in a fluvial-lacustrine environment, with the lacustrine component tending towards playas .

[ 10 ] Fiftymile Member (UT): Mainly present in the Kaiparowits basin, consisting of interbedded sandstone and mudstone, with minimal conglomerate. Locally, it is the uppermost member and has contact with the Dakota Formation .

[ 11 ] Jackpile Sandstone Member (NM): primarily a whitish crossbedded subarkose sandstone with a clay matrix. It is interbedded with variegated, pale-green to red, bentonitic mudstone lenses.

[ 12 ] However, recent detrital zircon geochronology results have suggested that the Jackpile Sandstone Member is part of the Burro Canyon Formation .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Ralston Creek Member (CO): formerly a considered separate formation and recently reclassified as the basal member of the Morrison in eastern Colorado. It appears analogous to the Tidwell and Salt Wash Members. This reclassification is supported by more detailed examination of the contacts and radiometric dating. The Ralston Creek contains conglomerate, sandstone, gypsum-mudstone, and gypsum-sandstone-mudstone facies; it is undetermined if the gypsum is of marine or lacustrine origin.

[ 15 ] Recapture Member (AZ, CO, NM, UT): forms the bottom of the Morrison across most of its range, overlying the Entrada and Wanakah Formations.

[ 16 ] Consists of clayey sandstone and claystone , representing a fluvial setting, interbedded with purely aeolian sandstone facies; [ 17 ] in places, it also contains a large (up to nineteen percent) of orthoclase feldspar inclusions.

[ 18 ] Salt Wash Member (CO, UT): composed of fluvial sandstone, [ 17 ] with occasional conglomeratic tendencies.

[ 19 ] Tidwell Member at the type section, Shadscale Mesa, Emery County, Utah.

Tidwell Member (AZ, CO, NM, UT): in the northern part of the Colorado Plateau , it is the basal member of the Morrison. Mainly composed of siltstone, shale, and sandstone, and occasionally incorporates limestone clasts , along with thin beds of limestone.

[ 19 ] Depositional environments range from mudflats to fluvial, to evaporate and lacustrine . The Morrison as a whole resembles the Tidwell.

[ 20 ] Unkpapa Sandstone Member (SD): occurs primarily in western South Dakota as a well-sorted, fine-grained sandstone, consisting primarily of quartz, with some feldspar inclusions.

[ 21 ] Locally overlain by the Lakota Formation or the main body of the Morrison, and overlies the Redwater Shale Member of the Sundance Formation .

[ 22 ] Occasionally referred to as a separate formation, chiefly within the Black Hills region.

[ 21 ] Westwater Canyon Member (AZ, CO, NM, UT): consists of sandstone interbedded with mudstone lenses and the occasional conglomerate component. Deposited in a braided-stream environment, high in organic matter. The term "Poison Canyon Sandstone" is informally applied to the upper sandstone sections of the member.

[ 17 ] The Westwater Canyon Member is the main source of uranium ore in the Morrison, especially in the San Juan Basin .

[ 23 ] Windy Hill Member (CO, SD, UT, WY): Formerly included as the upper member of the Sundance Formation, as, like the rest of the Sundance, it was deposited in marine settings; however, it is separated by an unconformity and interfingers with the Morrison, meriting the nomenclature shift.

[ 24 ] Composed of limey, fossiliferous sandstone, generally interpreted to be deposited in a marine setting.

[ 25 ] "Popcorn" texture due to bentonite , formed from volcanic ash, characterizes the Brushy Basin Member Other informal or disused designations of the Morrison include the Stockett Bed in Montana, an unofficial sub-unit which contains bituminous coal; [ 26 ] the outdated terms Casamero, Chavez, and Prewitt Sandstone for the Brushy Basin, Recapture, and Westwater Canyon, respectively; [ 27 ] [ 28 ] and the Bullington Member, which has been discarded entirely.

Fossil content [ edit ] Main article: Paleobiota of the Morrison Formation Bluish beds of the Brushy Basin Member containing alkali minerals deposited in Lake T'oo'dichi' Main article: List of dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation Though many of the Morrison Formation fossils are fragmentary, they are sufficient to provide a good picture of the flora and fauna in the Morrison Basin during the Kimmeridgian. Overall, the climate was dry, similar to a savanna but, since there were no angiosperms ( grasses , flowers , and some trees ), the flora was quite different.

Conifers , the dominant plants of the time, were to be found with ginkgos , cycads , tree ferns , and horsetail rushes . Much of the fossilized vegetation was riparian , living along the river flood plains. Along the rivers, there were fish , frogs , salamanders , lizards , crocodiles , turtles , pterosaurs , crayfish , clams , and mammaliforms .

Coal seam in the Morrison Formation, Belt, Montana The dinosaurs were most likely riparian, as well.

[ 6 ] Hundreds of dinosaur fossils have been discovered, such as Allosaurus , Ceratosaurus , Torvosaurus , Camptosaurus , Ornitholestes , several stegosaurs comprising at least two species of Stegosaurus and the slightly older Hesperosaurus , and the early ankylosaurs , Mymoorapelta and Gargoyleosaurus , most notably a very broad range of sauropods (the giants of the Mesozoic era).

[ 29 ] Since at least some of these species are known to have nested in the area ( Camptosaurus embryoes have been discovered), there are indications that it was a good environment for dinosaurs and not just home to migratory, seasonal populations. However, the large body mass of the sauropods has been interpreted as an adaptation to migration in times of drought.

[ 6 ] Sauropods that have been discovered include Diplodocus (most famously, the first nearly complete specimen of D. carnegii , which is now exhibited at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History , in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania), Camarasaurus (the most commonly found sauropod), Brachiosaurus , Apatosaurus , Brontosaurus , Barosaurus , the uncommon Haplocanthosaurus and Supersaurus . The very diversity of the sauropods has raised some questions about how they could all co-exist. While their body shapes are very similar (long neck, long tail, huge elephant-like body), they are assumed to have had very different feeding strategies, in order for all to have existed in the same time frame and similar environment.

Sites and quarries [ edit ] Workers inside the Dinosaur Quarry building, at the Dinosaur National Monument Locations where significant Morrison Formation fossil discoveries have been made include: Colorado [ edit ] Fruita Paleontological Resource Area. One of the sites is denoted by the arrow.

Garden Park, Colorado : One of the three major sites excavated by the paleontologists Othniel Charles Marsh and Edward Drinker Cope during the Bone Wars in 1877, though most of the specimens were too incomplete to classify ( nomina dubia ) during the 1877-78 field seasons. The first nearly complete skeletons of Stegosaurus , Ceratosaurus , and Allosaurus were discovered at the site, including the type specimens of the former two and the proposed neotype of Allosaurus fragilis, in the 1883-1886 Yale field seasons.

[ 30 ] In 1992, a specimen of Stegosaurus stenops was discovered with its armor still in place, which confirmed that the dinosaur had two rows of plates on its back.

Dry Mesa Quarry , Colorado: A wide variety of fauna, as well as the most diverse set of dinosaurs from any Morrison Formation quarry. The first dig was in 1972, by researchers from Brigham Young University . Unique specimens include the longest dinosaur known, Supersaurus , the chimeric Ultrasauros , and the largest carnivore on the continent, Torvosaurus .

Fruita Paleontological Resource Area: Badlands sites located south of Fruita , were actively worked by George Callison from California State University and the Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History. Numerous specimens of mammals, lizards, and crocodiles were found. Most recently, Fruitafossor windscheffelia and the new dinosaur Fruitadens were described from the area.

Purgatoire River track site , Otero County .

Utah [ edit ] Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry , Utah: First excavated by geologists from the University of Utah in the late 1920s.

William Lee Stokes led an expedition from Princeton in 1939. During the Jurassic, the quarry was likely an ephemeral pond, where dinosaurs gathered and died due to severe drought.

[ 31 ] Their bodies were reworked by seasonal flooding events, which also added other partial carcasses from elsewhere.

[ 32 ] Allosaurus fragilis is by far the most common dinosaur at this site, making it a model organism for studies of paleobiology in basal theropods. The rare theropods Stokesosaurus and Marshosaurus specimens were also first discovered here.

Dinosaur National Monument , Utah: First excavated by Earl Douglas working for the Carnegie Museum in 1909 with the purpose of finding sauropods from the Morrison Formation for public display. Monument also has fossilized dinosaurs from the Cedar Mountain Formation .

Hanksville-Burpee Quarry , Hanksville Wyoming [ edit ] Bone Cabin Quarry , Wyoming Como Bluff , Wyoming: One of the most renowned fossil sites in North America. It was first worked by Cope and particularly Marsh in 1877 and has been the source of many different sauropods and non-dinosaur species. The Cloverly Formation from the Cretaceous and some Triassic strata are also exposed at this location.

The Wyoming Dinosaur Center , Thermopolis Ten Sleep , including Dana Quarry from where at least 12 sauropods and theropods are recovered.

[ 33 ] Montana [ edit ] Mother's Day Quarry , Carbon County Economic geology [ edit ] The Morrison Formation contains uranium deposits, including the Jackpile uranium body discovered near Grants, New Mexico in 1951.

[ 12 ] The ore deposits in the rich Grants mineral belt are concentrated in sandstone beds of the Westwater Canyon Member and the Jackpile Member. Mines in this belt produced 340,000,000 pounds (150,000,000 kg) of U 3 O 8 between 1948 and 2002. The uranium was precipitated by plant debris and humate that acted as reducing agents.

[ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Dinosaurs portal Paleontology portal Chugwater Formation Lists of dinosaur-bearing stratigraphic units List of fossil sites (with link directory) List of Paleobiota of the Morrison Formation Uranium mining and the Navajo people Citations [ edit ] ^ "Morrison Formation" (PDF) . CGKN . Retrieved 25 May 2013 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Parrish, J.T.; Peterson, F.; Turner, C.E. (2004).

"Jurassic "savannah"-plant taphonomy and climate of the Morrison Formation (Upper Jurassic, Western USA)" (PDF) .

Sedimentary Geology .

167 ( 3– 4): 137– 162.

Bibcode : 2004SedG..167..137P .

doi : 10.1016/j.sedgeo.2004.01.004 .

^ Trujillo, K.C.; Chamberlain, K.R.; Strickland, A. (2006). "Oxfordian U/Pb ages from SHRIMP analysis for the Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation of southeastern Wyoming with implications for biostratigraphic correlations".

Geological Society of America Abstracts with Programs .

38 (6): 7.

^ Bilbey, S.A. (1998). "Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry - age, stratigraphy and depositional environments". In Carpenter, K.; Chure, D.; Kirkland, J.I. (eds.).

The Morrison Formation: An Interdisciplinary Study . Modern Geology. Vol. 22. Taylor and Francis Group. pp.

87– 120.

ISSN 0026-7775 .

^ Mateus, O. 2006. Late Jurassic dinosaurs from the Morrison Formation, the Lourinhã and Alcobaça Formations (Portugal), and the Tendaguru Beds (Tanzania): a comparison. in Foster, J.R. and Lucas, S. G. R.M., eds., 2006, Paleontology and Geology of the Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation. New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin 36: 223-231.

^ a b c Turner, Christine E.; Peterson, Fred (May 2004).

"Reconstruction of the Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation extinct ecosystem—a synthesis" (PDF) .

Sedimentary Geology .

167 ( 3– 4): 309– 355.

Bibcode : 2004SedG..167..309T .

doi : 10.1016/j.sedgeo.2004.01.009 .

^ "Geologic Unit: Morrison" .

USGS Geolex . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

^ "Geologic Unit: Windy Hill" .

USGS Geolex . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

^ Condon, S.M.

"Stratigraphic Sections of the Middle Jurassic Wanakah Formation, Cow Springs Sandstone, and adjacent rocks, from Bluff, Utah, to Lupton, Arizona: U.S. Geologic Survey Oil and Gas Investigation Chart, OC-131" .

USGS Geolex . U.S. Geological Survey . Retrieved December 31, 2020 .

^ Bell, Thomas, "Deposition and Diagenesis of the Brushy Basin Member and the Upper Part of the Westwater Canyon Member of the Morrison Formation, San Juan Basin, New Mexico," in A Basin Analysis Case Study: The Morrison Grants Uranium Region New Mexico , edited by Neil S. Fishermen, Elmer S. Santos, and Christine E. Turner-Peterson, American Association of Petroleum Geolgists, Tulsa, 1986.

^ Peterson, Fred (1988).

"Revisions to Stratigraphic Nomenclature of Jurassic and Cretaceous Rocks of the Colorado Plateau" (PDF) .

U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin .

1633 (B): 13-56 . Retrieved December 31, 2020 .

^ a b Owen, Donald E.; Walters, Lester J. Jr.; Beck, Ronald G. (August 1984).

"The Jackpile Sandstone Member of the Morrison Formation in west-central New Mexicoby Donald E. jwen, Consulting Geologist, Tulsa, 0K 74152, and Lester J.Walters, Jr. and Ronald G. Beck, ARCO Oil and Gas Co., Dallas, IX75221 a formal definiti" (PDF) .

New Mexico Geology .

6 (3).

doi : 10.58799/NMG-v6n3.45 . Retrieved 4 June 2020 .

^ Dickinson, William R.; Gehrels, George E. (2010).

"Implications of U-Pb ages of detrital zircons in Mesozoic strata of the Four Corners region for provenance relations in space and time" (PDF) .

New Mexico Geological Society Field Conference Series .

61 : 135– 146 . Retrieved 27 October 2020 .

^ Cather, Steven M. (2020).

"Jurassic stratigraphic nomenclature for northwestern New Mexico" (PDF) .

New Mexico Geological Society Special Publication .

14 : 145– 151 . Retrieved 31 October 2020 .

^ Carpenter, Kenneth; Lindsey, Eugene (2019-01-31).

"Redefining the Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation in Garden Park National Natural Landmark and vicinity, eastern Colorado" .

Geology of the Intermountain West .

6 : 1– 30.

doi : 10.31711/giw.v6.pp1-30 .

ISSN 2380-7601 .

^ Condon, S.M.; Huffman, A.C. (1988).

"Revisions in nomenclature of the Middle Jurassic Wanakah Formation, Northwest New Mexico and northeast Arizona" .

U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin .

1633 (A): 1-12 . Retrieved 8 February 2021 .

^ a b c Allan R. Kirk; Steven M. Condon (1986). "Structural Control of Sedimentation Patterns and the Distribution of Uranium Deposits in the Westwater Canyon Member of the Morrison Formation, Northwestern New Mexico--A Subsurface Study". In Turner-Peterson, C.E.; Santos, Elmer S.; Fishman, Neil S. (eds.).

Basin Analysis Case Study: The Morrison Formation, Grants Uranium Region, New Mexico . Tulsa: The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. p. 110-111.

^ Peterson, Fred; Turner-Peterson, C.E. (1987).

"The Morrison Formation of the Colorado Plateau: recent advances in sedimentology, stratigraphy, and paleotectonics" .

Hunter .

2 (1): 1-18 . Retrieved 8 February 2021 .

^ a b O'Sullivan, R.B. (1984).

"The base of the Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation in east-central Utah" .

U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin .

1561 : 17 . Retrieved 8 February 2021 .

^ Peterson, Fred (1988).

"Stratigraphy and Nomenclature of Middle and Upper Jurassic rocks, western Colorado Plateau, Utah and Arizona" .

U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin .

1633 (B): 13-56 . Retrieved 9 February 2021 .

^ a b Mapel, W.J.; Chisholm, W.A. (1962). "Nonopaque heavy minerals in sandstone of Jurassic and Cretaceous age in the Black Hills, Wyoming and South Dakota".

U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin .

1161 (C): 1-59.

^ Szigeti, G.J; Fox, J.E. (1979). "Unkpapa Sandstone (Jurassic), Black Hills, South Dakota; an eolian facies of the Morrison Formation". In Ethridge, F.G.; Flores, R.M. (eds.).

Recent and Ancient non marine depositional environments: models for exploration . Casper, WY: Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists Special Publication. p. 331-349.

^ Christine E. Turner-Peterson (1986). "Fluvial Sedimentology of a Major Uranium-Bearing Sandstone-- A Study of the Westwater Canyon Member of the Morrison Formation, San Juan Basin, New Mexico". In Turner-Peterson, C.E.; Santos, Elmer S.; Fishman, Neil S. (eds.).

Basin Analysis Case Study: The Morrison Formation, Grants Uranium Region, New Mexico . Tulsa: The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. p. 110-111.

^ Fred Peterson. "Sand dunes, sabkhas, streams, and shallow seas: Jurassic paleogeography in the southern part of the Western Interior Basin". In Caputo, M.V.; Peterson, J.A.; Franczyk, K.J. (eds.).

Mesozoic Systems of the Rocky Mountain Region, USA . Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists, Rocky Mountain Section. p. 233-272.

^ Pipiringos, G.N. (1968).

"Correlation and Nomenclature of some Triassic and Jurassic Rocks in south-central Wyoming" .

U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper .

594 (D): 1-26 . Retrieved 8 February 2021 .

^ Daniel, J.A.; Bartholomew, M.J.; Murray, R.C. (1992). "Geological Characteristics of the Stockett Bed Coal in the Central Great Falls Coal Field, Montana".

Montana Bureau of Mines and Geology Special Publication .

102 : 145-157.

^ Smith, C.T. (1954). "Geology of the Thoreau quadrangle, McKinley and Valencia Counties, New Mexico".

New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources .

31 .

^ Robertson, J.F. (1990). "Geologic map of the Thoreau quadrangle, McKinley County, New Mexico".

U.S. Geological Survey .

^ Dodson, Peter; Behrensmeyer, A. K.; Bakker, Robert T.; McIntosh, John S. (1980).

"Taphonomy and Paleoecology of the Dinosaur Beds of the Jurassic Morrison Formation" .

Paleobiology .

6 (2): 208– 232.

Bibcode : 1980Pbio....6..208D .

doi : 10.1017/s009483730000676x .

ISSN 0094-8373 .

S2CID 130686856 .

^ Evanoff, E., & Carpenter, K. (1998).

History, sedimentology, and taphonomy of felch quarry 1 and associated sandbodies, Morrison Formation, Garden Park, Colorado.

Modern Geology , 22 , 423-170.

^ Gates, Terry.

"The Late Jurassic Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry as a Drought-Induced Assemblage" . PALAIOS . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ Peterson, Joseph E.; Warnock, Jonathan P.; Eberhart, Shawn L.; Clawson, Steven R.; Noto, Christopher R. (2017).

"New data towards the development of a comprehensive taphonomic framework for the Late Jurassic Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry, Central Utah" .

PeerJ .

5 : e3368.

doi : 10.7717/peerj.3368 .

PMC 5463971 .

PMID 28603668 .

^ Saleiro, A., & Mateus O. (2017).  Upper Jurassic bonebeds around Ten Sleep, Wyoming, USA: overview and stratigraphy. Abstract book of the XV Encuentro de Jóvenes Investigadores en Paleontología/XV Encontro de Jovens Investigadores em Paleontologia, Lisboa, 428 pp.. 357-361.

^ Wilton, Ted; Chavez, William X. Jr.; Caldwell, Samantha (2020).

"Sandstone-hosted uranium deposits at the Cebolleta Land Grant, Cibola County, New Mexico" (PDF) .

New Mexico Geological Society Special Publication .

14 : 67– 75 . Retrieved 27 October 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Foster, J. 2007. Jurassic West: The Dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation and Their World. Indiana University Press. 389pp.

Foster, J.R. 2003. Paleoecological Analysis of the Vertebrate Fauna of the Morrison Formation (Upper Jurassic), Rocky Mountain Region, U.S.A. Albuquerque, New Mexico: New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science. Bulletin 23.

Jenkins, J.T. and J.L. Jenkins. 1993. Colorado's Dinosaurs. Denver, Colorado: Colorado Geologic Survey. Special Publication 35.

Mateus, O. 2006. Late Jurassic dinosaurs from the Morrison Formation, the Lourinhã and Alcobaça Formations (Portugal), and the Tendaguru Beds (Tanzania): a comparison. in Foster, J.R. and Lucas, S. G. R.M., eds., 2006, Paleontology and Geology of the Upper Jurassic Morrison Formation. New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin 36: 223-231.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Morrison Formation .

Morrison Natural History Museum home page.

Dinosaurs and the History of Life , Columbia University lecture on the Morrison Formation.

Geology of the (Dinosaur National Monument) Quarry , from the National Park Service.

Spatial distribution of Morrison in Macrostrat .

Paleobiology Database: Dalton Well Dinosaur Track Site (Morrison Formation): Late/Upper Jurassic, Utah Paleobiology Database: Black Ridge Dinosaur Track Site (Morrison Formation): Late/Upper Jurassic, Colorado Catalogue of Morrison mammals (bottom of the page) NPS.gov: "About the Morrison Formation in Dinosaur National Monument Britannica.com: Morrison Formation geology v t e Chronostratigraphy of Colorado v t e Cenozoic chronostratigraphy of Colorado Ph Cz Q Pleistocene Alamosa Formation N Pliocene Zanclean Dry Union Formation Ogallala Formation Miocene Messinian Dry Union Formation Ogallala Formation Aquitanian Arikaree Formation Browns Park Formation Cedar Mountain Formation Flat Tops Volcanics Los Pintos Formation Martins Canyon Formation North Park Formation Santa Fe Formation Troublesome Formation Trump Formation Wagon Tongue Formation Grouse Mountain Basalt Pe Oligocene Chattian Arikaree Formation Brule Formation Central Colorado Volcanics Chadron Formation Conejos Formation Pinnacle Formation Pitch Formation Eocene Blanco Basin Formation Cuchara Formation D2 Sequence Dawson Arkose Echo Park Formation Farisita Formation Huerfano Formation Green River Formation Poison Canyon Formation Uinta Formation Wasatch Formation Paleocene Animas Formation Arapahoe Conglomerate Bridger Formation Denver Formation Fort Union Formation Middle Park Formation Nacimiento Formation Ojo Alamo Formation Raton Conglomerate San Jose Formation South Park Formation Washakie Formation Gravel Mountain Formation Independence Mountain Formation v t e Mesozoic chronostratigraphy of Colorado Ph Mz K Upper Benton Formation Carlile Shale Castle Gate Formation Cliff House Sandstone Codell Sandstone Dakota Group Fort Hays Limestone Fox Hills Formation Fruitland Formation Graneros Shale Greenhorn Shale Hygiene Formation Juana Lopez Kirtland Formation Kremmling Formation Lance Formation Laramie Formation Lewis Formation Lion Canyon Formation Mancos Shale Menefee Formation Mowry Shale Niobrara Formation Pando Porphyry Pictured Cliffs Formation Pierre Shale Point Lookout Formation Smoky Hill Chalk Trinidad Formation Vermejo Formation Williams Fork Formation Lower Burro Canyon Formation Horsetooth Formation J Upper Curtis Formation Morrison Formation Ralston Creek Formation Wanakah Formation Middle Carmel Formation Entrada Formation Garo Formation Page Formation Sundance Formation Lower Glen Canyon Formation Kayenta Formation Navajo Formation Wingate Sandstone Tr Upper Chinle Formation Middle Anisian Chugwater Formation Jelm Formation Moenkopi Formation Lower Olenekian Chugwater Formation Induan Chugwater Formation Lykins Formation Taloga Formation Moenkopi Formation v t e Paleozoic chronostratigraphy of Colorado Ph Pz P Lopingian Changhsingian Chugwater Formation Lykins Formation Taloga Formation Cisuralian Asselian Fountain Formation Madera Formation Blaine Formation Cedar Hills Formation Chase Formation Council Grove Formation Crestone Conglomerate Day Creek Formation Falcon Formation Forelle Formation Glendo Formation Glorieta Formation Hermosa Formation Ingleside Formation Kaibab Limestone Lansing Formation Lyons Formation Maroon Formation Minnekahta Formation Opeche Formation Owl Canyon Formation Phosphoria Formation Sangre de Cristo Formation Satanka Formation Shawnee Formation South Canyon Creek Formation Stone Corral Formation Sumner Formation Wabaunsee Formation Weber Formation Wellington Formation White Horse Group Wolfcamp Formation Yeso Formation C ⁋ Gzhelian Fountain Formation Madera Formation Atoka Formation Belden Formation Cherokee Formation Eagle Valley Evaporite Glen Eyrie Formation Gothic Formation Hermosa Formation Jacque Mountain Formation Kansas City Formation Kerber Formation Keyes Formation Marmaton Formation Maroon Formation Minturn Formation Molas Formation Morgan Round Valley Formation Morrow Formation Sharpsdale Formation M Tournaisian Williams Canyon Formation Beulah Formation Gilman Formation Headscrabble Formation Leadville Formation Molas Formation Osage Formation Spergen Formation St. Louis Formation Ste. Genevieve Formation Warsaw Formation D Upper Famennian Williams Canyon Formation Aneth Formation Dyer Formation Elbert Formation Kinderhook Formation Misener Formation Ouray Formation Parting Formation Pinyon Park Formation O Upper Fremont Limestone Viola Formation Middle Harding Sandstone Simpson Formation Lower Tremadocian Dotsero Formation Arbuckle Formation Manitou Formation Є Furongian Stage 10 Dotsero Formation Paibian Lodore Formation Sawatch Formation Series 3 Guzhangian Lodore Formation Sawatch Formation Reagan Formation Tintic Formation v t e Precambrian chronostratigraphy of Colorado pЄ ♇ Z Tonian Uinta Mountain Group Tava Formation X Siderian Owiyukuts Complex Uncompahgre Formation NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐p4xz6
Cached time: 20250817044103
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.134 seconds
Real time usage: 1.338 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 44572/1000000
Revision size: 35958/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 614617/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 135034/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 26/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 144611/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.537/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9965764/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1128.622      1 -total
 68.83%  776.775    220 Template:Chronostratigraphy_navbox_subgroup
 46.04%  519.592     38 Template:Navbox
 35.05%  395.588      1 Template:Chronostratigraphy_of_Colorado
 34.69%  391.560      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 30.78%  347.353      4 Template:Chronostratigraphy_navbox
 30.26%  341.539      1 Template:Reflist
 13.95%  157.460      1 Template:Infobox_Rockunit
 13.46%  151.899      1 Template:Infobox
 12.08%  136.332      1 Template:Mesozoic_chronostratigraphy_of_Colorado Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1149977:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044103 and revision id 1298902457. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Morrison_Formation&oldid=1298902457 " Categories : Morrison Formation Geologic formations of the United States Jurassic System of North America Late Jurassic North America Jurassic United States Kimmeridgian Stage Tithonian Stage Mudstone formations of the United States Siltstone formations of the United States Limestone formations of the United States Sandstone formations of the United States Fluvial deposits Shallow marine deposits Jurassic fossil record Fossiliferous stratigraphic units of North America Jurassic paleontological sites of North America Jurassic Arizona Jurassic Colorado Jurassic Idaho Jurassic Kansas Jurassic Montana Jurassic Nebraska Jurassic formations of New Mexico Jurassic North Dakota Jurassic geology of Oklahoma Jurassic geology of South Dakota Jurassic Texas Jurassic geology of Utah Jurassic geology of Wyoming Colorado Plateau Dinosaur National Monument Geology of the Rocky Mountains Geologic formations of Idaho Geologic formations of Montana Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 13:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Morrison Formation 22 languages Add topic

