Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Conceptual levels of philosophical technoscience Toggle Conceptual levels of philosophical technoscience subsection 1.1 Descriptive-analytic 1.2 Deconstructive 1.3 Visionary 2 Facets Toggle Facets subsection 2.1 Social 2.2 Political 2.3 Environmental 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Technoscience 11 languages العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara Français Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of how technology and science interact This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In common usage, technoscience refers to the entire long-standing and global human activity of technology , combined with the relatively recent scientific method that occurred primarily in Europe during the 17th and 18th centuries . Technoscience is the study of how humans interact with technology using the scientific method.

[ 1 ] Technoscience thus comprises the history of human application of technology and modern scientific methods, ranging from the early development of basic technologies for hunting , agriculture , or husbandry (e.g. the well, the bow, the plow, the harness) and all the way through atomic applications, biotechnology , robotics , and computer sciences . This more common and comprehensive usage of the term technoscience can be found in general textbooks and lectures concerning the history of science.

The relationship with the history of science is important in this subject and also underestimated, for example, by more modern sociologists of science. Instead, it is worth emphasising the links that exist between books on the history of science and technology and the study of the relationship between science and technology within a framework of social developments. We [ who?

] must always consider the generational leap between historical periods and scientific discoveries, the construction of machines, the creation of tools in relation to the technological changes that occurs in very specific situations.

[ 2 ] An alternate, more narrow usage occurs in some philosophical science and technology studies . In this usage, technoscience refers specifically to the technological and social context of science . Technoscience recognises that scientific knowledge is not only socially coded and historically situated but sustained and made durable by material (non-human) networks . Technoscience states that the fields of science and technology are linked and grow together, and scientific knowledge requires an infrastructure of technology in order to remain stationary or move forward.

The latter, philosophic use of the term technoscience was popularized by French philosopher Gaston Bachelard in 1953.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] It was popularized in the French-speaking world by Belgian philosopher Gilbert Hottois in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and entered English academic usage in 1987 with Bruno Latour 's book Science in Action .

[ 6 ] In translating the concept to English, Latour also combined several arguments about technoscience that had circulated separately within science and technology studies (STS) before into a comprehensive framework: the intertwinement of scientific and technological development as e.g. shown by the lab studies; the power of laboratories (and engineering workshops) to change the world as we know and experience it; the seamless webs that connect scientists, engineers and societal actors in actual practice (cf.

John Law 's concept of heterogeneous engineering ); the propensity of technoscientific world to create new nature–culture hybrids, and hence to complicate the borders between nature and culture.

[ 6 ] Conceptual levels of philosophical technoscience [ edit ] We [ who?

] look at the concept of technoscience by considering three levels: a descriptive-analytic level, a deconstructivist level, and a visionary level.

Descriptive-analytic [ edit ] On a descriptive-analytic level, technoscientific studies examine the decisive role of science and technology in how knowledge is being developed. What is the role played by large research labs in which experiments on organisms are undertaken, when it comes to a certain way of looking at the things surrounding us? To what extent do such investigations, experiments and insights shape views of 'nature' and of human bodies? How do these insights link to the concept of living organisms as biofacts ? To what extent do such insights inform technological innovation ? Can the laboratory be understood as a metaphor for social structures in their entirety?

Deconstructive [ edit ] On a deconstructive level, theoretical work is being undertaken on technoscience to address scientific practices critically, e.g. by Bruno Latour ( sociology ), by Donna Haraway ( history of science ), and by Karen Barad ( theoretical physics ). It is pointed out that scientific descriptions may be only allegedly objective; that descriptions are of a performative character, and that there are ways to de-mystify them. Likewise, new forms of representing those involved in research are being sought.

Visionary [ edit ] On a visionary level, the concept of technoscience comprises a number of social, literary, artistic and material technologies from western cultures in the third millennium. This is undertaken in order to focus on the interplay of hitherto separated areas and to question traditional boundary-drawing: this concerns the boundaries drawn between scientific disciplines as well as those commonly upheld for instance between research, technology, the arts and politics. One aim is to broaden the term ' technology ' (which by the Greek etymology of ' techné ' connotes all of the following: arts, handicraft, and skill) so as to negotiate possibilities of participation in the production of knowledge and to reflect on strategic alliances. Technoscience can be juxtaposed with a number of other innovative interdisciplinary areas of scholarship which have surfaced in these recent years such as technoetic , technoethics and technocriticism .

Facets [ edit ] Social [ edit ] As with any subject, technoscience exists within a broader social context that must be considered. Science & Technology Studies researcher Sergio Sismondo argues, "Neither the technical vision nor the social vision will come into being without the other, though with enough Concerted Effort both may be brought into being together".

[ 7 ] Despite the frequent separation between innovators and the consumers, Sismondo argues that development of technologies, though stimulated by a technoscientific themes, is an inherently social process.

Technoscience is so deeply embedded in people's everyday lives that its developments exist outside a space for critical thought and evaluation, argues Daniel Lee Kleinman (2005). Those who do attempt to question the perception of progress as being only a matter of more technology are often seen as champions of technological stagnation. The exception to this mentality is when a development is seen as threatening to human or environmental well-being. This holds true with the popular opposition of GMO crops, where the questioning of the validity of monopolized farming and patented genetics was simply not enough to rouse awareness.

[ 8 ] Political [ edit ] Science and technology are tools that continually change social structures and behaviors. Technoscience can be viewed as a form of government or having the power of government because of its impact on society. The impact extends to public health, safety, the environment, and beyond.

[ 9 ] Innovations create fundamental changes and drastically change the way people live. For example, C-SPAN and social media give American voters a near real-time view of Congress . This has allowed journalists and the people to hold their elected officials accountable in new ways.

Environmental [ edit ] Chlorine chemists and their scientific knowledge helped set the agenda for many environmental problems: PCBs in the Hudson River are polychlorinated biphenols ; [ 10 ] DDT , dieldrin , and aldrin are chlorinated pesticides ; CFCs that deplete the ozone layer are chlorofluorocarbons . Industry actually manufactured the chemicals and consumers purchased them. Therefore, one can determine that chemists are not the sole cause for these issues, but they are not blameless.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Bernard Stiegler Feminist technoscience Technocriticism Technoethics Notes [ edit ] ^ Encyclopedia.com (2019), Technoscience , accessed 3 January 2024 ^ Cf. Guglielmo Rinzivillo, Raccontare la tecnoscienza. Storia di macchine, strumenti, idee per fare funzionare il mondo , Roma, Edizioni Nuova Cultura, 2020, p.7, ISBN 978-88-3365-349-5 ; ISSN 2284-0567) ^ Gaston Bachelard, La materialisme rationel , Paris: PUF, 1953.

^ Don Ihde, Expanding Hermeneutics: Visualism in Science , Northwestern University Press, 1999, p. 8.

^ James M. M. Good, Irving Velody, The Politics of Postmodernity , Cambridge University Press, 1998, p. 178.

^ a b Bruno Latour (1987).

Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers Through Society . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-79291-2 ^ Sismondo, Sergio (2004).

An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies . Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-631-23444-9 .

^ Klienmen, Daniel Lee. Science and Technology in Society: From Biotechnology to the Internet. Blackwell Pub, 2005 ^ Langdon Winner, The Whale and the Reactor: The Search for Limits in an Age of High Technology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986) ^ "Hudson River PCBs — Background and Site Information". United States Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved 2007-12-31.

[1] ^ Woodhouse, Edward. The Future of Technological Civilization. Print.

References [ edit ] Steven Lukes, Power (1974), A Radical View , London: Macmillan Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar (1979).

Laboratory Life: the Social Construction of Scientific Facts . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-09418-7 Gilbert Hottois (1984).

Le signe et la technique. La philosophie à l'épreuve de la technique , Paris, Aubier Montaigne, Coll. "Res, L'invention philosophique", p. 59–60.

Langdon Winner (1986), The Whale and the Reactor: The Search for Limits in an Age of High Technology , Chicago: University of Chicago Press Stanley Aronowitz, Barbara Martinsons and Michael Menser (1995), Technoscience and Cyberculture , Routledge Adam Schaff (1990).

A sociedade informática: as conseqüências sociais da segunda revolução industrial . Editora Brasiliense.

ISBN 85-11-14081-6 Don Ihde (2003) Chasing Technoscience: Matrix for Materiality . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 0-253-21606-0 Sergio Sismondo (2004).

An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies . Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-631-23444-9 Daniel Lee Kleinman (2005), Science and Technology in Society: From Biotechnology to the Internet . Blackwell Pub Mike Michael (2006), Technoscience And Everyday Life: The Complex Simplicities of the Mundane , Open University Press Kristin Asdal, Brita Brenna, Ingunn Moser (2007), Technoscience: The Politics of Interventions, Akademika Publishing ISBN 978-8-274-773004 "Hudson River PCBs — Background and Site Information". United States Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved 2007-12-31.

Hans Lenk (2007), Global TechnoScience and Responsibility , LIT Verlag Don Ihde (2009), Postphenomenology and Technoscience: The Peking University Lectures , State University of New York Adele E. Clarke and al. (2010), Biomedicalization: Technoscience, Health, and Illness in the U.S.

, Duke University Press Bruce Braun and Sarah J. Whatmore (2010), Political Matter: Technoscience, Democracy, and Public Life , University Of Minnesota Press ISBN 978-0-816-670895 Marja Ylonen and Luigi Pellizzoni (2012), Neoliberalism and Technoscience: Critical Assessments , Ashgate Publishing Limited Edward Woodhouse (2013), The Future of Technological Civilization . Print; University Readers Guglielmo Rinzivillo (2020), Raccontare la tecnoscienza. Storia di macchine, strumenti, idee per fare funzionare il mondo , Roma, Edizioni Nuova Cultura ( ISBN 978-88-3365-349-5 ; ISSN 2284-0567).

External links [ edit ] Look up technoscience in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

International Journal of Feminist Technoscience Archived 2007-06-26 at the Wayback Machine ( open access journal with open peer review ) v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technoscience&oldid=1305103596 " Categories : Science and technology studies Science studies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2009 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2024 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 02:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technoscience 11 languages Add topic

