Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ethics 2 Political philosophy 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Kantianism 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophy of Immanuel Kant, a German philosopher This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's factual accuracy is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced .

( March 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( May 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Immanuel Kant Major works Critique of Pure Reason Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics " Answering the Question: What Is Enlightenment?

" Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals Critique of Practical Reason Critique of Judgment Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason Perpetual Peace The Metaphysics of Morals " On a Supposed Right to Tell Lies from Benevolent Motives " Opus Postumum Kantianism • Kantian ethics Transcendental idealism Critical philosophy Sapere aude Thing-in-itself Schema A priori and a posteriori Analytic–synthetic distinction Noumenon Category Categorical imperative Hypothetical imperative " Kingdom of Ends " Political philosophy Teleology People J. G. Fichte G. W. F. Hegel David Hume F. H. Jacobi Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Related topics German idealism Neo-Kantianism Category • Philosophy portal Kantianism ( German : Kantianismus ) is the philosophy of Immanuel Kant , a German philosopher born in Königsberg , Prussia (now Kaliningrad , Russia ). The term Kantianism or Kantian is sometimes also used to describe contemporary positions in philosophy of mind , epistemology , and ethics .

Ethics [ edit ] Main article: Kantian ethics Kantian ethics is deontological , revolving entirely around duty rather than the moral actor or the consequences of the actions. All actions are performed in accordance with some underlying maxim or principle, which are vastly different from each other; it is according to this that the moral worth of any action is judged. Kant's ethics are founded on his view of rationality as the ultimate good and his belief that all people are fundamentally rational beings. This led to the most important part of Kant's ethics, the formulation of the categorical imperative , which is the criterion for whether a maxim is good or bad.

Simply put, this criterion amounts to a thought experiment : to attempt to universalize the maxim (by imagining a world where all people necessarily acted in this way in the relevant circumstances) and then see if the maxim and its associated action would still be conceivable in such a world. For instance, holding the maxim kill anyone who annoys you and applying it universally would result in self termination. Thus holding this maxim is irrational as it ends up being impossible to hold it.

Universalizing a maxim (statement) leads to it being valid, or to one of two contradictions—a contradiction in conception (where the maxim, when universalized, is no longer a viable means to the end) or a contradiction in will (where the will of a person contradicts what the universalisation of the maxim implies). The first type leads to a "perfect duty", and the second leads to an "imperfect duty".

Kant's ethics focus, then, only on the maxim that underlies actions, and judges these to be good or bad solely on how they conform to reason. Kant showed that many of our common sense views of what is good or bad conform to his system, but denied that any action performed for reasons other than rational actions can be good (saving someone who is drowning simply out of a great pity for them is not a morally good act). Kant also denied that the consequences of an act in any way contribute to the moral worth of that act—his reasoning being (highly simplified for brevity) that the physical world is outside our full control, and thus we cannot be held accountable for the events that occur in it.

The formulations of the categorical imperative : Act only according to that maxim whereby you can, at the same time, will that it should become a universal law.

[ 1 ] Act in such a way that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, never merely as a means to an end, but always at the same time as an end.

[ 2 ] Therefore, every rational being must so act as if he were, through his maxim, always a legislating member in the universal kingdom of ends.

[ 3 ] Political philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant In political philosophy , Kant has had wide and increasing influence with major political philosophers of the late twentieth century. For example, John Rawls [ 4 ] [ 5 ] drew heavily on his inspiration in setting out the basis for a liberal view of political institutions.

[ clarification needed ] The nature of Rawls' use of Kant has engendered serious controversy [ clarification needed ] but has demonstrated the vitality of Kantian considerations across a wider range of questions than was once thought plausible.

See also [ edit ] Adaptive representation Kantian empiricism Neo-Kantianism Schopenhauer's criticism of the Kantian philosophy References [ edit ] ^ Kant, Immanuel (1993).

Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals . Translated by James W. Ellington (3rd ed.). Hackett. p.

30 .

ISBN 0-87220-166-X .

^ Kant, Immanuel (1993).

Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals . Translated by James W. Ellington (3rd ed.). Hackett. p.

36 .

ISBN 0-87220-166-X .

^ Kant, Immanuel (1993).

Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals . Translated by James W. Ellington (3rd ed.). Hackett. p.

43 .

ISBN 0-87220-166-X .

^ Thomas, Domjahn (4 May 2007).

John Rawls and Immanuel Kant - A Comparison (seminar paper, 2006) . GRIN Verlag.

ISBN 9783640089369 . Retrieved 14 August 2019 .

^ Vadim, Chaly (June 2015).

"An Interpretation of Rawls' "Kantian Interpretation" " .

CON-TEXTOS KANTIANOS. International Journal of Philosophy .

1 (1): 142– 155.

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.18510 . Retrieved 14 August 2019 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Henry Allison (2004) Kant's transcendental Idealism (Yale University Press) Thomas Auxter (1982) Kant's Moral Teleology (Mercer University Press) Lewis White Beck (1960) A Commentary on Kant's Critique of Practical Reason (University of Chicago Press) R. Beiner and W.J. Booth (eds.) (1993) Kant and Political Philosophy (Yale University Press) Gary Banham (2000) Kant and the Ends of Aesthetics (Macmillan) Gary Banham (2000) "Teleology, Transcendental Reflection and Artificial Life" Tekhnehma: Journal of Philosophy and Technology Number 6.

Gary Banham (2003) Kant's Practical Philosophy: From Critique to Doctrine (Palgrave Macmillan) Gary Banham (2006) Kant's Transcendental Imagination (Palgrave Macmillan) Howard Caygill (1989) Art of Judgment (Blackwell) Howard Caygill (1995) A Kant Dictionary (Blackwell) Mary Gregor (1963) Laws of Freedom: A Study of Kant's Method of Applying the Categorical Imperative in the Metaphysik Der Sitten (Basil Blackwell) Palmquist, Stephen (1993).

Kant's system of perspectives: an architectonic interpretation of the critical philosophy . Lanham: University Press of America.

ISBN 9780819189271 .

Online.

Palmquist, Stephen (2000).

Kant's critical religion . Aldershot, Hants, England Burlington, Vermont: Ashgate.

ISBN 9780754613336 .

Online.

John Rawls (2000) Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy (Harvard University Press) External links [ edit ] Media related to Kantianism at Wikimedia Commons Immanuel Kant , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Immanuel Kant: Aesthetics , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Immanuel Kant: Logic , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Immanuel Kant: Metaphysics , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Immanuel Kant: Philosophy of Mind , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Immanuel Kant: Radical Evil , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Immanuel Kant: Philosophy of Religion , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Kant's Aesthetics and Teleology v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category Authority control databases : National Germany Latvia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fgq8k
Cached time: 20250816100719
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.651 seconds
Real time usage: 0.814 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1919/1000000
Revision size: 8866/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 198981/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10779/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61551/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.417/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22406614/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  645.652      1 -total
 20.56%  132.726      1 Template:Reflist
 18.68%  120.633      6 Template:Cite_book
 16.51%  106.622      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 16.07%  103.786      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 15.51%  100.125      1 Template:Langx
 11.98%   77.362      1 Template:Immanuel_Kant
 11.71%   75.629      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.85%   70.026      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  8.97%   57.923      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:661863:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816100719 and revision id 1293668417. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kantianism&oldid=1293668417 " Categories : Kantianism Eponymous political ideologies Philosophical schools and traditions Philosophical theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Accuracy disputes from March 2008 All accuracy disputes Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2008 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia introduction cleanup from May 2017 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2017 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2015 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 02:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kantianism 24 languages Add topic

