Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Regular sections 3 Feature articles 4 Focus 5 Special editions 6 AstroFest 7 Lifetime achievement award 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Astronomy Now 2 languages فارسی Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Monthly magazine This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject.

It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view . Please discuss further on the talk page .

( November 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Astronomy Now" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Astronomy Now" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Astronomy Now is a monthly British magazine on astronomy and space. According to the Royal Astronomical Society , Astronomy Now is the "principal amateur astronomy magazine in Britain" with a reputed circulation of 24,000.

[ 1 ] The magazine features articles ranging from how to observe the night sky to the latest discoveries in the Solar System and in deep space. The first issue of Astronomy Now was published in April 1987 by Intra Press, initially as a quarterly publication, but it soon became monthly. It is published by Pole Star Publications Ltd.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] The first editor of Astronomy Now was Patrick Moore , who co-founded the magazine with original publisher Angelo Zgorelec, along with John Mason, Peter Cattermole, Ron Maddison, Iain Nicolson and Art Editor Paul Doherty. Subsequent editors have included Martin Beech, Timothy Lyster, Fiona Gammie, Steven Young, Pam Spence, Paul Parsons and Stuart Clark. The current editor is Keith Cooper.

Regular sections [ edit ] Each issue contains a host of regular sections. These include: News Update , reviewing major news stories over the last month.

The Night Sky – details of how to find the planets, deep sky challenges, double star of the month, Moonwatch by lunar expert Peter Grego, a section for Southern Hemisphere observers, a 'sky tour' with star charts and graphics from technical Illustrator Greg Smye–Rumsby. Other regular contributors include Martin Mobberley, Owen Brazell, Tony Markham and the magazine's Night Sky Consultant, supernova-discoverer Mark Armstrong. In 2007 a 'Light Pollution Corner' was added, detailing advances in the battle against light pollution, written by Bob Mizon of the Campaign for Dark Skies.

Absolute Beginners – Carole Stott's two-page guide for newcomers to astronomy.

In the Shops , the magazine's reviews section where telescopes, binoculars, mounts, eyepieces and all other kinds of astro-paraphernalia are assessed by regular reviewers including Steve Ringwood and Ade Ashford. There is also a two-page book reviews section, including a regular interview with a book author.

Key Moments , – Ian Seymour's monthly exploration of the quirkier aspects of astronomical history. One of the longest running features in the magazine, written by the same contributor since 1992.

Picture Gallery – astrophotos submitted by the magazine's readers, with commentary on the 'picture of the month' by astrophotographer Nik Szymanek . There is also a regular section showcasing the work of the Faulkes Telescopes led by Daniel Duggan.

[ 2 ] Society News –  News and information about UK astronomical societies, plus "Astrolistings" – an extensive programme of forthcoming events and lectures held by societies across the UK.

Tech talk – Martin Mobberley's guide to overcoming technical problems for the hands-on observer.

Ask Alan was a part of the magazine where readers had their astronomy questions answered by Dr. Alan Longstaff, (a freelance tutor at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich ).

Feature articles [ edit ] The articles in the magazine are aimed at both amateur and armchair astronomers, as well as being of general interest to professional astronomers. Examples of articles published in the last two years include in-depth reviews of missions such as the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter and the Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing Satellite, MESSENGER's flybys of Mercury, Planck, Herschel, the Hubble Space Telescope and more, and articles on the latest theories in cosmology, galaxy and star formation, planets and moons, plus telescopes and the latest observing technology.

Focus [ edit ] As well as the five or six feature articles in each issue to go alongside the regular sections, each issue contains a 'Focus' section to provide an in-depth look at a chosen area. Recent 'Focus' topics have included the lives of stars, gas giants, the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, emanations from the Sun, gamma ray astronomy and maps of the Universe .

Special editions [ edit ] In addition to the twelve monthly issues of Astronomy Now per year, there are also occasional special issues. A Yearbook is also released each autumn.

The Grand Tour of the Universe Written by Keith Cooper, this is a 100-page journey from our planet Earth, past the other planets of the Solar System and out into deep space, to the farthest depths of the Universe. Lavishly illustrated with full-colour images from the Hubble Space Telescope, the Spitzer Space Telescope, the Mars rovers, Cassini, the Voyager spacecraft and many other space missions, this is an introduction to our Universe, with detailed information on each planet, moon, star, nebulae and galaxy presented within.

The Grand Tour was released in autumn 2006.

Infinity Rising A collection of pictures of the night sky and guide to the art of astrophotography by Nik Szymanek released in summer 2005, for those who want to follow in Nik's footsteps as an astrophotographer to those that simply want to admire Nik's graceful images of galaxies, nebulae, the Moon and the various exotic locations and mountain-top observatories.

Exploring Mars Written by Neil English to coincide with the successful landing on the red planet by the twin rovers Spirit and Opportunity in 2004, and including their first pictures, this pictorial history of man's robotic exploration portrays Mars in all its dusty red glory.

The 3-D Universe The 3-D Universe features over 155  remarkable 3-D images of the Universe, many created from scratch by technical Illustrator Greg Smye–Rumsby, and with commentary from Kulvinder Singh Chadha, each copy comes with a pair of 3-D glasses.

Yearbooks Edited by the editor of Astronomy Now , and written by many of the magazine's regular contributors, the 132-page Yearbooks are released annually. They include a full observing guide for the full year ahead, plus a mix of interviews and articles on various aspects of astronomy.

AstroFest [ edit ] AstroFest is an annual exhibition and conference celebrating astronomy and space exploration, held by Astronomy Now magazine at Kensington Conference and Events Centre in west London. It is a two-day event, taking place over a Friday and a Saturday usually in the first half of February (2020: Friday 31 January and Saturday 1 February). A trade show consisting of dozens of exhibitors and telescope dealers covers three floors of the town hall. Visitors can meet the Astronomy Now editors and contributors and discuss the magazine with them.

The accompanying conference programme presents top speakers from the UK and overseas. Past speakers have included Maggie Aderin-Pocock , Alan Bond , Ted Bowell , Jocelyn Bell Burnell , Carol Christian , Alberto Conti , Brian Cox , Carlos Frenk , Douglas Gough , Monica Grady , Eva Grebel , David A. Hardy , Lucy Hawking , David Hughes , Robin Ince , Mat Irvine , Helen Keen , Rob Kennicutt , Jim Al-Khalili , Ed Krupp , David H. Levy , Chris Lintott , Keith Mason , Brian May , Fulvio Melia , Simon Mitton , Stephen O’Meara, Martin Rees , Ian Ridpath , Chris Riley , Seth Shostak , Simon Singh , Stephen Smartt , David Southwood , Jill Tarter , David Whitehouse, and John Zarnecki .

Allan Chapman is a regular speaker.

Lifetime achievement award [ edit ] The magazine presents the Astronomy Now Lifetime Achievement Award from time to time at AstroFest. The first two winners were Iain Nicolson (2015) and Ian Ridpath (2017).

References [ edit ] ^ "British Astronomy – Amateur and Educational Astronomy in Britain" .

Royal Astronomical Society . Retrieved 23 November 2012 .

^ "Images by Daniel Duggan | Faulkes Telescope Project" .

www.faulkes-telescope.com . Archived from the original on 26 May 2011 . Retrieved 22 February 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Portals : Astronomy Outer space Solar System Spaceflight Stars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astronomy_Now&oldid=1236513672 " Categories : Amateur astronomy Science and technology magazines published in the United Kingdom Monthly magazines published in the United Kingdom Astronomy in the United Kingdom Magazines established in 1987 Astronomy magazines 1987 establishments in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest from November 2012 Articles needing additional references from November 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles with topics of unclear notability from February 2021 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from December 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 25 July 2024, at 03:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astronomy Now 2 languages Add topic

