Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Music and influence 3 Notes 4 References and further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Pedro de Escobar 9 languages Deutsch Español Français עברית مصرى Português Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Portuguese composer (1465 – 1535) Pedro de Escobar (c. 1465 – after 1535), a.k.a.

Pedro do Porto , was a Portuguese composer of the Renaissance , mostly active in Spain .  He was one of the earliest and most skilled composers of polyphony in the Iberian Peninsula , whose music has survived.

Life [ edit ] He was born at Porto , Kingdom of Portugal , but nothing is known of his life until he entered the service of Isabella I of Castile in 1489.  His surname is of Castilian origin, and maybe he was born to Castilian immigrants, or descendants, established in Porto . But Castilians regarded him as Portuguese.

He was a singer in the Catholic Queen's chapel for ten years, and clearly was working as a composer as well; in addition he was the only member of her chapel described in court records as Portuguese.  In 1499 he returned to his native Portugal, but in 1507 received an offer of employment, which he accepted, as the maestro de capilla (chapel master in the Castilian language) at the cathedral in Seville .

While there he had charge of the choirboys, having to take care of their room and board in addition to having to teach them to sing; he complained of low pay, and eventually resigned.  In 1521 he was working in Portugal, as mestre de capela (chapel master in Portuguese) for  prince Dom Afonso, Cardinal-Infante of Portugal , son of Manuel I of Portugal .  His career seems to have ended badly, however, for the final record of his life there is a mention in a document of 1535 that he was an alcoholic and living in squalor.  He died in Évora .

Music and influence [ edit ] Villancico "Pásame, por Dios, barquero", facsimile from the Elvas Songbook Two complete masses of Escobar have survived, including a Requiem setting ( Missa pro defunctis ), the earliest by a composer from the Iberian Peninsula .  His known work also includes a setting of the Magnificat , 7 motets (including one Stabat Mater ), 4 antiphons , 8 hymns , and 18 villancicos , but it is highly probable that his authorship is hidden among the many anonymous works of the Portuguese and Spanish renaissance manuscripts.  His music was popular, as attested by the appearance of copies in far-off places; for example native scribes copied two of his manuscripts in Guatemala .  His motet Clamabat autem mulier Cananea was particularly praised by his contemporaries, and served as the source for instrumental pieces by later composers, namely Alonso Mudarra .

Notes [ edit ] This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) References and further reading [ edit ] Reese, Gustave (1954).

Music in the Renaissance . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 0-393-09530-4 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Stevenson, Robert (1980). "Escobar, Pedro de". In Sadie, Stanley (ed.).

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians . Vol. vi (1st ed.). London: Macmillan. pp.

243– 244.

Stevenson, Robert (24 February 2010) [20 January 2001]. "Escobar, Pedro de".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.08972 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

External links [ edit ] Free scores by Pedro de Escobar in the Choral Public Domain Library (ChoralWiki) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Portugal Latvia Poland Israel Finland Belgium Artists MusicBrainz Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pedro_de_Escobar&oldid=1263438817 " Categories : Portuguese classical composers Portuguese male classical composers Renaissance composers Musicians from Porto 1460s births 16th-century deaths 15th-century Portuguese people 16th-century Portuguese composers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template with a doi parameter Year of birth uncertain Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 16 December 2024, at 17:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pedro de Escobar 9 languages Add topic

