Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Dates and archaeology 2 Variants Toggle Variants subsection 2.1 Recumbent and axial stone circle 3 Distribution Toggle Distribution subsection 3.1 Great Britain and Ireland 3.2 Continental Europe 3.3 Africa 3.4 Asia 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Footnotes 5.2 Sources 5.3 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Stone circle 26 languages العربية Brezhoneg Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ring of standing stones This article is about ancient megalithic stone circles. For other uses, see Stone circle (disambiguation) .

Swinside stone circle, Cumbria , England Bryn Cader Faner , North Wales , a Welsh ring cairn / tumulus often misinterpreted as a stone circle A stone circle is a ring of megalithic standing stones . Most are found in Northwestern Europe – especially Stone circles in the British Isles and Brittany – and typically date from the Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age , with most being built between 3300 and 2500 BC. The best known examples include those at the henge monument at Avebury , the Rollright Stones , Castlerigg , and elements within the ring of standing stones at Stonehenge .

[ 1 ] Scattered examples exist from other parts of Europe. Later, during the Iron Age , stone circles were built in southern Scandinavia .

The archetypical stone circle is an uncluttered enclosure, large enough to congregate inside, and composed of megalithic stones. Often similar structures are named 'stone circle', but these names are either historic, or incorrect. Examples of commonly misinterpreted stone circles are ring cairns , burial mounds , and kerb cairns . Although it is often assumed there are thousands of stone circles across the British Isles and Europe, such enclosures are actually very rare, and constitute a regional form of henge .

[ 1 ] Examples of true stone circles include Long Meg and Her Daughters in Cumbria , henges with inner stones such as Avebury in Wiltshire , and The Merry Maidens in Cornwall .

Stone circles are usually grouped in terms of the shape and size of the stones, the span of their radius, and their population within the local area. Although many theories have been advanced to explain their use, usually related to providing a setting for ceremony or ritual, no consensus exists among archaeologists regarding their intended function. Their construction often involved considerable communal effort, including specialist tasks such as planning, quarrying, transportation, laying the foundation trenches, and final construction.

[ 2 ] Dates and archaeology [ edit ] Growing evidence suggests that megalithic constructions began as early as 5000 BC in northwestern France [ 3 ] and that the custom and techniques spread via sea routes throughout Europe and the Mediterranean region from there.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Carnac Stones in France are estimated to have been built around 4500 BC, [ 5 ] and many of the formations include megalithic stone circles.

The earliest stone circles in Britain were erected 3200–2500 BC, [ 1 ] [ 6 ] during the Middle Neolithic ( c.

3200 –2500 BC). Around that time, stone circles began to be built in the coastal and lowland areas towards the north of the United Kingdom . The Langdale axe industry in the Lake District may have been an important early centre for circle building , perhaps because of its economic power. Many had closely set stones, perhaps similar to the earth banks of henges . Others were constructed from boulders placed stably on the ground rather than standing stones held erect by a foundation trench. Recent research shows that the two oldest stone circles in Britain ( Stenness on Orkney and Callanish on the Isle of Lewis ) were constructed to align with solar and lunar positions.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Most sites do not contain evidence of human dwelling, suggesting that stone circles were constructed for ceremonies.
Sometimes, a stone circle is found in association with a burial pit or burial chamber, but most of these monuments have no such known association because of a lack of archaeological investigation.

Variants [ edit ] Recumbent and axial stone circle [ edit ] Easter Aquhorthies recumbent stone circle near Inverurie , Aberdeenshire , Scotland Dunnideer recumbent stone circle near Insch , Aberdeenshire, Scotland Main articles: Recumbent stone circle and Axial stone circle Recumbent stone circles are a variation containing a single large stone placed on its side. The stones are often ordered by height, with the tallest being the portals, with gradually reducing heights around each side of the circle, down to the recumbent stone, which is the lowest.

[ 8 ] This type is found throughout the British Isles and Brittany, with 71 examples in Scotland [ 9 ] and at least 20 in south-west Ireland. In the latter nation they are generally called axial stone circles , including Drombeg stone circle near Rosscarbery , County Cork.

Scottish recumbent circles are usually flanked by the two largest of the standing stones immediately on either side. These are known as 'flankers'. The stones are commonly graded in height with the lowest stones being diametrically opposite to the tall flankers. The circle commonly contains a ring cairn and cremation remains.

Irish axial stone circles are found in Cork and Kerry counties. These do not have tall flanking stones on either side of the recumbent stone. Instead, there are two tall stones at the side of the circle opposite the recumbent stone. These are known as 'portals', as they form an entrance into the circle. Often the portals are turned so that their flat sides face each other, rather than facing the centre of the circle.

Distribution [ edit ] Further information: List of stone circles Megalithic monuments are found in especially great number on the European Atlantic fringe and in the British Isles.

[ 10 ] Great Britain and Ireland [ edit ] Cornish stone circle Drombeg stone circle , County Cork, Ireland Stone circle at the Carrigagulla complex, County Cork, Ireland There are approximately 1300 stone circles in Britain and Ireland.

[ 11 ] Experts disagree on whether the construction of megaliths in Britain developed independently or was imported from mainland Europe.

A 2019 comprehensive radiocarbon dating study of megalithic structures across Europe and the British Isles concluded that construction techniques were spread to other communities via sea routes, starting from north-western France.

[ 4 ] [ 3 ] In contrast, the French archaeologist Jean-Pierre Mohen in his book Le Monde des Megalithes wrote that the British Isles are "outstanding in the abundance of standing stones, and the variety of circular architectural complexes of which they formed a part ... strikingly original, they have no equivalent elsewhere in Europe – strongly supporting the argument that the builders were independent." Some theories suggest that invaders from Brittany may have been responsible for constructing Stonehenge.

[ 12 ] Although stone circles are widely distributed across the island, Ireland has two main concentrations: in the Cork / Kerry area and in mid- Ulster . The latter typically consist of a greater number of small stones, usually 1' (0.3 metres) high, and are often found in upland areas and on sites that also contain a stone alignment . The Cork–Kerry stone circles tend to be more irregular in shape with larger but fewer and more widely-spaced orthostats around the axial stone.

[ 13 ] Continental Europe [ edit ] Examples can be found throughout Continental Europe, from the Black Sea to Brittany . Locations in France include several in Brittany (two on the island of Er Lannic and two more suggested at Carnac ), several in the south of France on the Causse de Blandas [ 14 ] [ 15 ] in the Cevennes , in the Pyrenees , [ 16 ] and in the Alps (e.g. the Petit Saint Bernard ). One notable stone circle is in the Italian Alps.

[ 17 ] As early as 1579, scholars in Germany described large erect stone circles near Ballenstedt .

[ 18 ] In 2001, a stone circle ( Beglik Tash ) was discovered in Bulgaria near the Black Sea.

There are several examples in the Alentejo region of Portugal, the oldest and most complete being the Almendres Cromlech near the regional capital of Évora and within its municipality. Remains of many others consist only of the central anta (as they are known in Portugal). This sometimes appears to have been used as an altar but more often as a central burial structure, originally surrounded by megaliths that show only sparsely survived erosion and human activities.

[ 19 ] These circles are also known as harrespil in the Basque country , where villagers call them mairu -baratz or jentil -baratz, meaning "pagan garden (cemetery)". They refer to mythological giants of the pre-Christian era. No example has survived in a good state of preservation, but, like the Alentejo, the Basque Country is dotted with eroded and vandalized examples of many such structures.

Africa [ edit ] Ancient stone circles are found throughout the Horn of Africa .

Booco in northeastern Somalia contains a number of such old structures. Small stone circles here surround two enclosed platform monuments, which are set together. The circles of stone are believed to mark associated graves.

[ 20 ] At Emba Derho in the Ethiopian and Eritrean highlands , two kinds of megalithic circles are found. The first type consists of single stone circles, whereas the second type comprises an inner circle enclosed within a larger circle (i.e. double stone circles).

[ 21 ] Stone circles and other megalithic monuments in Senegambia .

[ 22 ] The Senegambian stone circles are found on the western side of the continent. The individual groups are dated from 700 A.D. to 1350 A.D, and 1145 sites were mapped in a 1982 study.

[ 22 ] Asia [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the Near East, possibly the oldest stone circles in the world were found at Atlit Yam (about 8000 BC). The locality is now submerged near the Levantine Mediterranean coast.

Other locations include India or Japan. See more in the relevant Wikipedia category .

See also [ edit ] Senegambian Stone Circles References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c Ibbotson, Adam Morgan (2024).

Cumbria's Prehistoric Monuments (2nd ed.). UK: History Press.

^ Richards, Colin.

Building the Great Stone Circles of the North . Windgather Press, 2013. pp. 3–4 ^ a b c Paulsson, B. Schulz (February 26, 2019).

"Radiocarbon dates and Bayesian modeling support maritime diffusion model for megaliths in Europe" .

PNAS .

116 (9): 3460– 3465.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..116.3460S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1813268116 .

PMC 6397522 .

PMID 30808740 .

^ a b Grossman, David (February 12, 2019).

"Stonehenge Might Have Its Roots with Ancient Sailors from France" .

Popular Mechanics .

^ Annick Jacq.

"Carnac" . Bretagne-celtic.com. Archived from the original on 2012-02-04 . Retrieved 2009-05-05 .

^ a b "New research reveals the 'spectacular' secrets of Britain's earliest stone circles" .

The Independent . August 20, 2016.

Archived from the original on 2022-05-25.

^ "The Strange Origin of Scotland's Stone Circles" . BBC. 12 October 2012.

^ Burl, Aubrey (1995).

A Guide to the Stone Circles of Britain, Ireland and Brittany . Yale University Press.

^ Welfare, Adam (2011).

Great Crowns of Stone: The Recumbent Stone Circles of Scotland (PDF) . Edinburgh: Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland. p. 271.

^ Aubrey Burl.

"The Megalith Map" . Archived from the original on 2006-09-28 . Retrieved 2006-09-22 .

^ Burl, Aubrey (2000).

The Stone Circles of Britain, Ireland and Brittany . New Haven: Yale University Press. p.

5 .

ISBN 9780300083477 .

The Stone Circles of Britain, Ireland and Brittany.

^ "France's new Stonehenge: Secrets of a neolithic time machine" .

The Independent . July 31, 2006.

Archived from the original on 2022-05-25.

^ Murphy (1997), p.27 ^ "Le circuit des Mégalithes" .

^ "Lacam de Peyrarines" .

The Megalithic Portal .

^ "Senescau Cromlech" .

The Megalithic Portal .

^ "Cromlech - Regione Autonoma Valle d'Aosta" .

www.regione.vda.it .

^ Jan Albert Bakker (2010).

Megalithic Research in the Netherlands, 1547-1911: From "giant's Beds" and "pillars of Hercules" to Accurate Investigations . Sidestone Press. p.

47 .

ISBN 978-90-8890-034-1 .

^ "Thracian Cromlech (Stone Circle) - Staro Zhelezare, Bulgaria" .

Archaeology in Bulgaria. and Beyond - Archaeology, History & Nature: the Human - Earth Connection . 30 June 2015.

^ Hussein Mohamed Adam (1992). Charles Lee Geshekter (ed.).

The Proceedings of the First International Congress of Somali Studies – Somali Studies International Association . Scholars Press. pp. 37, 40.

ISBN 0891306587 . Retrieved 9 November 2014 .

^ Institut für Afrikanistik und Aẗhiopistik – Universität Hamburg (2004).

Aethiopica: International Journal of Ethiopian Studies . Vol.

7– 8. Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 27 . Retrieved 1 January 2015 .

^ a b Curdy, Philippe (1982-01-01).

"Mbolop Tobé (Santhiou Kohel, Sénégal). Contribution à la connaissance du mégalithisme sénégambien" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) Sources [ edit ] Burl, Aubrey (2000).

The Stone Circles of Britain, Ireland and Brittany . New Haven and London: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-08347-7 .

Bradley, Richard (1998).

The Significance of Monuments: On the Shaping of Human Experience in Neolithic and Bronze Age Europe . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-15204-4 .

Childe, V. Gordon (1947).

Prehistoric Communities of the British Isles (second edition) . Glasgow and London: Gilmour & Dean Ltd.

Murphy, Cornelius (1997).

The Prehistoric Archaeology of the Beara Peninsula, Co. Cork . Department of Archaeology - University College Cork .

Thomas, Julian (1999).

Understanding the Neolithic . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-20767-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Joanne Parker, ed. (2009).

Written On Stone: The Cultural Reception of British Prehistoric Monuments . Cambridge Scholars.

ISBN 978-1-4438-1338-9 .

Ronald E. Hicks (1981).

"Henges and stone circles, ritual and archaeoastronomy: archaeological research in Ireland and Great Britain" .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Stone circles .

Wikisource has the text of The New Student's Reference Work article  " Stone-Circles ".

Interactive map of megalithic monuments in Europe.

v t e European megaliths Armenia Metsamor Zorats Karer Azerbaijan Gobustan Rocks Bulgaria Beglik Tash Garlo Tatul Sanctuary France Barnenez Tumulus of Bougon Caixa de Rotllan Carnac Menhir de Champ-Dolent Dolmen de Bagneux Broken Menhir of Er Grah Dolmen de Mané-Kerioned Filitosa Gallardet Dolmen Gavrinis Harrespil Hotié de Viviane Kerzérho Locmariaquer megaliths Mane Braz Paddaghju Peyre-Brune Tombeau de Merlin Tremeca Verziau of Gargantua Germany Altendorf Denghoog Fraubillen cross Harhoog Lancken-Granitz dolmens Lohra Megaliths in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Niedertiefenbach Oldendorfer Totenstatt Riesenstein Route of Megalithic Culture Sieben Steinhäuser Wotanstein Züschen Guernsey Castel Menhir Le Creux ès Faïes Déhus Dolmen Les Fouillages La Gran'mère du Chimquière Le Trépied La Varde Ireland List of five-stone circles List of multiple-stone circles Aideen's Grave Ardgroom Ardristan standing stones Beltany stone circle Bohonagh Brennanstown Portal Tomb Brownshill dolmen Brú na Bóinne Carraig á Mhaistin stone Carrigagulla Carrowmore Castlenalacht Stone Row Castlestrange Stone Creevykeel Court Tomb Drombeg Gaulstown Portal Tomb Glantane East Grange stone circle High cross Kealkill Knocknakilla Meehambee Dolmen Mount Venus Piper's Stones Poulnabrone dolmen Reask Templebryan Stone Circle Turoe Stone Uragh Stone Circle Jersey Jersey dolmens La Hougue Bie Malta Megalithic Temples ( Borġ l-Imramma Borġ in-Nadur Buġibba Debdieba Ġgantija Ħaġar Qim Ħal Ġinwi Kordin Mnajdra Qortin l-Imdawwar Santa Verna Skorba Ta' Ħaġrat Ta' Marżiena Ta' Raddiena Tal-Qadi Tarxien Tas-Silġ Xemxija Xrobb l-Għaġin ) Ħal Saflieni Hypogeum Xagħra Stone Circle Netherlands Hunebed Poland Brąchnówko Grzybnica Odry Węsiory Portugal Almendres Cromlech Anta de Adrenunes Anta de Agualva Anta do Alto da Toupeira Antas do Barrocal Anta de Carcavelos Anta da Estria Antas da Valeira Anta do Monte Abraão Antas do Olival da Pêga Anta da Pedra dos Mouros Anta das Pedras Grandes Anta da Vidigueira Great Dolmen of Zambujeiro Barreira Megalithic Complex Dolmen of Cunha Baixa Dolmen of Carapito I Great Dolmen of Comenda da Igreja Menhir of Outeiro Menhir of Bulhoa Vale Maria do Meio Cromlech Xerez Cromlech Russia Dolmens of North Caucasus Thunder Stone Megaliths in the Urals Russian geoglyph Scandinavia Picture stones Runestones Stone circles Stone ships Spain Antequera Dolmens Site Chabola de la Hechicera Cova d'en Daina Dolmen de Axeitos Dolmen of Guadalperal Dolmen of Menga Dolmen de la Pastora Dolmen del prado de Lácara Dolmen de Soto Dolmen de Viera La Torre–La Janera Son Matge Turkey Obelisk of Theodosius Ukraine Boundary Stones United Kingdom England Arbor Low Avebury Barbrook One Birkrigg Boscawen-Un Boskednan Bridestones Brown Willy Cairns Bull Ring Burnmoor stone circles Castlerigg Craddock Moor Devil's Arrows Doll Tor Drizzlecombe Duloe Fernacre Five Wells Gardom's Edge Goodaver Grey Wethers Hoarstones Hordron Edge Hurlers Leper Stone Long Meg and Her Daughters Mên-an-Tol Merry Maidens Mitchell's Fold Mulfra Quoit Nine Ladies Nine Stones, Altarnun Nine Stones Close Pipers Rollright Rudston Monolith Scorhill Stannon Stanton Drew Stonehenge Stripple Swinside Trethevy Quoit Trippet Northern Ireland Aughlish Ballynoe Beaghmore Corick Drumskinny Legananny Giant's Ring Scotland List of recumbent stone circles Auld Bourtreebush Balquhain Callanish I II III IV VIII X Carlin Cat Stane Clach an Trushal Colmeallie Dunnideer Drybridge Easter Aquhorthies Kirkton of Bourtie Loanhead of Daviot Lochmaben Stone Pictish Ring of Brodgar Sheldon Stenness Steinacleit Strichen Sunhoney Tomnaverie Tyrebagger Yonder Bognie Wales Barclodiad y Gawres Bedd Arthur Bedd Taliesin Bodowyr Bryn Cader Faner Bryn Celli Ddu Bryn Gwyn stones Capel Garmon Carreg Coetan Arthur Carreg Samson Coetan Arthur Foel Chwern Llanfechell Lligwy Burial Chamber Maen Llia Maen Madoc Meini Hirion Moel Tŷ Uchaf Parc Cwm long cairn Penrhos Feilw Pentre Ifan St Lythans burial chamber Trefignath Tinkinswood Tŷ Newydd Burial Chamber Whetstones Isle of Man Manx runestones General Axial stone circle Chambered cairn Concentric stone circle Cromlech Dolmen Gallery grave Henge Harrespil Irish megalithic tombs Menhir Standing stone Stone circle Stone row Recumbent stone circle Photographs of stone circles Middle Eastern megaliths v t e Neolithic Europe (including the Chalcolithic ) ↑ Mesolithic Europe ↑ Horizons Cardium pottery Corded Ware culture First Temperate Neolithic Linear Pottery culture (LBK) Cultures Baden Beaker Boian Butmir Cernavodă Cerny Chasséen Cortaillod Coțofeni Cucuteni–Trypillia Danilo Decea Mureşului Dudești Funnelbeaker Gaudo Globular Amphora Gornești Gumelnița–Karanovo Hamangia Horgen Kakanj Karanovo Lengyel Narva Neman Petrești Pit–Comb Ware Pitted Ware Pfyn Rössen Rzucewo Seine–Oise–Marne Sesklo Sopot Sredny Stog Starčevo–Körös–Criș Starčevo Körös Criş Tisza Tiszapolgár Varna Vinča Vlaardingen Vučedol Wartberg Windmill Hill Monumental architecture Bank barrow Causewayed enclosure Cist Cursus Dolmen Great dolmen Guardian stones Henge Long barrow Megalith Megalithic entrance Menhir Passage grave Polygonal dolmen Rectangular dolmen Rondel Round barrow Simple dolmen Statue menhir Stone circle Stone row Timber circle Tor enclosure Unchambered long barrow Technology Grooved ware Lithic industries Metallurgy Neolithic long house Unstan ware Concepts Danubian culture Secondary products revolution Old Europe Proto-Indo-Europeans ↓ Bronze Age Europe ↓ v t e Prehistoric technology Prehistory Timeline Outline Stone Age Subdivisions New Stone Age Technology history Glossary Tools Farming Neolithic Revolution Founder crops New World crops Ard / plough Celt Digging stick Domestication Goad Irrigation Secondary products Sickle Terracing Food processing ( Paleolithic diet ) Fire Basket Cooking Earth oven Granaries Grinding slab Ground stone Hearth Aşıklı Höyük Qesem cave Manos Metate Mortar and pestle Pottery Quern-stone Storage pits Hunting Arrow Boomerang throwing stick Bow and arrow history Nets Spear spear-thrower baton harpoon Schöningen woomera Projectile points Arrowhead Transverse Bare Island Cascade Clovis Cresswell Cumberland Eden Folsom Lamoka Manis Mastodon Plano Systems Game drive system Buffalo jump Toolmaking Earliest toolmaking Oldowan Acheulean Mousterian Aurignacian Clovis culture Cupstone Fire hardening Gravettian culture Hafting Hand axe Grooves Langdale axe industry Levallois technique Lithic core Lithic reduction analysis debitage flake Lithic technology Magdalenian culture Metallurgy Microblade technology Mining Prepared-core technique Solutrean industry Striking platform Tool stone Uniface Yubetsu technique Other tools Adze Awl bone Axe Bannerstone Blade prismatic Bone tool Bow drill Burin Canoe Oar Pesse canoe Chopper tool Cleaver Denticulate tool Fire plough Fire-saw Hammerstone Knife Microlith Quern-stone Racloir Rope Scraper side Stone tool Tally stick Weapons Wheel illustration Architecture Ceremonial Kiva Pyramid Standing stones megalith row Stonehenge Dwellings Neolithic architecture long house British megalith architecture Nordic megalith architecture Burdei Cave Cliff dwelling Dugout Hut Quiggly hole Jacal Longhouse Mudbrick Mehrgarh Pit-house Pueblitos Pueblo Rock shelter Blombos Cave Abri de la Madeleine Sibudu Cave Roundhouse Stilt house Alp pile dwellings Stone roof Wattle and daub Water management Check dam Cistern Flush toilet Reservoir Well Other architecture Archaeological features Broch Burnt mound fulacht fiadh Causewayed enclosure Tor enclosure Circular enclosure Goseck Cursus Henge Thornborough Megalithic architectural elements Midden Oldest extant buildings Timber circle Timber trackway Sweet Track Arts and culture Material goods Baskets Beadwork Beds Chalcolithic Clothing/textiles timeline Cosmetics Glue Hides shoes Ötzi Jewelry amber use Mirrors Pottery Cardium Cord-marked Grooved ware Jōmon Linear Unstan ware Sewing needle Weaving Wine winery wine press Prehistoric art Art of the Upper Paleolithic Art of the Middle Paleolithic Blombos Cave List of Stone Age art Bird stone Cairn Carved stone balls Cave paintings Cup and ring mark Geoglyph Hill figure Golden hats Guardian stones Gwion Gwion rock paintings painting pigment Megalithic art Petroform Petroglyph Petrosomatoglyph Pictogram Rock art Rock cupule Stone carving Sculpture Statue menhir Stone circle list British Isles and Brittany Venus figurine Prehistoric music Evolutionary musicology music archaeology Alligator drum Paleolithic flute Divje Babe flute Gudi Prehistoric religion Evolutionary origin of religion Paleolithic religion Spiritual drug use Burial Burial mounds Bowl barrow Round barrow Mound Builders culture U.S. sites Chamber tomb Cotswold-Severn Cist Dartmoor kistvaens Clava cairn Court cairn Cremation Dolmen Great dolmen Funeral pyre Gallery grave transepted wedge-shaped Grave goods Jar burial Long barrow unchambered Grønsalen Megalithic tomb Mummy Passage grave Rectangular dolmen Ring cairn Simple dolmen Stone box grave Tor cairn Unchambered long cairn Other cultural Archaeoastronomy sites lunar calendar Behavioral modernity Origin of language Prehistoric counting Prehistoric medicine trepanning Prehistoric warfare Symbols symbolism Authority control databases : National Japan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐t88vs
Cached time: 20250814220257
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.609 seconds
Real time usage: 0.780 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2419/1000000
Revision size: 19064/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 166073/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1124/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 126640/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.367/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14727968/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  588.558      1 -total
 28.13%  165.589      1 Template:Reflist
 20.56%  121.005     13 Template:Cite_book
 13.33%   78.475      1 Template:Lang
 12.68%   74.639      3 Template:Navbox
 11.75%   69.148      1 Template:European_Standing_Stones
 10.76%   63.327      1 Template:Short_description
  7.85%   46.224     12 Template:Cite_web
  6.92%   40.733      1 Template:Unreferenced_section
  6.50%   38.274      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:637066:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220257 and revision id 1284647222. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stone_circle&oldid=1284647222 " Categories : Stone circles Megalithic monuments Types of monuments and memorials Late Neolithic Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 April 2025, at 21:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stone circle 26 languages Add topic

