Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Music and influence 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Bálint Bakfark 21 languages Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Հայերեն Italiano Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian musician (16th century) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Bálint Bakfark" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The native form of this personal name is Bakfark Bálint . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

Bálint Bakfark Bálint Bakfark Born Valentin Bakfark c. 1507 Brassó, Kingdom of Hungary (today Brașov , Romania) Died 15 or 22 August 1576 Padua , Republic of Venice Other names Valentin Bakfark Bacfarc Bakfarc Bakfarkh Bakffark Backuart Bálint Bakfark ( Hungarian: [ˈbaːlint ˈbɒkfɒrk] ; in contemporary sources Valentin Bakfark or (from 1565 onward) Valentin Greff alias Bakfark , his name is variously spelled as Bacfarc , Bakfarc , Bakfarkh , Bakffark , Backuart ) (c. 1507 – 15 or 22 August 1576) was a Hungarian composer of Transylvanian Saxon origin, [ 1 ] and lutenist of the Renaissance . He was enormously influential as a lutenist in his time, and renowned as a virtuoso on the instrument.

Life [ edit ] He was born in Brassó, Transylvania , Kingdom of Hungary (today Brașov in Romania), into a family of Transylvanian Saxon origin.

[ 2 ] An orphan, he was brought up by the Greff family and was educated in Buda at the court of John Zápolya . Bakfark remained there until 1540, though he possibly traveled to Italy once during this time.

Sometime in the 1540s he traveled to Paris, but, finding the position of lutenist to the king filled, he left for Jagiellon Poland in 1549, where he was employed as a court lutenist by Sigismund II Augustus . From then until 1566, he traveled extensively around Europe, with his renown increasing, but remained faithful to his employer in spite of numerous efforts by other monarchs to win him away; the riches bestowed on him by Sigismund may have affected his decision to remain attached to the court of Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania in Vilnius .

What happened to him in 1566 is not precisely known, but he clearly did something to provoke the wrath of the king, and scarcely had time to flee before Polish army troops ransacked his house and destroyed his possessions. After this, he lived for a while in Vienna and then returned to Transylvania, but not for long; in 1571 he moved to Padua in Italy, where he remained until his death during the plague of 1576.

As was common practice at the time, all the possessions of plague victims were destroyed by fire, so most of his manuscript music was lost.

[ citation needed ] Music and influence [ edit ] Music sheet by Bakfark with French tablature While Bakfark almost certainly wrote an enormous amount of music, very little was printed: a commonly given reason was that it was simply too difficult for others to play. His surviving works include ten fantasies , seven madrigals , eight chansons , and fourteen motets —all in amazingly faithful polyphonic arrangements for lute alone. Additionally, he transcribed vocal motets by contemporary composers such as Josquin des Prez , Clemens non Papa , Nicolas Gombert , and Orlando di Lasso into arrangements for the lute.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Vogl, Emil (1980).

"Johann Anton Losy: Lutenist of Prague" (PDF) .

Journal of the Lute Society of America .

XII : 58– 86. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-09-23 . Retrieved 2019-06-09 – via www.cs.dartmouth.edu.

^ Majuru, Adrian (2011-01-21).

"VALENTIN GREFF BAKFARK, COMPOZITOR ŞI" .

E-antropolog (in Romanian) . Retrieved 2024-09-24 .

^ Mészáros, Dávid (2022-12-12).

"A world star raised in Buda in the Middle Ages - memories of Bálint Bakfark and the street named after him" .

PestBuda . Retrieved 2024-07-08 .

Further reading [ edit ] Article "Bálint Bakfark", in: The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , ed.

Stanley Sadie , 20 vols. (London, Macmillan, 1980); ISBN 1-56159-174-2 .

Peter Király, "Bakfark [Bacfarc, Bakfarc, Bakfarkh, Bakffark] [Greff alias Bakfark, Greff Bakfark], Valentin", in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , 2nd edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell , 29 vols. (London: Macmillan, 2001); ISBN 978-1-56159-239-5 Gustave Reese : Music in the Renaissance (New York, W. W. Norton & Co., 1954); ISBN 0-393-09530-4 .

External links [ edit ] Free scores by Bálint Bakfark at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP) Portals : Biography Classical music Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Finland Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz 2 People BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bálint_Bakfark&oldid=1270081531 " Categories : 1500s births 1576 deaths 16th-century classical composers 16th-century deaths from plague (disease) 16th-century Hungarian people Composers for lute Hungarian expatriates in Italy Hungarian expatriates in Poland Hungarian lutenists Hungarian male classical composers Hungarian classical composers Musicians from Brașov Renaissance composers Transylvanian Saxon people Hidden categories: CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards Pages with Hungarian IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Composers with IMSLP links Articles with International Music Score Library Project links This page was last edited on 17 January 2025, at 20:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bálint Bakfark 21 languages Add topic

