Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Components 3 Educational activities 4 Research studies and education projects 5 Earlier uses of the term 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Geo-literacy 2 languages العربية Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia As defined by National Geographic , geo-literacy is "the ability to use geographic understanding and geographic reasoning to make decisions".

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The term "geo-literacy" arose from the National Geographic Society's "Fight against Geographic Illiteracy." The organization released various media to help explain the concept to the general public. In an editorial, Daniel C. Edelson, vice president for education at National Geographic, said, "The National Geographic Society's concern for geo-literacy comes from our mission. We see geo-literacy as providing the tools that will enable communities to protect natural and cultural resources, reduce violent conflict , and improve the quality of life worldwide. However, having a geo-literate populace is also critical for maintaining economic competitiveness , quality of life, and national security in our modern, interconnected world.", [ 2 ] and have released various media to help explain it to the general public.

[ 1 ] In addition, the National Geographic Society set up the Fund for Geo-literacy, in which donations help fund the printing of materials for education, professional development for the educators, and programs to help build awareness of the importance of geo-literacy.

[ 3 ] Components [ edit ] According to Edelson, the three components of geo-literacy are: [ 1 ] Interactions: understanding of human and natural systems Interconnections: geographic reasoning Implications: systematic decision-making Educational activities [ edit ] Kid World Citizen is a website which provides "multicultural, educational activities to teach...kids about the world", and lists the following "age-appropriate lessons to increase geo-literacy in primary school students": [ 4 ] Explore different homes around the world and guess why the types of home fit their environment Discover why certain cultures celebrate certain holidays, and what is important to them Investigate different habitats and biomes , such as the rainforest ; look at tangible ways children can prevent their destruction Surround kids with geography: study maps, create maps , follow maps, play with maps. The more spatial intelligence is developed at a young age, the more children will understand their place in this world.

Learn about the water cycle and the conserving and managing freshwater resources Research a child's favorite animal, turning it into a global lesson about protecting their habitat and food sources; what decisions can be made that will affect the outcome of this animal?

Research studies and education projects [ edit ] In 2012, InTeGrate ("a community effort to improve geoscience literacy and build a workforce that can make use of geoscience to solve societal issues") held a Module Author Meeting from May 16–18 on the topic.

[ 5 ] Earlier uses of the term [ edit ] In 2002, Robert E. Nolan of the Education Resources Information Center published a research report/journal article entitled "Geo-Literacy: How Well Adults Understand the World in Which They Live", which included  "a test of physical and geopolitical geography...completed by 321 adults". The years of formal education and age were correlated with geographic literacy, and informal learning, such as travel, reading, media, was used as the primary source of geographic knowledge for those with higher educational attainment. A notable finding was that women, regardless of education level, scored significantly lower than men." [ 6 ] In 2001, the Arizona Geographic Alliance launched a project called The GeoLiteracy Project that integrated geography education into reading and writing instruction.  In this case, their term GeoLiteracy referred to the integration of geography and traditional language arts literacy.

In 1997, Linda Ferguson and Eva LaMar established an educational project they called The Geo-Literacy Project.  LaMar describes geo-literacy as "the use of visual learning and communication tools to build an in-depth understanding -- or literacy -- of geography, geology , and local history ." [ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Geo-Literacy" . Archived from the original on April 16, 2014 . Retrieved June 26, 2012 .

^ Rosenberg, Matt (May 13, 2012).

"Geo-Literacy" . About.com. Archived from the original on April 12, 2014 . Retrieved June 26, 2012 .

^ "Fund for Geo-Literacy" . Archived from the original on June 25, 2012 . Retrieved June 26, 2012 .

^ "What is Geo-Literacy?" . Kid World Citizen. May 13, 2012 . Retrieved June 26, 2012 .

^ "Module Author Meeting Agenda" . Retrieved June 26, 2012 .

^ "Geo-Literacy: How Well Adults Understand the World in Which They Live" . Retrieved June 26, 2012 .

^ Ball, Ashley.

"Geo-Literacy: Using Technology to Forge New Ground" .

Edutopia . Retrieved 6 July 2012 .

External links [ edit ] National Geographic videos: "What is Geo-Literacy?" and "Why is Geo-Literacy Important?" Directions Magazine article "The Geo-Literacy Coalition Tackles Americans’ Geographic Preparation" v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geo-literacy&oldid=1276969420 " Categories : Geography Literacy This page was last edited on 21 February 2025, at 21:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geo-literacy 2 languages Add topic

