Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works 2 See also 3 Notes 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Plato Tiburtinus 15 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Français Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Plato of Tivoli ) 12th-century Italian astronomer and mathematician Plato Tiburtinus ( Latin : Plato Tiburtinus , "Plato of Tivoli "; fl . 12th century) was a 12th-century Italian mathematician , astronomer and translator who lived in Barcelona from 1116 to 1138.

[ 1 ] He is best known for translating Hebrew and Arabic documents into Latin , and was apparently the first to translate information on the astrolabe (an astronomical instrument) from Arabic.

Quadripartitum , 1622 Plato of Tivoli translated the Arab astrologer Albohali 's "Book of Birth"  into Latin in 1136.

[ 2 ] He translated Claudius Ptolemy 's Tetrabiblos from Arabic to Latin in 1138, [ 3 ] the astronomical works of al-Battani , Theodosius' Spherics and the Liber Embadorum by Abraham bar Chiia .

[ 4 ] He has worked together with the Jewish mathematician Savasorda ( Abraham Bar Ḥiyya Ha-Nasi ). His manuscripts were widely circulated and were among others used by Albertus Magnus and Fibonacci .

Works [ edit ] To him are attributed four works in science - mathematics : The Liber Embadorum (“ Book of Areas ,” or “ Practical Geometry ”), it was transferred (after a date astronomical specified in the text ) in 1145 from the Hebrew . The book had an influence on the Geometry of Fibonacci book and contains one of the first comprehensive treatments of quadratic equations in the Occident .

The Spherics by Theodosius of Bithynia , Al-Battān, i’s al-Zij (“ Astronomical Treatise ”) The De usu astrolabii of Abu’l-Qāsim Maslama ( Ibn al-Sạffār ), The manuscript contains information about the first astrolabe in the West .

The translations from the Arabic of seven other works (five astrological, one geomantical, and one medical [now lost]) are ascribed to Plato: Ptolemy’s Quadripartitum, The Iudicia Almansoris, The De electionibus horarum of Ali ibn Aḥmad al-Imrani , The De nativitatibus or De iudiciis nativitatum of Abu 'Ali al-Khaiyat , The De revolutionibus nativitatum by Abū Bakr al-Ḥasan (Albubather), The Questiones geomantice or Liber Arenalis scientie by “ Alfakini, son of Abizarch ” or “ son of Abraham ”, A De pulsibus et urinis by “ Aeneas ”.

See also [ edit ] Latin translations of the 12th century Notes [ edit ] ^ Charles E. Butterworth, Blake Andrée Kessel, The Introduction of Arabic philosophy into Europe , (Brill, 1994), 11.

^ Houtsma, p.875 ^ Jim Tester, Astrology of the Western World, (1987), p. 54 ^ David Eugene Smith, History of Mathematics , (Dover Publications, Inc, 1951), 201.

Further reading [ edit ] Baldassarre Boncompagni : Delle versioni fatte da Platone Tiburtino.

Atti dell’ Accademia pontificia dei Nuovi Lincei, 4, 1851, S. 249–286 F. J. Carmody : Arabic Astronomical and Astrological Sciences in Latin Translation: A Critical Bibliography.

Berkeley, Los Angeles 1956 Charles Homer Haskins : Studies in History of Medieval Science.

Cambridge, Massachusetts 1924 Charles Homer Haskins : The Renaissance of the Twelfth Century.

Cambridge: Harvard University Press 1927 George Sarton : Introduction to the History of Science.

Band 2, Teil 1, Baltimore 1931, S. 177–179 Moritz Steinschneider Die Europäischen Übersetzungen aus dem Arabischen bis Mitte des 17. Jahrhunderts.

Graz 1956 Moritz Steinschneider : Abraham Judaeus: Savasorda und Ibn Esra … In: Zeitschrift für Mathematik und Physik.

Band 12, 1867, S. 1–44 External links [ edit ] Minio-Paluello, Lorenzo (2008) [1970-80].

"Plato of Tivoli" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Encyclopedia.com.

Translators Article in the Dictionary of Scientific Biography by Lorenzo Minio-Paluello Portals : biography Mathematics astronomy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Poland Academics zbMATH People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plato_Tiburtinus&oldid=1299174728 " Categories : People from Tivoli, Lazio 12th-century Italian mathematicians Hebrew–Latin translators Arabic–Latin translators Christian Hebraists 12th-century astronomers 12th-century translators Medieval Italian astronomers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 23:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plato Tiburtinus 15 languages Add topic

