Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Modelization 2 Mathematical functions Toggle Mathematical functions subsection 2.1 Examples 2.2 Mathematical models 2.3 Analytic geometry 2.4 Mathematical analysis 2.5 Statistics and econometrics 2.6 Probability theory 3 Computer programming 4 Artificial intelligence 5 Engineering 6 Environmental science 7 Linguistics 8 Logic 9 Music 10 See also 11 References Toggle the table of contents Parameter 46 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Lëtzebuergesch Malagasy മലയാളം မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Română Runa Simi Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Sunda Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Variable used for specification For other uses, see Parameter (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Parameter" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A parameter (from Ancient Greek παρά ( pará ) ' beside, subsidiary ' and μέτρον ( métron ) ' measure ' ), generally, is any characteristic that can help in defining or classifying a particular system (meaning an event, project, object, situation, etc.). That is, a parameter is an element of a system that is useful, or critical, when identifying the system, or when evaluating its performance, status, condition, etc.

Parameter has more specific meanings within various disciplines, including mathematics , computer programming , engineering , statistics , logic , linguistics , and electronic musical composition.

In addition to its technical uses, there are also extended uses, especially in non-scientific contexts, where it is used to mean defining characteristics or boundaries, as in the phrases 'test parameters' or 'game play parameters'.

[ citation needed ] Modelization [ edit ] Main article: Modelization When a system is modeled by equations, the values that describe the system are called parameters . For example, in mechanics , the masses, the dimensions and shapes (for solid bodies), the densities and the viscosities (for fluids), appear as parameters in the equations modeling movements. There are often several choices for the parameters, and choosing a convenient set of parameters is called parametrization .

For example, if one were considering the movement of an object on the surface of a sphere much larger than the object (e.g. the Earth), there are two commonly used parametrizations of its position: angular coordinates (like latitude/longitude), which neatly describe large movements along circles on the sphere, and directional distance from a known point (e.g. "10km NNW of Toronto" or equivalently "8km due North, and then 6km due West, from Toronto" ), which are often simpler for movement confined to a (relatively) small area, like within a particular country or region. Such parametrizations are also relevant to the modelization of geographic areas (i.e.

map drawing ).

Mathematical functions [ edit ] Mathematical functions have one or more arguments that are designated in the definition by variables . A function definition can also contain parameters, but unlike variables, parameters are not listed among the arguments that the function takes. When parameters are present, the definition actually defines a whole family of functions, one for every valid set of values of the parameters. For instance, one could define a general quadratic function by declaring f ( x ) = a x 2 + b x + c {\displaystyle f(x)=ax^{2}+bx+c} ; Here, the variable x designates the function's argument, but a , b , and c are parameters (in this instance, also called coefficients ) that determine which particular quadratic function is being considered. A parameter could be incorporated into the function name to indicate its dependence on the parameter. For instance, one may define the base- b logarithm by the formula log b ⁡ ⁡ ( x ) = log ⁡ ⁡ ( x ) log ⁡ ⁡ ( b ) {\displaystyle \log _{b}(x)={\frac {\log(x)}{\log(b)}}} where b is a parameter that indicates which logarithmic function is being used. It is not an argument of the function, and will, for instance, be a constant when considering the derivative log b ′ ⁡ ⁡ ( x ) = ( x ln ⁡ ⁡ ( b ) ) − − 1 {\displaystyle \textstyle \log _{b}'(x)=(x\ln(b))^{-1}} .

In some informal situations it is a matter of convention (or historical accident) whether some or all of the symbols in a function definition are called parameters. However, changing the status of symbols between parameter and variable changes the function as a mathematical object. For instance, the notation for the falling factorial power n k _ _ = n ( n − − 1 ) ( n − − 2 ) ⋯ ⋯ ( n − − k + 1 ) {\displaystyle n^{\underline {k}}=n(n-1)(n-2)\cdots (n-k+1)} , defines a polynomial function of n (when k is considered a parameter), but is not a polynomial function of k (when n is considered a parameter). Indeed, in the latter case, it is only defined for non-negative integer arguments. More formal presentations of such situations typically start out with a function of several variables (including all those that might sometimes be called "parameters") such as ( n , k ) ↦ ↦ n k _ _ {\displaystyle (n,k)\mapsto n^{\underline {k}}} as the most fundamental object being considered, then defining functions with fewer variables from the main one by means of currying .

Sometimes it is useful to consider all functions with certain parameters as parametric family , i.e. as an indexed family of functions. Examples from probability theory are given further below .

Examples [ edit ] In a section on frequently misused words in his book The Writer's Art , James J. Kilpatrick quoted a letter from a correspondent, giving examples to illustrate the correct use of the word parameter : W.M. Woods ... a mathematician ... writes ... "... a variable is one of the many things a parameter is not." ... The dependent variable, the speed of the car, depends on the independent variable, the position of the gas pedal.

[Kilpatrick quoting Woods] "Now ... the engineers ... change the lever arms of the linkage ... the speed of the car ... will still depend on the pedal position ...

but in a ... different manner .  You have changed a parameter" A parametric equaliser is an audio filter that allows the frequency of maximum cut or boost to be set by one control, and the size of the cut or boost by another. These settings, the frequency level of the peak or trough, are two of the parameters of a frequency response curve, and in a two-control equaliser they completely describe the curve. More elaborate parametric equalisers may allow other parameters to be varied, such as skew. These parameters each describe some aspect of the response curve seen as a whole, over all frequencies.  A graphic equaliser provides individual level controls for various frequency bands, each of which acts only on that particular frequency band.

If asked to imagine the graph of the relationship y = ax 2 , one typically visualizes a range of values of x , but only one value of a . Of course a different value of a can be used, generating a different relation between x and y . Thus a is a parameter: it is less variable than the variable x or y , but it is not an explicit constant like the exponent 2. More precisely, changing the parameter a gives a different (though related) problem, whereas the variations of the variables x and y (and their interrelation) are part of the problem itself.

In calculating income based on wage and hours worked (income equals wage multiplied by hours worked), it is typically assumed that the number of hours worked is easily changed, but the wage is more static. This makes wage a parameter, hours worked an independent variable , and income a dependent variable .

Mathematical models [ edit ] In the context of a mathematical model , such as a probability distribution , the distinction between variables and parameters was described by Bard as follows: We refer to the relations which supposedly describe a certain physical situation, as a model . Typically, a model consists of one or more equations. The quantities appearing in the equations we classify into variables and parameters . The distinction between these is not always clear cut, and it frequently depends on the context in which the variables appear. Usually a model is designed to explain the relationships that exist among quantities which can be measured independently in an experiment; these are the variables of the model. To formulate these relationships, however, one frequently introduces "constants" which stand for inherent properties of nature (or of the materials and equipment used in a given experiment). These are the parameters.

[ 1 ] Analytic geometry [ edit ] Main articles: Parametric equation and Parametrization (geometry) In analytic geometry , a curve can be described as the image of a function whose argument, typically called the parameter , lies in a real interval .

For example, the unit circle can be specified in the following two ways: implicit form, the curve is the locus of points ( x , y ) in the Cartesian plane that satisfy the relation x 2 + y 2 = 1.

{\displaystyle x^{2}+y^{2}=1.} parametric form, the curve is the image of the function t ↦ ↦ ( cos ⁡ ⁡ t , sin ⁡ ⁡ t ) {\displaystyle t\mapsto (\cos t,\sin t)} with parameter t ∈ ∈ [ 0 , 2 π π ) .

{\displaystyle t\in [0,2\pi ).} As a parametric equation this can be written ( x , y ) = ( cos ⁡ ⁡ t , sin ⁡ ⁡ t ) .

{\displaystyle (x,y)=(\cos t,\sin t).} The parameter t in this equation would elsewhere in mathematics be called the independent variable .

Mathematical analysis [ edit ] In mathematical analysis , integrals dependent on a parameter are often considered. These are of the form F ( t ) = ∫ ∫ x 0 ( t ) x 1 ( t ) f ( x ; t ) d x .

{\displaystyle F(t)=\int _{x_{0}(t)}^{x_{1}(t)}f(x;t)\,dx.} In this formula, t is the argument of the function F , and on the right-hand side the parameter on which the integral depends. When evaluating the integral, t is held constant, and so it is considered to be a parameter.  If we are interested in the value of F for different values of t , we then consider t to be a variable. The quantity x is a dummy variable or variable of integration (confusingly, also sometimes called a parameter of integration ).

Statistics and econometrics [ edit ] Main article: Statistical parameter In statistics and econometrics , the probability framework above still holds, but attention shifts to estimating the parameters of a distribution based on observed data, or testing hypotheses about them. In frequentist estimation parameters are considered "fixed but unknown", whereas in Bayesian estimation they are treated as random variables, and their uncertainty is described as a distribution.

[ citation needed ] [ 2 ] In estimation theory of statistics, "statistic" or estimator refers to samples, whereas "parameter" or estimand refers to populations, where the samples are taken from. A statistic is a numerical characteristic of a sample that can be used as an estimate of the corresponding parameter, the numerical characteristic of the population from which the sample was drawn.

For example, the sample mean (estimator), denoted X ¯ ¯ {\displaystyle {\overline {X}}} , can be used as an estimate of the mean parameter (estimand), denoted μ , of the population from which the sample was drawn. Similarly, the sample variance (estimator), denoted S 2 , can be used to estimate the variance parameter (estimand), denoted σ 2 , of the population from which the sample was drawn. (Note that the sample standard deviation ( S ) is not an unbiased estimate of the population standard deviation ( σ ): see Unbiased estimation of standard deviation .) It is possible to make statistical inferences without assuming a particular parametric family of probability distributions . In that case, one speaks of non-parametric statistics as opposed to the parametric statistics just described. For example, a test based on Spearman's rank correlation coefficient would be called non-parametric since the statistic is computed from the rank-order of the data disregarding their actual values (and thus regardless of the distribution they were sampled from), whereas those based on the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient are parametric tests since it is computed directly from the data values and thus estimates the parameter known as the population correlation .

Probability theory [ edit ] These traces all represent Poisson distributions, but with different values for the parameter λ In probability theory , one may describe the distribution of a random variable as belonging to a family of probability distributions , distinguished from each other by the values of a finite number of parameters . For example, one talks about "a Poisson distribution with mean value λ".  The function defining the distribution (the probability mass function ) is: f ( k ; λ λ ) = e − − λ λ λ λ k k !

.

{\displaystyle f(k;\lambda )={\frac {e^{-\lambda }\lambda ^{k}}{k!}}.} This example nicely illustrates the distinction between constants, parameters, and variables.

e is Euler's number , a fundamental mathematical constant . The parameter λ is the mean number of observations of some phenomenon in question, a property characteristic of the system.

k is a variable, in this case the number of occurrences of the phenomenon actually observed from a particular sample.  If we want to know the probability of observing k 1 occurrences, we plug it into the function to get f ( k 1 ; λ λ ) {\displaystyle f(k_{1};\lambda )} .  Without altering the system, we can take multiple samples, which will have a range of values of k , but the system is always characterized by the same λ.

For instance, suppose we have a radioactive sample that emits, on average, five particles every ten minutes.  We take measurements of how many particles the sample emits over ten-minute periods.  The measurements exhibit different values of k , and if the sample behaves according to Poisson statistics, then each value of k will come up in a proportion given by the probability mass function above.  From measurement to measurement, however, λ remains constant at 5.  If we do not alter the system, then the parameter λ is unchanged from measurement to measurement; if, on the other hand, we modulate the system by replacing the sample with a more radioactive one, then the parameter λ would increase.

Another common distribution is the normal distribution , which has as parameters the mean μ and the variance σ².

In these above examples, the distributions of the random variables are completely specified by the type of distribution, i.e. Poisson or normal, and the parameter values, i.e. mean and variance.  In such a case, we have a parameterized distribution.

It is possible to use the sequence of moments (mean, mean square, ...) or cumulants (mean, variance, ...) as parameters for a probability distribution: see Statistical parameter .

Computer programming [ edit ] Main article: Parameter (computer programming) In computer programming , two notions of parameter are commonly used, and are referred to as parameters and arguments —or more formally as a formal parameter and an actual parameter .

For example, in the definition of a function such as y = f ( x ) = x + 2, x is the formal parameter (the parameter ) of the defined function.

When the function is evaluated for a given value, as in f (3): or, y = f (3) = 3 + 2 = 5, 3 is the actual parameter (the argument ) for evaluation by the defined function; it is a given value (actual value) that is substituted for the formal parameter of the defined function. (In casual usage the terms parameter and argument might inadvertently be interchanged, and thereby used incorrectly.) These concepts are discussed in a more precise way in functional programming and its foundational disciplines, lambda calculus and combinatory logic . Terminology varies between languages; some computer languages such as C define parameter and argument as given here, while Eiffel uses an alternative convention .

Artificial intelligence [ edit ] In artificial intelligence , a model describes the probability that something will occur. Parameters in a model are the weight of the various probabilities. Tiernan Ray, in an article on GPT-3, described parameters this way: A parameter is a calculation in a neural network that applies a great or lesser weighting to some aspect of the data, to give that aspect greater or lesser prominence in the overall calculation of the data. It is these weights that give shape to the data, and give the neural network a learned perspective on the data.

[ 3 ] Engineering [ edit ] In engineering (especially involving data acquisition) the term parameter sometimes loosely refers to an individual measured item. This usage is not consistent, as sometimes the term channel refers to an individual measured item, with parameter referring to the setup information about that channel.

"Speaking generally, properties are those physical quantities which directly describe the physical attributes of the system; parameters are those combinations of the properties which suffice to determine the response of the system. Properties can have all sorts of dimensions, depending upon the system being considered; parameters are dimensionless, or have the dimension of time or its reciprocal." [ 4 ] The term can also be used in engineering contexts, however, as it is typically used in the physical sciences.

Environmental science [ edit ] In environmental science and particularly in chemistry and microbiology , a parameter is used to describe a discrete chemical or microbiological entity that can be assigned a value: commonly a concentration, but may also be a logical entity (present or absent), a statistical result such as a 95 percentile value or in some cases a subjective value.

Linguistics [ edit ] Within linguistics, the word "parameter" is almost exclusively used to denote a binary switch in a Universal Grammar within a Principles and Parameters framework.

Logic [ edit ] In logic , the parameters passed to (or operated on by) an open predicate are called parameters by some authors (e.g., Prawitz 's Natural Deduction ; [ 5 ] Paulson 's Designing a theorem prover ). Parameters locally defined within the predicate are called variables . This extra distinction pays off when defining substitution (without this distinction special provision must be made to avoid variable capture). Others (maybe most) just call parameters passed to (or operated on by) an open predicate variables , and when defining substitution have to distinguish between free variables and bound variables .

Music [ edit ] Main article: Musical parameter In music theory, a parameter denotes an element which may be manipulated (composed), separately from the other elements. The term is used particularly for pitch , loudness , duration , and timbre , though theorists or composers have sometimes considered other musical aspects as parameters. The term is particularly used in serial music , where each parameter may follow some specified series.

Paul Lansky and George Perle criticized the extension of the word "parameter" to this sense, since it is not closely related to its mathematical sense, [ 6 ] but it remains common.  The term is also common in music production, as the functions of audio processing units (such as the attack, release, ratio, threshold, and other variables on a compressor) are defined by parameters specific to the type of unit (compressor, equalizer, delay, etc.).

See also [ edit ] Coefficient Coordinate system Function parameter Occam's razor (with regards to the trade-off of many or few parameters in data fitting) References [ edit ] ^ Bard, Yonathan (1974).

Nonlinear Parameter Estimation . New York: Academic Press . p. 11.

ISBN 0-12-078250-2 .

^ Efron, Bradley (2014-09-10).

"Frequentist Accuracy of Bayesian Estimates" .

researchgate.net . Retrieved 2023-04-12 .

^ "OpenAI's gigantic GPT-3 hints at the limits of language models for AI" .

ZDNet .

^ Trimmer, John D. (1950).

Response of Physical Systems . New York: Wiley. p. 13.

^ Prawitz, Dag (2006).

Natural Deduction: A Proof-Theoretic Study . Mineola, New York: Dover Publications.

ISBN 9780486446554 .

OCLC 61296001 .

^ Lansky, Paul & Perle, George (2001). "Parameter". In Sadie, Stanley & Tyrrell, John (eds.).

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (2nd ed.). London: Macmillan Publishers .

ISBN 978-1-56159-239-5 .

‎ v t e Artificial intelligence (AI) History timeline Companies Projects Concepts Parameter Hyperparameter Loss functions Regression Bias–variance tradeoff Double descent Overfitting Clustering Gradient descent SGD Quasi-Newton method Conjugate gradient method Backpropagation Attention Convolution Normalization Batchnorm Activation Softmax Sigmoid Rectifier Gating Weight initialization Regularization Datasets Augmentation Prompt engineering Reinforcement learning Q-learning SARSA Imitation Policy gradient Diffusion Latent diffusion model Autoregression Adversary RAG Uncanny valley RLHF Self-supervised learning Reflection Recursive self-improvement Hallucination Word embedding Vibe coding Applications Machine learning In-context learning Artificial neural network Deep learning Language model Large language model NMT Reasoning language model Model Context Protocol Intelligent agent Artificial human companion Humanity's Last Exam Artificial general intelligence (AGI) Implementations Audio–visual AlexNet WaveNet Human image synthesis HWR OCR Computer vision Speech synthesis 15.ai ElevenLabs Speech recognition Whisper Facial recognition AlphaFold Text-to-image models Aurora DALL-E Firefly Flux Ideogram Imagen Midjourney Recraft Stable Diffusion Text-to-video models Dream Machine Runway Gen Hailuo AI Kling Sora Veo Music generation Riffusion Suno AI Udio Text Word2vec Seq2seq GloVe BERT T5 Llama Chinchilla AI PaLM GPT 1 2 3 J ChatGPT 4 4o o1 o3 4.5 4.1 o4-mini 5 Claude Gemini chatbot Grok LaMDA BLOOM DBRX Project Debater IBM Watson IBM Watsonx Granite PanGu-Σ DeepSeek Qwen Decisional AlphaGo AlphaZero OpenAI Five Self-driving car MuZero Action selection AutoGPT Robot control People Alan Turing Warren Sturgis McCulloch Walter Pitts John von Neumann Claude Shannon Shun'ichi Amari Kunihiko Fukushima Takeo Kanade Marvin Minsky John McCarthy Nathaniel Rochester Allen Newell Cliff Shaw Herbert A. Simon Oliver Selfridge Frank Rosenblatt Bernard Widrow Joseph Weizenbaum Seymour Papert Seppo Linnainmaa Paul Werbos Geoffrey Hinton John Hopfield Jürgen Schmidhuber Yann LeCun Yoshua Bengio Lotfi A. Zadeh Stephen Grossberg Alex Graves James Goodnight Andrew Ng Fei-Fei Li Alex Krizhevsky Ilya Sutskever Oriol Vinyals Quoc V. Le Ian Goodfellow Demis Hassabis David Silver Andrej Karpathy Ashish Vaswani Noam Shazeer Aidan Gomez John Schulman Mustafa Suleyman Jan Leike Daniel Kokotajlo François Chollet Architectures Neural Turing machine Differentiable neural computer Transformer Vision transformer (ViT) Recurrent neural network (RNN) Long short-term memory (LSTM) Gated recurrent unit (GRU) Echo state network Multilayer perceptron (MLP) Convolutional neural network (CNN) Residual neural network (RNN) Highway network Mamba Autoencoder Variational autoencoder (VAE) Generative adversarial network (GAN) Graph neural network (GNN) Category Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐gcqxq
Cached time: 20250817193912
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.439 seconds
Real time usage: 0.646 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1885/1000000
Revision size: 21679/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 69161/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3376/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 38560/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.281/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14784145/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  496.317      1 -total
 22.90%  113.654      1 Template:Etymology
 22.13%  109.853      1 Template:Reflist
 16.88%   83.797      2 Template:Wikt-lang
 14.90%   73.973      3 Template:Cite_book
 14.11%   70.035      1 Template:Artificial_intelligence_navbox
 14.09%   69.923      2 Template:Navbox
 12.68%   62.931      1 Template:Short_description
 10.63%   52.737      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.87%   48.966      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25065:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817193912 and revision id 1268516123. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parameter&oldid=1268516123 " Category : Mathematical terminology Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template without a link parameter Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2011 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2009 This page was last edited on 10 January 2025, at 04:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parameter 46 languages Add topic

