Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Distribution 2 Climate 3 Structure 4 Characteristic biology 5 References 6 See also Toggle the table of contents Seasonal tropical forest 7 languages فارسی Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Monsoon forest ) Type of tropical forest Tropical seasonal climate sub-types: Am—Tropical monsoon climate .

Aw/As—Tropical savanna climate .

(note: Af in light green is Tropical rainforest ) Seasonal tropical forest , also known as moist deciduous , semi-evergreen seasonal , tropical mixed or monsoon [ 1 ] forest, typically contains a range of tree species: only some of which drop some or all of their leaves during the dry season. This tropical forest is classified under the Walter system as (i) tropical climate with high overall rainfall (typically in the 1000–2500 mm range; 39–98 inches) and (ii) having a very distinct wet season with (an often cooler “winter”) dry season .  These forests represent a range of habitats influenced by monsoon (Am) or tropical wet savanna (Aw/As) climates (as in the Köppen climate classification ).  Drier forests in the Aw/As climate zone are typically deciduous and placed in the Tropical dry forest biome : with further transitional zones ( ecotones ) of savannah woodland then tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands .

Distribution [ edit ] Main article: Global 200 § Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests Extreme differences are very much evident between the wet and dry seasons in a tropical seasonal forest. The image to the left shows Bhawal National Park in central Bangladesh during the dry season, while the image to the right depicts the same area during monsoon season.

Trees at Cat Tien National Park : showing seasonal forest structure in the early dry season (December) Seasonal forest in Northern Thailand Seasonal (mixed) tropical forests can be found in many parts of the tropical zone , with examples found in: In the Asia-Pacific region: seasonal forests predominate across large areas of the Eastern Java , Wallacea , Indian subcontinent and Indochina Eastern Java monsoon forests Wallacea Forest Brahmaputra Valley semi-evergreen forests Mondulkiri Province , Cambodia Cat Tien National Park , Vietnam Khao Yai National Park and Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary , Thailand Northern Australia: Cape York Peninsula ( Queensland ), Arnhem Land ( Northern Territory ), The Kimberly ( Western Australia ) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Emergent tree rising above the main canopy in Khao Yai National Park forest In the Americas Atlantic forests of Brazil Central and eastern Panama : with Barro Colorado Island especially well studied [ 6 ] In Africa Coastal West Africa : Guinean seasonal forest : from south-western Gambia to eastern Ghana Climate [ edit ] The climate of seasonal forests is typically controlled by a system called the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), located near the equator and created by the convergence of the trade winds from the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. The position of these bands vary seasonally, moving north in the northern summer and south in the northern winter, and ultimately controlling the wet and dry seasons in the tropics.

[ 7 ] These regions appear to have experienced strong warming, at a mean rate of 0.26 degrees Celsius per decade, which coincides with a global rise in temperature resulting from the anthropocentric inputs of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. Studies have also found that precipitation has declined and tropical Asia has experienced an increase in dry season intensity whereas Amazonian has no significant pattern change in precipitation or dry season.

[ 8 ] Additionally, El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events drive the inter-annual climatic variability in temperature and precipitation and result in drought and increased intensity of the dry season. As anthropogenic warming increases the intensity and frequency of ENSO will increase, rendering tropical rainforest regions susceptible to stress and increased mortality of trees and other plants.

[ 8 ] Onset dates and prevailing wind currents of the southwest summer monsoon.

Structure [ edit ] As with tropical rainforests there are different canopy layers , but these may be less pronounced in mixed forests, which are often characterised by numerous lianas due to their growth advantage during the dry season.

[ 9 ] The colloquial term jungle , derived from the Sanskrit word for "forest", has no specific ecological meaning but originally referred to this type of primary and especially secondary forest in the Indian subcontinent . Determining which strands of mixed forest are primary and secondary can also be problematic, since the species mixture is influenced by factors such as soil depth and climate, as well as human interference.

Characteristic biology [ edit ] The fauna and flora of seasonal tropical mixed forest are usually distinctive.  Examples of the biodiversity and habitat type are often well described for National Parks in: Africa represented by: the northern part of Korup National Park in Cameroon (central region) Falling Waters in Korup National Park the Upper Guinean forests (West Africa) Asia represented by Cat Tien National Park and Huai Kha Khaeng in the ( Indochina region) Pacific region : including the Queensland forest reserves Central American wildlife is well represented in: Costa Rica e.g.

Corcovado National Park the Soberanía National Park in Panama.

South American flora listed and represented in Rio Doce State Park References [ edit ] ^ Mongbay: Types of tropical forest (accessed 21 March 2017) ^ Beard, J.S.; Keneally, K.F. (1987), 'Rainforests of Western Australia'. In 'The rainforest legacy: Australian national rainforests study'. Special Australian heritage publication series 7(1) , pp.

289– 304 ^ Webb, L. J. (Leonard James) ; Tracey, J. G. (John Geoffrey) (1982), An ecological survey of the monsoon forests of the north-western region of the Northern Territory , Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service ^ Russell-Smith, Jeremy; Dunlop, Clyde (1987), The status of monsoon vine forests in the Northern Territory: a perspective. In 'The rainforest legacy: Australian national rainforests study. Special Australian heritage publication series 7(1) ^ Stanton, J.P.

; Fell, David. G. (2005).

"The rainforests of Cape York Peninsula" . Rainforest CRC – via National Library of Australia.

^ Leigh EG, Rand AS, Windsor DM (Eds. 1983)  The ecology of a tropical forest. Seasonal rhythms and long-term changes. Oxford University Press 468 pp.

^ NWS JetStream – Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone . Srh.noaa.gov (5 January 2010). Retrieved on 28 March 2013.

^ a b Malhi, Yadvinder & Wright, James (2004).

"Spatial patterns and recent trends in the climate of tropical rainforest regions" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences .

359 (1443): 311– 329.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2003.1433 .

PMC 1693325 .

PMID 15212087 .

^ Ya-Jun Chen, Kun-Fang Cao, Stefan A. Schnitzer, Ze-Xin Fan, Jiao-Lin Zhang, Frans Bongers (2015) Water-use advantage of lianas over trees in seasonal tropical forests.

New Phytologist , 205 [1]: 128–136 See also [ edit ] International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) List of tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests ecoregions Trees of the world Tropical dry forest Tropical rainforest Tropical vegetation Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Seasonal_tropical_forest&oldid=1298237013 " Categories : Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests Terrestrial biomes Tropical flora Ecoregions Forests Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 07:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Seasonal tropical forest 7 languages Add topic

