Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beliefs 2 By country Toggle By country subsection 2.1 Germany 2.2 Scandinavia 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Forerunners 3.2 Founding 3.3 Early leaders 3.4 Establishment reaction 3.5 Hymnody 3.6 Later history 4 Pietistic Lutheran denominations 5 Cross-denominational influence Toggle Cross-denominational influence subsection 5.1 Radical Pietism 5.2 Influence on the Methodists 5.3 Influence on religion in America 6 Influence on science 7 Impact on party voting in United States and Great Britain 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 Older works 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Pietism 51 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Magyar Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Rumantsch Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Movement within Lutheranism Part of a series on Lutheranism Background Christianity Start of the Reformation Reformation Protestantism Doctrine and theology Bible Old Testament New Testament Creeds Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Book of Concord Augsburg Confession Apology of the Augsburg Confession Luther's Small / Large Catechism Smalcald Articles Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope Formula of Concord Distinctive theological concepts Theology of Martin Luther Justification Law and Gospel Sola gratia Sola scriptura Christology Sanctification Two kingdoms catholicity Two states of the Church Priesthood of all believers Divine Providence Marian theology Theology of the Cross Sacramental Union Other relevant topics Homosexuality Sacraments and worship Baptism Eucharist Confession Confirmation Matrimony Anointing of the Sick Holy Orders Divine Service Matins Vespers Liturgical calendar Calendar of saints Lutheran hymn Lutheran hymnwriters Normative principle Lutheran art Organization Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference Global Confessional & Missional Lutheran Forum International Lutheran Council Lutheran World Federation Denominations Lutheranism by region Movements History of Lutheranism Crypto-Lutherans Gnesio-Lutherans Lutheran orthodoxy Pietists Radical Pietism Haugeans Laestadians Finnish Awakening Old Lutherans Neo-Lutherans High church Lutherans Confessional Lutheranism Key figures Missionaries John Campanius Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg Hans Egede Johann Heinrich Callenberg Johann Phillip Fabricius Paul Henkel John Christian Frederick Heyer Karl Graul Martti Rautanen Wilhelm Sihler F. C. D. Wyneken Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder Lars Olsen Skrefsrud Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen Onesimos Nesib Paul Olaf Bodding Johann Flierl Christian Keyser Jens Christensen Bible Translators Martin Luther Casiodoro de Reina Kjell Magne Yri Onesimos Nesib Aster Ganno Kristian Osvald Viderø Jákup Dahl Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg Johann Phillip Fabricius William Tyndale John Rogers George Constantine Jozef Roháček Johannes Avetaranian Guðbrandur Þorláksson Ludvig Olsen Fossum Hans Egede / Paul Egede Otto Fabricius Nils Vibe Stockfleth Olaus Petri / Laurentius Petri Martti Rautanen Primož Trubar Jurij Dalmatin Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen Sebastian Krelj Mikael Agricola Norwegian Bible Society Swedish Bible Society Samuel Ludwik Zasadius Stanislovas Rapolionis Laurentius Andreae Hans Tausen Olaf M. Norlie Jonas Bretkūnas Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder Antonio Brucioli Mikołaj Jakubica Matthias Bel Johann Ernst Glück William F. Beck Theologians Martin Luther / Katharina von Bora Philip Melanchthon Johannes Bugenhagen Johannes Brenz Justus Jonas Hans Tausen Laurentius Petri Olaus Petri Mikael Agricola Matthias Flacius Martin Chemnitz Johann Gerhard Abraham Calovius Johannes Andreas Quenstedt Johann Wilhelm Baier Philipp Spener David Hollaz August Hermann Francke Henry Muhlenberg Lars Levi Laestadius Charles Porterfield Krauth C. F. W. Walther Søren Kierkegaard Albrecht Ritschl Wilhelm Herrmann F. W. Stellhorn Rudolf Otto Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Bultmann Paul Tillich Hermann Sasse Dietrich Bonhoeffer Wolfhart Pannenberg Robert Jenson v t e Part of a series on Protestantism Outline Concepts Anti-Protestantism Bible Criticism Culture Demographics Ecclesiology Liturgy Relations with Catholics Theologies Five Solas History Proto-Protestantism Bohemian Reformation Reformation Magisterial Radical Counter Martin Luther Ninety-five Theses Augsburg Confession Huldrych Zwingli John Calvin Arminianism Crypto-Protestantism Nonconformists Dissenters Puritans John Wesley Pietism Great Awakenings in America Revival meetings Branches Proto-Protestants Hussites Waldensians Lutherans Reformed Continental Presbyterians Congregational Anglicans Continuing Anabaptists Amish Hutterites Mennonites Quakers Baptists Black church Methodists Radical Pietism Shakers Stone-Campbell Plymouth Brethren Adventist Irvings Holiness Keswickians Eastern Protestant Pentecostals United and uniting churches Nondenominational Movements Augsburg Catholics Charismatics Confessionalism Confessing Movement Convergence Church Growth Ecumenism Emerging church Evangelicalism Fundamentalism High church Liberalism Mainlines Neo-charismatics Neo-orthodoxy New Calvinism Paleo-orthodoxy Progressivism Spiritual Christianity Christianity portal v t e Pietism ( / ˈ p aɪ .

ɪ t ɪ z əm / ), also known as Pietistic Lutheranism , is a movement within Lutheranism that combines its emphasis on biblical doctrine with an emphasis on individual piety and living a holy Christian life.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Although the movement is aligned with Lutheranism, it has had a tremendous impact on Protestantism worldwide, particularly in North America and Europe. Pietism originated in modern Germany in the late 17th century with the work of Philipp Spener , a Lutheran theologian whose emphasis on personal transformation through spiritual rebirth and renewal, individual devotion, and piety laid the foundations for the movement. Although Spener did not directly advocate the quietistic , legalistic, and semi-separatist practices of Pietism, they were more or less involved in the positions he assumed or the practices which he encouraged.

Pietism spread from Germany to Switzerland, the rest of German-speaking Europe, and to Scandinavia and the Baltics, where it was heavily influential, leaving a permanent mark on the region's dominant Lutheranism, with figures like Hans Nielsen Hauge in Norway , Peter Spaak and Carl Olof Rosenius in Sweden , Katarina Asplund in Finland , and Barbara von Krüdener in the Baltics, and to the rest of Europe. It was further taken to North America, primarily by German and Scandinavian immigrants. There, it influenced Protestants of other ethnic and other (non-Lutheran) denominational backgrounds, contributing to the 18th-century foundation of evangelicalism , an interdenominational movement within Protestantism that today has some 300 million followers.

In the middle of the 19th century, Lars Levi Laestadius spearheaded a Pietist revival in Scandinavia that upheld what came to be known as Laestadian Lutheran theology , which is adhered to today by the Laestadian Lutheran Churches as well as by several congregations within other mainstream Lutheran Churches, such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Eielsen Synod and Association of Free Lutheran Congregations are Pietist Lutheran bodies that emerged in the Pietist Lutheran movement in Norway , which was spearheaded by Hans Nielsen Hauge .

[ 5 ] In 1900, the Church of the Lutheran Brethren was founded and it adheres to Pietist Lutheran theology, emphasizing a personal conversion experience .

[ 6 ] The Ethiopian Evangelical Church Mekane Yesus , a Lutheran denomination with a largely Pietistic following with some Presbyterian and Pentecostal influence and primarily based in Ethiopia and among the Ethiopian diaspora , is the largest individual member Lutheran denomination within the Lutheran World Federation .

[ 7 ] Whereas Pietistic Lutherans stayed within the Lutheran tradition, adherents of a related movement known as Radical Pietism believed in separating from the established Lutheran Churches.

[ 8 ] Some of the theological tenets of Pietism also influenced other traditions of Protestantism , inspiring the Anglican priest John Wesley to begin the Methodist movement and Alexander Mack to begin the Anabaptist Schwarzenau Brethren movement.

The word pietism (in lower case spelling) [ 9 ] is also used to refer to an "emphasis on devotional experience and practices", or an "affectation of devotion", [ 10 ] [ 9 ] "pious sentiment, especially of an exaggerated or affected nature", [ 11 ] not necessarily connected with Lutheranism or even Christianity.

Beliefs [ edit ] Pietistic Lutherans meet together in conventicles , "apart from Divine Service in order to mutually encourage piety".

[ 12 ] They believe "that any true Christian could point back in his or her life to an inner struggle with sin that culminated in a crisis and ultimately a decision to start a new, Christ-centered life." [ 12 ] Pietistic Lutherans emphasize following "biblical divine commands of believers to live a holy life and to strive for holy living, or sanctification ".

[ 13 ] By country [ edit ] Germany [ edit ] The "Five Brothers of Württemberg Pietism": Johannes Schnaitmann (1767–1847), Anton Egeler (1770–1850), Johann Martin Schäffer (1763–1851), Immanuel Gottlieb Kolb (1784–1859) and Johann Michael Hahn (1758–1819) Pietism did not die out in the 18th century, but was alive and active in the American Deutscher Evangelischer Kirchenverein des Westens (German Evangelical Church Society of the West, based in Gravois, Missouri , later German Evangelical Synod of North America and still later the Evangelical and Reformed Church , a precursor of the United Church of Christ .) The church president from 1901 to 1914 was a pietist named Jakob Pister.

[ 14 ] Some vestiges of Pietism were still present in 1957 at the time of the formation of the United Church of Christ. In the 21st century Pietism is still alive in groups inside the Evangelical Church in Germany . These groups are called Landeskirchliche Gemeinschaften and emerged in the second half of the 19th century in the so-called Gemeinschaftsbewegung .

The 19th century saw a revival of confessional Lutheran doctrine, known as the neo-Lutheran movement . This movement focused on a reassertion of the identity of Lutherans as a distinct group within the broader community of Christians , with a renewed focus on the Lutheran Confessions as a key source of Lutheran doctrine. Associated with these changes was a renewed focus on traditional doctrine and liturgy, which paralleled the growth of Anglo-Catholicism in England.

[ 15 ] Scandinavia [ edit ] Pietistic Lutheran frugality, humility, restraint, sense of duty and order have been strong cultural and religious influences in Scandinavia.

In Denmark , Pietistic Lutheranism became popular in 1703.

[ 16 ] There, the faithful were organized into conventicles that "met for prayer and Bible reading".

[ 16 ] Pietistic Lutheranism entered Sweden in the 1600s after the writings of Johann Arndt, Philipp Jakob Spener, and August Hermann Francke became popular.

[ 17 ] Pietistic Lutheranism gained patronage under Archbishop Erik Benzelius , who encouraged the Pietistic Lutheran practices.

[ 17 ] Laestadian Lutheranism , a form of Pietistic Lutheranism, continues to flourish in Scandinavia, where Church of Sweden priest Lars Levi Laestadius spearheaded the revival in the 19th century.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Forerunners [ edit ] As the forerunners of the Pietists in the strict sense, certain voices had been heard bewailing the shortcomings of the church and advocating a revival of practical and devout Christianity. Amongst them were the Christian mystic Jakob Böhme (Behmen); Johann Arndt , whose work, True Christianity , became widely known and appreciated; Heinrich Müller , who described the font , the pulpit , the confessional , and the altar as "the four dumb idols of the Lutheran Church"; the theologian Johann Valentin Andrea , court chaplain of the Landgrave of Hesse; Schuppius, who sought to restore the Bible to its place in the pulpit; and Theophilus Grossgebauer (d. 1661) of Rostock , who from his pulpit and by his writings raised what he called "the alarm cry of a watchman in Sion ".

Founding [ edit ] Philipp Spener (1635–1705), the "Father of Pietism", is considered the founder of the movement.

The direct originator of the movement was Philipp Spener . Born at Rappoltsweiler in Alsace, now in France, on 13 January 1635, trained by a devout godmother who used books of devotion like Arndt's True Christianity , Spener was convinced of the necessity of a moral and religious reformation within German Lutheranism. He studied theology at Strasbourg , where the professors at the time (and especially Sebastian Schmidt) were more inclined to "practical" Christianity than to theological disputation. He afterwards spent a year in Geneva , and was powerfully influenced by the strict moral life and rigid ecclesiastical discipline prevalent there, and also by the preaching and the piety of the Waldensian professor Antoine Leger and the converted Jesuit preacher Jean de Labadie .

During a stay in Tübingen , Spener read Grossgebauer's Alarm Cry , and in 1666 he entered upon his first pastoral charge at Frankfurt with a profound opinion that the Christian life within Evangelical Lutheranism was being sacrificed to zeal for rigid Lutheran orthodoxy . Pietism, as a distinct movement in the German Church, began with religious meetings at Spener's house ( collegia pietatis ) where he repeated his sermons, expounded passages of the New Testament , and induced those present to join in conversation on religious questions. In 1675, Spener published his Pia desideria or Earnest Desire for a Reform of the True Evangelical Church , the title giving rise to the term "Pietists". This was originally a pejorative term given to the adherents of the movement by its enemies as a form of ridicule, like that of "Methodists" somewhat later in England.

In Pia desideria , Spener made six proposals as the best means of restoring the life of the church: The earnest and thorough study of the Bible in private meetings, ecclesiolae in ecclesia ("little churches within the church") The Christian priesthood being universal, the laity should share in the spiritual government of the church A knowledge of Christianity must be attended by the practice of it as its indispensable sign and supplement Instead of merely didactic, and often bitter, attacks on the heterodox and unbelievers, a sympathetic and kindly treatment of them A reorganization of the theological training of the universities, giving more prominence to the devotional life A different style of preaching, namely, in the place of pleasing rhetoric, the implanting of Christianity in the inner or new man, the soul of which is faith, and its effects the fruits of life This work produced a great impression throughout Germany. While large numbers of orthodox Lutheran theologians and pastors were deeply offended by Spener's book, many other pastors immediately adopted Spener's proposals.

Early leaders [ edit ] Haugean Pietist Conventicle In 1686 Spener accepted an appointment to the court-chaplaincy at Dresden , which opened to him a wider though more difficult sphere of labor. In Leipzig , a society of young theologians was formed under his influence for the learned study and devout application of the Bible. Three magistrates belonging to that society, one of whom was August Hermann Francke , subsequently the founder of the famous orphanage at Halle (1695), commenced courses of expository lectures on the Scriptures of a practical and devotional character, and in the German language , which were zealously frequented by both students and townsmen. The lectures aroused the ill-will of the other theologians and pastors of Leipzig, and Francke and his friends left the city, and with the aid of Christian Thomasius and Spener founded the new University of Halle . The theological chairs in the new university were filled in complete conformity with Spener's proposals. The main difference between the new Pietistic Lutheran school and the orthodox Lutherans arose from the Pietists' conception of Christianity as chiefly consisting in a change of heart and consequent holiness of life. Orthodox Lutherans rejected this viewpoint as a gross simplification, stressing the need for the church and for sound theological underpinnings.

Spener died in 1705, but the movement, guided by Francke and fertilized from Halle, spread through the whole of Middle and North Germany. Among its greatest achievements, apart from the philanthropic institutions founded at Halle, were the revival of the Moravian Church in 1727 by Count von Zinzendorf , formerly a pupil in Francke's School for Young Noblemen in Halle, and the establishment of Protestant missions. In particular, Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg (10 July 1682 – 23 February 1719) became the first Pietist missionary to India.

Spener stressed the necessity of a new birth and separation of Christians from the world (see Asceticism ). Many Pietists maintained that the new birth always had to be preceded by agonies of repentance, and that only a regenerated theologian could teach theology. The whole school shunned all common worldly amusements, such as dancing, the theatre, and public games. Some believe this led to a new form of justification by works. Its ecclesiolae in ecclesia also weakened the power and meaning of church organization. These Pietistic attitudes caused a counter-movement at the beginning of the 18th century; one leader was Valentin Ernst Löscher , superintendent at Dresden.

Title page of the 1743 Mose och Lambsens wisor . This edition had 136 hymns, which were not numbered, although most had instructions as to which melody the text should be sung. For a complete list of hymns, see the Swedish article on Mose och Lambsens wisor .

The title is a reference to Revelation 15 :3, where those who triumph over the beast sing the songs of Moses and the Lamb.

Establishment reaction [ edit ] Authorities within state-endorsed Churches were suspicious of pietist doctrine which they often viewed as a social danger, as it "seemed either to generate an excess of evangelical fervor and so disturb the public tranquility or to promote a mysticism so nebulous as to obscure the imperatives of morality. A movement which cultivated religious feeling almost as an end itself". While some pietists (such as Francis Magny) held that "mysticism and the moral law went together", for others (like his pupil Françoise-Louise de la Tour) "pietist mysticism did less to reinforce the moral law than to take its place… the principle of 'guidance by inner light' was often a signal to follow the most intense of her inner sentiments… the supremacy of feeling over reason".

[ 18 ] Religious authorities could bring pressure on pietists, such as when they brought some of Magny's followers before the local consistory to answer questions about their unorthodox views [ 19 ] or when they banished Magny from Vevey for heterodoxy in 1713.

[ 18 ] Likewise, pietism challenged the orthodoxy via new media and formats: Periodical journals gained importance versus the former pasquills and single thesis, traditional disputation was replaced by competitive debating, which tried to gain new knowledge instead of defending orthodox scholarship.

[ 20 ] Hymnody [ edit ] Main article: Hymnody of continental Europe § Pietism Later history [ edit ] The Broad and the Narrow Way , a popular German Pietist painting, 1866 As a distinct movement, Pietism had its greatest strength by the middle of the 18th century; its very individualism in fact helped to prepare the way for the Enlightenment ( Aufklärung ), which took the church in an altogether different direction. Yet some claim that Pietism contributed largely to the revival of Biblical studies in Germany and to making religion once more an affair of the heart and of life and not merely of the intellect.

[ citation needed ] It likewise gave a new emphasis to the role of the laity in the church. Rudolf Sohm claimed that "It was the last great surge of the waves of the ecclesiastical movement begun by the Reformation ; it was the completion and the final form of the Protestantism created by the Reformation. Then came a time when another intellectual power took possession of the minds of men." Dietrich Bonhoeffer of the German Confessing Church framed the same characterization in less positive terms when he called Pietism the last attempt to save Christianity as a religion: Given that for him religion was a negative term, more or less an opposite to revelation , this constitutes a rather scathing judgment. Bonhoeffer denounced the basic aim of Pietism, to produce a "desired piety" in a person, as unbiblical.

Pietism is considered the major influence that led to the creation of the " Evangelical Church of the Union " in Prussia in 1817. The King of Prussia ordered the Lutheran and Reformed churches in Prussia to unite; they took the name "Evangelical" as a name both groups had previously identified with. This union movement spread through many German lands in the 1800s. Pietism, with its looser attitude toward confessional theology, had opened the churches to the possibility of uniting. The unification of the two branches of German Protestantism sparked the Schism of the Old Lutherans . Many Lutherans, called Old Lutherans formed free churches or emigrated to the United States and Australia , where they formed bodies that would later become the Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod and the Lutheran Church of Australia , respectively. (Many immigrants to America, who agreed with the union movement, formed German Evangelical Lutheran and Reformed congregations, later combined into the Evangelical Synod of North America , which is now a part of the United Church of Christ .) Summer services are a feature of Laestadian Lutheran piety.

In the middle of the 19th century, Lars Levi Laestadius spearheaded a Pietist revival in Scandinavia that upheld what came to be known as Laestadian Lutheran theology , which is heralded today by the Laestadian Lutheran Church as well as by several congregations within mainstream Lutheran Churches, such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland and the Church of Sweden .

[ 3 ] [ 21 ] After encountering a Sami woman who experienced a conversion, Laestadius had a similar experience that "transformed his life and defined his calling".

[ 4 ] As such, Laestadius "spend the rest of his life advancing his idea of Lutheran pietism, focusing his energies on marginalized groups in the northernmost regions of the Nordic countries".

[ 4 ] Laestadius called on his followers to embrace their Lutheran identity and as a result, Laestadian Lutherans have remained a part of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland , the national Church in that country, with some Laestadian Lutherans being consecrated as bishops .

[ 4 ] In the United States, Laestadian Lutheran Churches were formed for Laestadian Pietists.

[ 4 ] Laestadian Lutherans observe the Lutheran sacraments , holding classical Lutheran theology on infant baptism and the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist , and also heavily emphasize Confession .

[ 22 ] Uniquely, Laestadian Lutherans "discourage watching television, attending movies, dancing, playing card games or games of chance, and drinking alcoholic beverages", as well as avoiding birth control – Laestadian Lutheran families usually have four to ten children.

[ 22 ] Laestadian Lutherans gather in a central location for weeks at a time for summer revival services in which many young adults find their future spouses.

[ 22 ] R. J. Hollingdale , who translated Friedrich Nietzsche 's Thus Spake Zarathustra into English, argued that a number of the themes of the work (especially amor fati ) originated in the Lutheran Pietism of Nietzsche's childhood – Nietzsche's father, Carl Ludwig Nietzsche , was a Lutheran pastor who supported the Pietist movement.

[ 23 ] In 1900, the Church of the Lutheran Brethren was founded and it adheres to Pietist Lutheran theology, emphasizing a personal conversion experience .

[ 6 ] [ 24 ] Pietistic Lutheran denominations [ edit ] Pietistic Lutheranism influenced existing Lutheran denominations such as the Church of Norway and many Pietistic Lutherans have remained in them, though other Pietistic Lutherans have established their own Synods too. In the middle of the 19th century, Lars Levi Laestadius spearheaded a Pietist revival in Scandinavia that upheld what came to be known as Laestadian Lutheran theology , which is adhered to today by the Laestadian Lutheran Churches as well as by several congregations within other mainstream Lutheran Churches, such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Eielsen Synod and Association of Free Lutheran Congregations are Pietist Lutheran bodies that emerged in the Pietist Lutheran movement in Norway , which was spearheaded by Hans Nielsen Hauge .

[ 5 ] In 1900, the Church of the Lutheran Brethren was founded and it adheres to Pietist Lutheran theology, emphasizing a personal conversion experience .

[ 6 ] Cross-denominational influence [ edit ] Main article: Radical Pietism Radical Pietism [ edit ] Radical Pietism are those Christian Churches who decided to break with denominational Lutheranism in order to emphasize certain teachings regarding holy living. Churches in the Radical Pietist movement include the Mennonite Brethren Church , Community of True Inspiration (Inspirationalists), the Baptist General Conference , members of the International Federation of Free Evangelical Churches (such as the Evangelical Covenant Church and the Evangelical Free Church ), the Templers , the River Brethren (inclusive of the Brethren in Christ Church , the Calvary Holiness Church , the Old Order River Brethren and the United Zion Church ), as well as the Schwarzenau Brethren (that include Old Order groups such as the Old Brethren German Baptist , Conservative groups such as the Dunkard Brethren Church , and mainline groups such as the Church of the Brethren ).

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Influence on the Methodists [ edit ] As with Moravianism , Pietism was a major influence on John Wesley and others who began the Methodist movement in 18th-century Great Britain . John Wesley was influenced significantly by Moravians (e.g., Zinzendorf , Peter Boehler ) and Pietists connected to Francke and Halle Pietism. The fruit of these Pietist influences can be seen in the modern American Methodists, especially those who are aligned with the Holiness movement .

Influence on religion in America [ edit ] Pietism had an influence on religion in America, as many German immigrants settled in Pennsylvania, New York, and other areas. Its influence can be traced in certain sectors of Evangelicalism . Balmer says that: Evangelicalism itself, I believe, is a quintessentially North American phenomenon, deriving as it did from the confluence of Pietism, Presbyterianism , and the vestiges of Puritanism .  Evangelicalism picked up the peculiar characteristics from each strain – warmhearted spirituality from the Pietists (for instance), doctrinal precisionism from the Presbyterians, and individualistic introspection from the Puritans – even as the North American context itself has profoundly shaped the various manifestations of evangelicalism:  fundamentalism, neo-evangelicalism, the holiness movement, Pentecostalism, the charismatic movement , and various forms of African-American and Hispanic evangelicalism.

[ 30 ] Influence on science [ edit ] The Merton Thesis is an argument about the nature of early experimental science proposed by Robert K. Merton . Similar to Max Weber 's famous claim on the link between Protestant ethic and the capitalist economy , Merton argued for a similar positive correlation between the rise of Protestant Pietism and early experimental science.

[ 31 ] The Merton Thesis has resulted in continuous debates.

[ 32 ] Impact on party voting in United States and Great Britain [ edit ] Further information: Ethnocultural politics in the United States In the United States, Richard L. McCormick says, "In the nineteenth century voters whose religious heritage was pietistic or evangelical were prone to support the Whigs and, later, the Republicans." Paul Kleppner generalizes, "the more pietistic the group's outlook the more intensely Republican its partisan affiliation." [ 33 ] McCormick notes that the key link between religious values and politics resulted from the "urge of evangelicals and Pietists to 'reach out and purge the world of sin'".

[ 34 ] Pietism became influential among Scandinavian Lutherans; additionally it affected other denominations in the United States, such as the Northern Methodists , Northern Baptists , Congregationalists , Presbyterians , Disciples of Christ , and some smaller groups. The great majority were based in the northern states; some of these groups in the South would rather support the Democrats.

[ 35 ] In England in the late 19th and early 20th century, the Nonconformist Protestant denominations, such as the Methodists, Baptists and Congregationalists, formed the base of the Liberal Party .

[ 36 ] David Hempton states, "The Liberal Party was the main beneficiary of Methodist political loyalties." [ 37 ] See also [ edit ] Part of the series on Modern scholasticism Title page of the Operis de religione (1625) from Francisco Suárez Background Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Aristotelianism Scholasticism Patristics Modern scholastics Second scholasticism of the School of Salamanca Lutheran scholasticism during Lutheran orthodoxy Ramism among the Reformed orthodoxy Metaphysical poets in the Church of England Reactions within Christianity The Jesuits against Jansenism Labadists against the Jesuits Pietism against orthodox Lutherans Nadere Reformatie within Dutch Calvinism Richard Hooker against the Ramists Reactions within philosophy Neologists against Lutherans Spinozists against Dutch Calvinists Deists against Anglicanism John Locke against Bishop Stillingfleet This box: view talk edit Amana Colonies Adolf Köberle Catholic Charismatic Renewal Church of the Brethren Erik Pontoppidan Evangelical Covenant Church Evangelical Free Church of America Friedrich Christoph Oetinger Friedrich Hölderlin Johann Georg Rapp Hans Adolph Brorson Harmony Society Henric Schartau Immanuel Kant Knightly Piety Johann Albrecht Bengel Johann Konrad Dippel Johannes Kelpius Mission Covenant Church of Sweden Templers (religious believers) Theologia Germanica Wesleyanism Christianity portal Reformed Christianity portal Religion portal References [ edit ] ^ Backman, Milton Vaughn (1976).

Christian Churches of America: Origins and Beliefs .

Brigham Young University Press . p. 75.

Pietistic Lutheranism was a form of belief and practice which emphasized experience in the Christian life and championed the importance of Christian action and growth in holiness.

^ "Pietism" . Encyclopædia Britannica.

It emphasized personal faith and sanctity against the main Lutheran church's perceived stress on doctrine and theology over Christian living.

^ a b c d Holmquist, June Drenning (1 January 1981).

They Chose Minnesota: A Survey of the State's Ethnic Groups . Minnesota Historical Society Press. p. 306.

ISBN 9780873511551 .

^ a b c d e f Kivisto, Peter (16 October 2014).

Religion and Immigration: Migrant Faiths in North America and Western Europe . Wiley. p. 109.

ISBN 9780745686660 .

^ a b Gritsch, Eric W. (1994).

Fortress Introduction to Lutheranism . Fortress Press.

ISBN 9781451407778 .

^ a b c Tweton, D. Jerome (1988).

The New Deal at the Grass Roots: Programs for the People in Otter Tail County, Minnesota . Minnesota Historical Society Press. p. 7.

ISBN 9780873512336 .

^ M, Eide, Øyvind (1929–1979).

"Tumsa, Gudina" .

Dictionary of African Christian Biography . Retrieved 2022-03-20 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Granquist, Mark Alan (2015).

Lutherans in America: A New History . Augsburg Fortress Publishers.

ISBN 9781451472288 .

^ a b "Pietism" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 10 September 2021 .

^ "Definition of pietism" .

Merriam Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 10 September 2021 .

^ "pietism" .

Lexico . Archived from the original on September 10, 2021 . Retrieved 10 September 2021 .

^ a b Dawn, Russell P. (15 March 2018).

"Piety vs. Pietism" .

Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .

^ Granquist, Mark A. (2015).

Scandinavian Pietists: Spiritual Writings from 19th-Century Norway, Denmark, Sweden, and Finland . Paulist Press. p. 13.

ISBN 9781587684982 .

^ A discussion of some of the earlier pietist influence in the Evangelical and Reformed church can be found in Dunn et al., "A History of the Evangelical and Reformed Church" Christian Education Press, Philadelphia, 1962. Further commentary can be found by Carl Viehe under Pietism, Illinois Trails, Washington County.

^ Scherer, James A. (1993).

"The Triumph of Confessionalism in Nineteenth-Century German Lutheran Missions" (PDF) .

Missio Apostolica .

2 : 71– 78. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 12, 2006.

This is an extract from Scherer's 1968 Ph.D. thesis, "Mission and Unity in Lutheranism". Scherer was Professor of World Mission and Church History at the Lutheran School of Theology at Chicago until his retirement.

^ a b Petersen, Wilhelm W. (2011).

"Warm Winds From the South: The Spread of Pietism to Scandinavian Lutherans" (PDF) . Bethany Lutheran Theological Seminary . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .

^ a b Collins Winn, Christopher T.; Gerhz, Christopher; Holst, Eric; Carlson, G. William; Heide, Gail (25 October 2012).

The Pietist Impulse in Christianity . Casemate Publishers. p. 200.

ISBN 9780227680001 .

^ a b Maurice Cranston (1982).

Jean-Jacques: The Early Life and Work of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, 1712–1754 . University of Chicago Press.

^ Leo Damrosch (2005).

Jean-Jacques Rousseau: Restless Genius . Mariner Books.

^ Gierl, Martin (1997).

Pietismus und Aufklärung: theologische Polemik und die Kommunikationsreform der Wissenschaft am Ende des 17. Jahrhunderts [ Pietism and enlightenment, theological polemic and the reform of science communication end of the 17. century ] (in German). Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

^ Elgán, Elisabeth; Scobbie, Irene (17 September 2015).

Historical Dictionary of Sweden . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 159.

ISBN 9781442250710 .

^ a b c Lamport, Mark A. (31 August 2017).

Encyclopedia of Martin Luther and the Reformation . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 406.

ISBN 9781442271593 .

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (28 February 1974).

Thus Spoke Zarathustra . Translated by Hollingdale, R. J.

Penguin Books Limited. p. 30.

ISBN 978-0-14-190432-0 .

^ Cimino, Richard (2003).

Lutherans Today: American Lutheran Identity in the Twenty-First Century . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 3.

ISBN 9780802813657 .

^ Shantz, Douglas H. (2013).

An Introduction to German Pietism: Protestant Renewal at the Dawn of Modern Europe . JHU Press.

ISBN 9781421408804 .

^ Smith, James Ward; Jamison, Albert Leland (1969).

Religion in American life .

Princeton University Press .

^ Ratliff, Walter R. (2010).

Pilgrims on the Silk Road: A Muslim-Christian Encounter in Khiva . Walter Ratliff.

ISBN 9781606081334 .

^ Carter, Craig A. (2007).

Rethinking Christ and Culture: A Post-Christendom Perspective . Brazos Press.

ISBN 9781441201225 .

^ Melton, J. Gordon; Baumann, Martin (2010).

Religions of the World: A Comprehensive Encyclopedia of Beliefs and Practices, 2nd Edition [6 volumes] .

ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 9781598842043 .

^ Randall Balmer (2002).

The Encyclopedia of Evangelicalism . Westminster John Knox Press. pp.

vii– viii.

ISBN 9780664224097 .

^ Sztompka, 2003 ^ Cohen, 1990 ^ Richard L. McCormick (1988).

The Party Period and Public Policy . Oxford UP. pp.

47– 48.

ISBN 978-0-19-536434-7 .

^ McCormick, p 48 ^ Paul Kleppner, The Third Electoral System 1853-1892: Parties, Voters, and Political Cultures (University of North Carolina Press, 1979).

^ Howard Martin (1996).

Britain in the 19th Century . Nelson Thornes. p. 298.

ISBN 9780174350620 .

^ David Hempton (26 January 1996).

Religion and Political Culture in Britain and Ireland: From the Glorious Revolution to the Decline of Empire . Cambridge UP. p. 37.

ISBN 9780521479257 .

See: "Six Principles of Pietism", based on Philip Jacob Spener's six proposals http://www.miamifirstbrethren.org/about-us Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Pietism" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Pietism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 21 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

593– 594.

Further reading [ edit ] Brown, Dale: Understanding Pietism , rev. ed. Nappanee, IN: Evangel Publishing House, 1996.

Brunner, Daniel L.

Halle Pietists in England: Anthony William Boehm and the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge . Arbeiten zur Geschichte des Pietismus 29. Göttingen, Germany: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1993.

Gehrz, Christopher and Mark Pattie III.

The Pietist Option: Hope for the Renewal of Christianity . Downers Grove, Illinois: InterVarsity Press, 2017.

Olson, Roger E., Christian T. Collins Winn.

Reclaiming Pietism: Retrieving an Evangelical Tradition (Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2015). xiii + 190 pp.

online review Shantz, Douglas H.

An Introduction to German Pietism: Protestant Renewal at the Dawn of Modern Europe . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013.

Stoeffler, F. Ernest.

The Rise of Evangelical Pietism . Studies in the History of Religion 9. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1965.

Stoeffler, F. Ernest.

German Pietism During the Eighteenth Century . Studies in the History of Religion 24. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1973.

Stoeffler, F. Ernest. ed.: Continental Pietism and Early American Christianity . Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1976.

Winn, Christian T. et al. eds.

The Pietist Impulse in Christianity . Pickwick, 2012.

Yoder, Peter James.

Pietism and the Sacraments: The Life and Theology of August Hermann Francke .

University Park: PSU Press, 2021.

Older works [ edit ] Joachim Feller , Sonnet. In: Luctuosa desideria Quibus […] Martinum Bornium prosequebantur Quidam Patroni, Praeceptores atque Amici . Lipsiae [1689], pp. [2]–[3]. (Facsimile in: Reinhard Breymayer (Ed.): Luctuosa desideria . Tübingen 2008, pp. 24–25.) Here for the first time the newly detected source. – Less exactly cf. Martin Brecht: Geschichte des Pietismus , vol. I, p. 4.

Johann Georg Walch , Historische und theologische Einleitung in die Religionsstreitigkeiten der evangelisch-lutherischen Kirche (1730); Friedrich August Tholuck , Geschichte des Pietismus und des ersten Stadiums der Aufklärung (1865); Heinrich Schmid , Die Geschichte des Pietismus (1863); Max Goebel , Geschichte des christlichen Lebens in der Rheinisch-Westfälischen Kirche (3 vols., 1849–1860).

The subject is dealt with at length in Isaak August Dorner 's and W Gass's Histories of Protestant theology .

Other works are: Heinrich Heppe , Geschichte des Pietismus und der Mystik in der reformierten Kirche (1879), which is sympathetic; Albrecht Ritschl , Geschichte des Pietismus (5 vols., 1880–1886), which is hostile; and Eugen Sachsse , Ursprung und Wesen des Pietismus (1884).

See also Friedrich Wilhelm Franz Nippold 's article in Theol. Stud. und Kritiken (1882), pp. 347?392; Hans von Schubert , Outlines of Church History , ch. xv. (Eng. trans., 1907); and Carl Mirbt 's article, "Pietismus," in Herzog-Hauck's Realencyklopädie für prot. Theologie u. Kirche , end of vol. xv.

The most extensive and current edition on Pietism is the four-volume edition in German, covering the entire movement in Europe and North America Geschichte des Pietismus (GdP) Im Auftrag der Historischen Kommission zur Erforschung des Pietismus herausgegeben von Martin Brecht, Klaus Deppermann, Ulrich Gäbler und Hartmut Lehmann (English: On behalf of the Historical Commission for the Study of pietism edited by Martin Brecht, Klaus Deppermann, Ulrich Gaebler and Hartmut Lehmann ) Band 1: Der Pietismus vom siebzehnten bis zum frühen achtzehnten Jahrhundert. In Zusammenarbeit mit Johannes van den Berg, Klaus Deppermann, Johannes Friedrich Gerhard Goeters und Hans Schneider hg. von Martin Brecht. Goettingen 1993. / 584 p.

Band 2: Der Pietismus im achtzehnten Jahrhundert. In Zusammenarbeit mit Friedhelm Ackva, Johannes van den Berg, Rudolf Dellsperger, Johann Friedrich Gerhard Goeters, Manfred Jakubowski-Tiessen, Pentii Laasonen, Dietrich Meyer, Ingun Montgomery , Christian Peters, A. Gregg Roeber, Hans Schneider, Patrick Streiff und Horst Weigelt hg. von Martin Brecht und Klaus Deppermann. Goettingen 1995. / 826 p.

Band 3: Der Pietismus im neunzehnten und zwanzigsten Jahrhundert. In Zusammenarbeit mit Gustav Adolf Benrath, Eberhard Busch, Pavel Filipi, Arnd Götzelmann, Pentii Laasonen, Hartmut Lehmann, Mark A. Noll, Jörg Ohlemacher, Karl Rennstich und Horst Weigelt unter Mitwirkung von Martin Sallmann hg. von Ulrich Gäbler. Goettingen 2000. / 607 p.

Band 4: Glaubenswelt und Lebenswelten des Pietismus. In Zusammenarbeit mit Ruth Albrecht, Martin Brecht, Christian Bunners, Ulrich Gäbler, Andreas Gestrich, Horst Gundlach, Jan Harasimovicz, Manfred Jakubowski-Tiessen, Peter Kriedtke, Martin Kruse, Werner Koch, Markus Matthias, Thomas Müller Bahlke, Gerhard Schäfer (†), Hans-Jürgen Schrader, Walter Sparn, Udo Sträter, Rudolf von Thadden, Richard Trellner, Johannes Wallmann und Hermann Wellenreuther hg. von Hartmut Lehmann. Goettingen 2004. / 709 p.

External links [ edit ] New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge, Vol. IX: Pietism After Three Centuries – The Legacy of Pietism by E.C. Fredrich Literary Landmarks of Pietism by Martin O. Westerhaus Pietism's World Mission Enterprise by Ernst H. Wendland Old Apostolic Lutheran Church of America The Evangelical Pietist Church of Chatfield v t e Pietism Germany Philipp Spener Johann Arndt August Hermann Francke Gottfried Arnold Jean de Labadie Johann Konrad Dippel Sweden Sven Rosén Thomas Leopold Lars Ulstadius Peter Spaak Johan Stendahl Eric Jansson Groups Laestadianism Brödraförsamlingen Grey Robes Läsare Skevikarna Christianity portal v t e Lutheranism Luther's Small Catechism The Ten Commandments Apostle's Creed Lord's Prayer Sacrament of Holy Baptism Confession Sacrament of the Eucharist Chief articles of faith in the Augsburg Confession I.

God II.

Original Sin III. The Son of God IV.

Justification By Faith V. The Office of Preaching VI. Of The New Obedience VII. Of The Church VIII. What the Church Is IX. Of Baptism X. Of the Lord's Supper XI. Of Confession XII. Of Repentance XIII. Of the Use of the Sacraments XIV.

XV.

Ecclesiastical Usages XVI. Of Civil Affairs XVII. Of Christ's Return to Judgment XVIII. Of Free Will XIX. Of the Cause of Sin XX. Of Good Works XXI. Of the Worship of the Saints Practices Divine Service Confirmation Common table prayer Sign of The Cross Matins Vespers Easter Vigil Liturgical Calendar Wreath of Christ Movements Gnesio-Lutherans Crypto-Calvinism Philippists Sacramentarians Ubiquitarians Lutheran orthodoxy Pietism Laestadianism Old Lutherans Neo-Lutheranism High Church Lutheranism Evangelical Catholicism Confessional Lutherans Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic 2 Spain Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pietism&oldid=1250573964 " Categories : Christian terminology Christian theological movements 17th-century Lutheranism 18th-century Lutheranism Laestadianism Lutheran revivals Lutheran theology Methodism Pietism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 11 October 2024, at 06:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pietism 51 languages Add topic

