Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Formation 3 Characteristics 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Guyot 38 languages العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses, see Guyot (disambiguation) .

Flat-topped underwater mountain The Bear Seamount (left), a guyot in the northern Atlantic Ocean In marine geology , a guyot ( / ˈ ɡ iː .

oʊ , ɡ iː ˈ oʊ / ), [ 1 ] [ 2 ] also called a tablemount , is an isolated underwater volcanic mountain ( seamount ) with a flat top more than 200 m (660 ft) below the surface of the sea.

[ 3 ] The diameters of these flat summits can exceed 10 km (6 mi).

[ 3 ] Guyots are most commonly found in the Pacific Ocean , but they have been identified in all the oceans except the Arctic Ocean . They are analogous to tables (such as mesas ) on land.

History [ edit ] Guyots were first recognized in 1945 by Harry Hammond Hess , who collected data using echo-sounding equipment on a ship he commanded during World War II .

[ 4 ] His data showed that some undersea mountains had flat tops. Hess called these undersea mountains "guyots", after the Department of Geosciences building at Princeton.

[ 5 ] Hess postulated they were once volcanic islands that were beheaded by wave action, yet they are now deep under sea level . This idea was used to help bolster the theory of plate tectonics .

[ 4 ] Formation [ edit ] Guyots show evidence of having once been above the surface, with gradual subsidence through stages from fringed reefed mountain, coral atoll , and finally a flat-topped submerged mountain.

[ 3 ] Seamounts are made by extrusion of lavas piped upward in stages from sources within the Earth's mantle, usually hotspots , to vents on the seafloor.  The volcanism invariably ceases after a time, and other processes dominate.  When an undersea volcano grows high enough to be near or breach the ocean surface, wave action or coral reef growth tend to create a flat-topped edifice.  However, all ocean crust and guyots form from hot magma or rock, which cools over time.  As the lithosphere that the future guyot rides on slowly cools, it becomes denser and sinks lower into Earth's mantle, through the process of isostasy .  In addition, the erosive effects of waves and currents are found mostly near the surface: the tops of guyots generally lie below this higher-erosion zone.

This is the same process that gives rise to higher seafloor topography at oceanic ridges, such as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge in the Atlantic Ocean, and deeper ocean at abyssal plains and oceanic trenches , such as the Mariana Trench . Thus, the island or shoal that will eventually become a guyot slowly subsides over millions of years.  In the right climatic regions, coral growth can sometimes keep pace with the subsidence, resulting in coral atoll formation, but eventually the corals dip too deep to grow and the island becomes a guyot.  The greater the amount of time that passes, the deeper the guyots become.

[ 6 ] Seamounts provide data on movements of tectonic plates on which they ride, and on the rheology of the underlying lithosphere . The trend of a seamount chain traces the direction of motion of the lithospheric plate over a more or less fixed heat source in the underlying asthenosphere , the part of the Earth's mantle beneath the lithosphere.

[ 7 ] There are thought to be up to an estimated 50,000 seamounts in the Pacific basin.

[ 8 ] The Hawaiian–Emperor seamount chain is an excellent example of an entire volcanic chain undergoing this process, from active volcanism, to coral reef growth, to atoll formation, to subsidence of the islands and becoming guyots.

Characteristics [ edit ] The steepness gradient of most guyots is about 20 degrees.  To technically be considered a guyot or tablemount, they must stand at least 900 m (3,000 ft) tall.

[ 9 ] One guyot in particular, the Great Meteor Tablemount in the Northeast Atlantic Ocean, stands at more than 4,000 m (13,000 ft) high, with a diameter of 110 km (68 mi).

[ 10 ] However, there are many undersea mounts that can range from just less than 90 m (300 ft) to around 900 m (3,000 ft).

[ 9 ] Very large oceanic volcanic constructions, hundreds of kilometres across, are called oceanic plateaus .

[ 11 ] Guyots have a mean area of 3,313 km 2 (1,279 sq mi), which is much larger than typical seamounts, which have a mean area of 790 km 2 (310 sq mi).

[ 12 ] There are 283 known guyots in the world's oceans, with the North Pacific having 119, the South Pacific 77, the South Atlantic 43, the Indian Ocean 28, the North Atlantic eight, the Southern Ocean six, and the Mediterranean Sea two; there are none known in the Arctic Ocean, though one is found along the Fram Strait off northeastern Greenland .

[ citation needed ] Guyots are also associated with specific lifeforms and varying amounts of organic matter .  Local increases in chlorophyll a , enhanced carbon incorporation rates and changes in phytoplankton species composition are associated with guyots and other seamounts .

See also [ edit ] Oceans portal Evolution of Hawaiian volcanoes Kodiak–Bowie Seamount chain New England Seamounts References [ edit ] ^ "guyot" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ "guyot" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ a b c "Guyot" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 2010 . Retrieved 2010-01-14 .

^ a b Bryson, Bill (2003).

A Short History of Nearly Everything . New York: Broadway. p. 178.

ISBN 076790818X .

^ Bryson, Bill (2004).

A Short History of Nearly Everything . Broadway Books.

ISBN 076790818X .

^ "Guyot" .

www.utdallas.edu . Retrieved 15 January 2019 .

^ Seamounts are made by extrusion of lavas piped upward in stages from sources within the Earth's mantle to vents on the seafloor. Seamounts provide data on movements of tectonic plates on which they ride, and on the rheology of the underlying lithosphere. The trend of a seamount chain traces the direction of motion of the lithospheric plate over a more or less fixed heat source in the underlying asthenosphere part of the Earth's mantle.

^ Hillier, J. K. (2007).

"Pacific seamount volcanism in space and time" (PDF) .

Geophysical Journal International .

168 (2): 877– 889.

Bibcode : 2007GeoJI.168..877H .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-246X.2006.03250.x .

^ a b "Seamount and guyot" .

Access Science .

doi : 10.1036/1097-8542.611100 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ "Great Meteor Tablemount (volcanic mountain, Atlantic Ocean) – Britannica Online Encyclopedia" .

britannica.com . Retrieved 15 January 2019 .

^ "Answers - The Most Trusted Place for Answering Life's Questions" .

Answers.com . Retrieved 15 January 2019 .

^ Harris, P.T.; Macmillan-Lawler, M.; Rupp, J.; Baker, E.K. (2014). "Geomorphology of the oceans".

Marine Geology .

352 : 4– 24.

Bibcode : 2014MGeol.352....4H .

doi : 10.1016/j.margeo.2014.01.011 .

External links [ edit ] NOAA: What is a guyot?

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guyot&oldid=1303034389 " Categories : Guyots Physical oceanography Plate tectonics Seamounts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 19:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Guyot 38 languages Add topic

