Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Career 2 Awards 3 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 3.1 Givenness 3.2 The saturated phenomenon 3.3 "The Intentionality of Love" 4 Publications 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Jean-Luc Marion 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French philosopher (born 1946) Jean-Luc Marion Born ( 1946-07-03 ) 3 July 1946 (age 79) Meudon, Hauts-de-Seine , France Education Education Lycée Condorcet Alma mater École normale supérieure Philosophical work Era 20th- / 21st-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Phenomenology Postmodernism Catholic theology Main interests Philosophical theology , Phenomenology , Descartes Notable ideas "As much reduction , as much givenness," saturated phenomenon, the intentionality of love, counter-experience Jean-Luc Marion ( French: [ʒɑ̃ lyk maʁjɔ̃] ; born 3 July 1946) is a French philosopher and Catholic theologian . A former student of Jacques Derrida , his work is informed by patristic and mystical theology , phenomenology , and modern philosophy .

[ 1 ] Much of his academic work has dealt with Descartes and phenomenologists like Martin Heidegger and Edmund Husserl , but also religion.

God Without Being , for example, is concerned predominantly with an analysis of idolatry , a theme strongly linked in Marion's work with love and the gift , which is a concept also explored at length by Derrida.

Biography [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Jean-Luc Marion at the Élysée Palace after his meeting with President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing on Thursday 7 September 1978.

Marion was born in Meudon , Hauts-de-Seine , on 3 July 1946. He studied at the University of Nanterre (now the University Paris Ouest Nanterre La Défense ) and the Sorbonne and then did graduate work in philosophy from the École normale supérieure in Paris from 1967 to 1971, where he was taught by Jacques Derrida , Louis Althusser and Gilles Deleuze .

[ 2 ] At the same time, Marion's deep interest in theology was privately cultivated under the personal influence of theologians such as Louis Bouyer , Jean Daniélou , Henri de Lubac , and Hans Urs von Balthasar . From 1972 to 1980 he studied for his doctorate and worked as an assistant lecturer at the Sorbonne. After receiving his doctorate in 1980, he began teaching at the University of Poitiers .

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] From there he moved to become the Director of Philosophy at the University Paris X – Nanterre , and in 1991 also took up the role of professeur invité at the Institut Catholique de Paris.

[ 3 ] In 1996 he became Director of Philosophy at the University of Paris IV ( Sorbonne ), where he taught until 2012.

Marion became a visiting professor at the University of Chicago Divinity School in 1994. He was then appointed the John Nuveen Professor of the Philosophy of Religion and Theology there in 2004, a position he held until 2010.

[ 4 ] That year, he was appointed the Andrew Thomas Greeley and Grace McNichols Greeley Professor of Catholic Studies at the Divinity School, a position that had been vacated by the retirement of theologian David Tracy .

[ 5 ] He retired from Chicago in 2022. He continues to serve on the Editorial Advisory Panel of the journal Quaestio .

On 6 November 2008, Marion was elected as an immortel by the Académie Française . Marion now occupies seat 4 , an office previously held by Cardinal Lustiger .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] In 2014, he delivered the Gifford Lectures on Givenness and Revelation at the University of Glasgow .

[ 9 ] Awards [ edit ] His awards include: [ 6 ] [ 10 ] the Premio Joseph Ratzinger of the Fondazione Vaticana Joseph Ratzinger – Benedetto XVI (initially 2020 but received in 2021 due to the covid-19 pandemic ) [ 11 ] [ 8 ] the Karl Jaspers Prize of the city and University of Heidelberg (2008) the Grand Prix de philosophie de l'Académie française (1992), for his entire oeuvre the Prix Charles Lambert de l'Académie des sciences morales et politiques (1977) Philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on the History of Christian theology Background Christian theology Diversity in early Christian theology Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Early Christianity Proto-orthodox Christianity Timeline History of Christianity Template:History of Christianity Ecclesiastical polity Trinitarianism Nontrinitarianism Christology Paterology Pneumatology Mariology Biblical canon Deuterocanon Hermeneutics Theological hermeneutics African American Asian American Philosophical theology Christian philosophy Christian apologetics Persecution and tolerance Historical theology Ecumenical Creeds Apostles' Nicene Chalcedonian Athanasian Patristics and Councils Great church ante-Nicene period Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Cappadocian Fathers Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Augustine Nicaea Ephesus Chalcedon Post-Nicene development Heresy Monophysitism Monothelitism Byzantine Iconoclasm Gregory I Alcuin Photios East–West Schism Scholasticism Aquinas Anselm Palamas Reformation Martin Luther Theology 95 Theses John Calvin Radical Evangelicalism theology Five solae Book of Concord Arminianism English Counter- Trent Jansenism From the Reformation to the World Wars Natural Onto- Practical Pietism John Wesley Great Awakenings Holiness movement Restoration Movement Dispensationalism Covenant theology Existentialism Dogmatics Fundamental/foundational Liberal Catholic Anglo-Catholic Critical realism Political Since the World Wars Vatican II of religions Situational ethics Nouvelle théologie ( Ressourcement ) Death of God Postliberal  •  Narrative Continental philosophy Radical orthodoxy Neo-orthodoxy Reconciliation Analytic in Thomism Theopoetics Ecumenism Digital Systematic Biblical Constructive Eco- Environmental Public Contextualisation and Inculturation Indigenous church mission theory Sino-Christian Feminism in Feminist theology Asian Womanist New Queer Liberation Black Dalit Latin American Minjung Palestinian Postcolonial Fourth Great Awakening Christian Zionism Paleo-orthodoxy Dominion theology extraterrestrials Moderate Christianity Conservative Christianity Emerging church Progressive Christianity Confessing Movement Biotheology Theophysics Christianity portal v t e Marion's phenomenological work is set out in three volumes which together form a triptych [ 12 ] or trilogy .

[ 13 ] Réduction et donation: Etudes sur Husserl, Heidegger et la phénoménologie (1989) is an historical study of the phenomenological method followed by Husserl and Heidegger , with a view towards suggesting future directions for phenomenological research. The unexpected reaction that Réduction et donation provoked called for clarification and full development. This was addressed in Étant donné: Essai d'une phénoménologie de la donation (1997), a more conceptual work investigating phenomenological givenness, the saturated phenomenon and the gifted—a rethinking of the subject.

Du surcroît (2001) provides an in-depth description of saturated phenomena.

[ 14 ] Givenness [ edit ] Marion claims that he has attempted to "radically reduce the whole phenomenological project beginning with the primacy in it of givenness".

[ 15 ] What he describes as his one and only theme is the givenness that is required before phenomena can show themselves in consciousness—"what shows itself first gives itself .

[ 16 ] This is based on the argument that any and all attempts to lead phenomena back to immanence in consciousness, that is, to exercise the phenomenological reduction, necessarily results in showing that givenness is the "sole horizon of phenomena" [ 17 ] Marion radicalizes this argument in the formulation, "As much reduction, as much givenness", [ 18 ] and offers this as a new first principle of phenomenology , building on and challenging prior formulae of Husserl and Heidegger .

[ 19 ] The formulation common to both, Marion argues, "So much appearance, so much Being", adopted from Johann Friedrich Herbart , [ 20 ] erroneously elevates appearing to the status of the "sole face of Being". In doing so, it leaves appearing itself undetermined, not subject to the reduction , and thus in a "typically metaphysical situation".

[ 21 ] The Husserlian formulation, "To the things themselves!", is criticized on the basis that the things in question would remain what they are even without appearing to a subject—again circumventing the reduction or even without becoming phenomena. Appearing becomes merely a mode of access to objects, rendering the formulation inadequate as a first principle of phenomenology.

[ 22 ] A third formulation, Husserl's "Principle of all Principles", states "that every primordial dator Intuition is a source of authority (Rechtsquelle) for knowledge , that whatever presents itself in ' intuition ' ...is simply to be accepted as it gives itself out to be , though only within the limits in which it then presents itself ." [ 23 ] Marion argues that while the Principle of all Principles places givenness as phenomenality's criterion and achievement, givenness still remains uninterrogated.

[ 24 ] Whereas it admits limits to intuition ("as it gives itself..., though only within the limits in which it presents itself"), "givenness alone is absolute, free and without condition" [ 25 ] Givenness then is not reducible except to itself, and so is freed from the limits of any other authority, including intuition; a reduced given is either given or not given. "As much reduction, as much givenness" states that givenness is what the reduction accomplishes, and any reduced given is reduced to givenness.

[ 26 ] The more a phenomenon is reduced, the more it is given. Marion calls the formulation the last principle, equal to the first, that of the appearing itself.

[ 27 ] Phenomenological reductions of Husserl, Heidegger and Marion [ 28 ] To whom are the things in question led back by the reduction?

What is given by the reduction?

How are the things in question given; what is the horizon?

How far does the reduction go, what is excluded?

First reduction – transcendental ( Husserl ) The intentional and constituting I Constituted objects Through regional ontologies . Through formal ontology, regional ontologies fall within the horizon of objectivity Excludes everything that does not let itself be led back to objectivity Second reduction – existential ( Heidegger ) Dasein : an intentionality broadened to Being-in-the-world and led back to its transcendence of beings through anxiety The different ways of Being; the "phenomenon of Being" According to Being as the original and ultimate phenomenon. According to the horizon of time Excludes that which does not have to be, especially the preliminary conditions of the phenomenon of Being, e.g.

boredom , the claim Third reduction – to givenness (Marion) The interloqué : that which is called by the claim of the phenomenon [ 29 ] The gift itself; the gift of rendering oneself to or of eluding the claim of the call According to the horizon of the absolutely unconditional call and of the absolutely unconstrained response Absence of conditions and determinations of the claim. Gives all that can call and be called By describing the structures of phenomena from the basis of givenness, Marion claims to have succeeded in describing certain phenomena that previous metaphysical and phenomenological approaches either ignore or exclude—givens that show themselves but which a thinking that does not go back to the given is powerless to receive.

[ 30 ] In all, three types of phenomena can be shown, according to the proportionality between what is given in intuition and what is intended : Phenomena where little or nothing is given in intuition.

[ 31 ] Examples include the Nothing and death, [ 32 ] mathematics and logic.

[ 33 ] Marion claims that metaphysics, in particular Kant (but also Husserl ), privileges this type of phenomenon.

[ 34 ] Phenomena where there is adequation between what is given in intuition and what is intended. This includes any objective phenomena .

[ 35 ] Phenomena where what is given in intuition fills or surpasses intentionality. These are named saturated phenomena.

[ 36 ] The saturated phenomenon [ edit ] Marion defines "saturated phenomena," which contradicts the Kantian claim that phenomena can only occur if they are congruent with the a priori knowledge upon which an observer's cognitive function is founded. For example, Kant would claim that the phenomenon "three years is a longer period of time than four years" cannot occur.

[ 37 ] According to Marion, "saturated phenomena" (such as divine revelation) overwhelm the observer with their complete and perfect givenness, such that they are not shaped by the particulars of the observer's cognition at all. These phenomena may be conventionally impossible, and still occur because their givenness saturates the cognitive architecture innate to the observer.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] "The Intentionality of Love" [ edit ] The fourth section of Marion's work Prolegomena to Charity is entitled "The Intentionality of Love" and primarily concerns intentionality and phenomenology . Influenced by (and dedicated to) the French philosopher Emmanuel Levinas , Marion explores the human idea of love and its lack of definition: "We live with love as if we knew what it was about. But as soon as we try to define it, or at least approach it with concepts, it draws away from us." [ 40 ] He begins by explaining the essence of consciousness and its "lived experiences." Paradoxically, the consciousness concerns itself with objects transcendent and exterior to itself, objects irreducible to consciousness, but can only comprehend its 'interpretation' of the object; the reality of the object arises from consciousness alone. Thus the problem with love is that to love another is to love one's own idea of another, or the "lived experiences" that arise in the consciousness from the "chance cause" of another: "I must, then, name this love my love, since it would not fascinate me as my idol if, first, it did not render to me, like an unseen mirror, the image of myself. Love, loved for itself, inevitably ends as self-love, in the phenomenological figure of self-idolatry." [ 40 ] Marion believes intentionality is the solution to this problem, and explores the difference between the I who intentionally sees objects and the me who is intentionally seen by a counter-consciousness, another, whether the me likes it or not. Marion defines another by its invisibility; one can see objects through intentionality, but in the invisibility of the other, one is seen. Marion explains this invisibility using the pupil : "Even for a gaze aiming objectively, the pupil remains a living refutation of objectivity, an irremediable denial of the object; here for the first time, in the very midst of the visible, there is nothing to see, except an invisible and untargetable void...my gaze, for the first time, sees an invisible gaze that sees it." [ 40 ] Love, then, when freed from intentionality, is the weight of this other's invisible gaze upon one's own, the cross of one's own gaze and the other's and the "unsubstitutability" of the other. Love is to "render oneself there in an unconditional surrender...no other gaze must respond to the ecstasy of this particular other exposed in his gaze." Perhaps in allusion to a theological argument, Marion concludes that this type of surrender "requires faith." [ 40 ] Publications [ edit ] God Without Being , University of Chicago Press, 1991. [ Dieu sans l'être; Hors-texte , Paris: Librarie Arthème Fayard, (1982)] Reduction and Givenness: Investigations of Husserl, Heidegger and Phenomenology , Northwestern University Press, 1998. [ Réduction et donation: recherches sue Husserl, Heidegger et la phénoménologie , (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1989)] Cartesian Questions: Method and Metaphysics , University of Chicago Press, 1999. [ Questions cartésiennes I: Méthode et métaphysique , (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1991)] 'In the Name: How to Avoid Speaking of 'Negative Theology', in JD Caputo and MJ Scanlon, eds, God, the Gift and Postmodernism , (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1999) On Descartes' Metaphysical Prism: The Constitution and the Limits of Onto-theo-logy in Cartesian Thought , University of Chicago Press, 1999. [ Sur le prisme métaphysique de Descartes.

(Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1986)] The Idol and Distance: Five Studies , Fordham University Press, 2001. [ L'idole et la distance: cinq études , (Paris: B Grasset, 1977)] Being Given: Toward a Phenomenology of Givenness , Stanford University Press, 2002. [ Étant donné. Essai d'une phénoménologie de la donation , (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1997)] In Excess: Studies of Saturated Phenomena , Fordham University Press, 2002. [ De surcroit: études sur les phénomenes saturés , (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2001)] Prolegomena to Charity , Fordham University Press, 2002. [ Prolégomènes á la charité , (Paris: E.L.A. La Différence, 1986] The Crossing of the Visible , Stanford University Press, 2004. [ La Croisée du visible , (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1996)] The Erotic Phenomenon: Six Meditations , University of Chicago Press, 2007. [ Le phénomene érotique: Six méditations , (Paris: Grasset, 2003)] On the Ego and on God , Fordham University Press, 2007. [ Questions cartésiennes II: Sur l'ego et sur Dieu , (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1996)] The Visible and the Revealed , Fordham University Press, 2008. [ Le visible et le révélé.

(Paris: Les Éditions du Cerf, 2005)] The Reason of the Gift (Richard Lectures) , University of Virginia Press, 2011.

In the Self's Place: The Approach of St. Augustine , Stanford University Press, 2012. [ Au lieu de soi , (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2008)] Givenness & Hermeneutics (Pere Marquette Lectures in Theology) , Marquette University Press, 2013.

Negative Certainties , University of Chicago Press, 2015. [ Certitudes négatives.

(Paris: Editions Grasset & Fasquelle, 2009)] Givenness and Revelation (Gifford Lectures) , Oxford University Press, 2016.

Believing in Order to See: On the Rationality of Revelation and the Irrationality of Some Believers , Fordham University Press, 2017.

A Brief Apology for a Catholic Moment , University of Chicago Press, 2017. [ Brève apologie pour un moment catholique , (Paris: Editions Grasset & Fasquelle, 2017)] On Descartes' Passive Thought: The Myth of Cartesian Dualism , University of Chicago Press, 2018. [ Sur la pensée de Descartes , (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2013)] Descartes' Grey Ontology: Cartesian Science and Aristotelian Thought in the Regulae, St. Augustine's Press, Forthcoming – May 2022.

Descartes' White Theology , Saint Augustine's Press, Translation in process.

Revelation Comes from Elsewhere.

Stanford University Press, 2024. [ D'ailleurs, la révélation, Paris: Grasset, 2020)] See also [ edit ] Christian existentialism Postmodern Christianity Rational mysticism Givenness – Quality of information that is assumed to be known to the listener References [ edit ] ^ Horner 2005.

^ a b Horner 2005, p. 3.

^ Horner 2005, p. 5.

^ Horner, Robyn. Jean-Luc Marion: a Theo-Logical Introduction. Burlington: Ashgate, 2005.

^ University of Chicago 2010.

^ a b Académie française, 2008.

^ L’Agence France-Presse 2008.

^ a b Wein, Terren (October 8, 2020).

"Pope Francis honors Prof. Jean-Luc Marion with one of world's top theology prizes" .

University of Chicago News .

^ "The Glasgow Gifford Lectures" .

gla.ac.uk . University of Glasgow.

^ University of Chicago Divinity School 2015.

^ Merlo, Francesca (November 13, 2021).

"Pope: Ratzinger Prize enriches human and spiritual heritage" .

Vatican News .

^ Marion 2002a, p.ix.

^ Marion 2002b, p.ix.

^ Marion 2002a, pp.ix-x.

^ Marion 2002b, p.xxi.

^ Marion 2002a, p.5.

^ Robyn Horner, translator, in Marion 2002b, p.ix.

^ Marion 1998, p.203; Marion 2002a, p.16; Marion 2002b, p.17-19; see Marion 2002b, p.x, note 4 for translator's note.

^ Marion 1998, p.203; Marion 2002a, p.14-19; Marion 2002b, p.16-19.

^ Marion 2002a, p.329, note 4.

^ Marion 2002a, p.11.

^ Marion 2002a, p.12.

^ Husserl 1969, p.92.

^ Marion 2002b, p.17.

^ Husserl, Edmund .

Die Idee der Phänomenologie, Husserliania II . pp. 61 and 50 respectively.

Cited in Marion 1998, p.33 and Marion 2002b p.17-18.

^ Marion 2002a, p.17.

^ Marion 2002b, p.26.

^ Marion 1998, pp.204–205.

^ Marion 1998, pp. 200–202.

^ Marion 2002a, pp.3–4.

^ Marion 2002a, pp.222, 308.

^ Marion 2002a, pp.53–59.

^ Marion 2002a, pp.191–196.

^ Marion 2002a, pp.194, 226.

^ Marion 2002a, pp.222–225.

^ Marion 2002a, pp.196–221, 225–247 and Marion 2002b.

^ Kant, Immanuel (1999).

Critique of Pure Reason . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-5216-5729-7 .

^ Mason, Brook (2014).

"Saturated Phenomena, the Icon, and Revelation: A Critique of Marion's Account of Revelation and the "Redoubling" of Saturation" (PDF) .

Aporia .

24 (1): 25– 37.

^ Caputo 2007 p. 164.

^ a b c d Marion 2002c Sources [ edit ] Académie française (2008).

"Jean-Luc Marion's profile" (in French). Archived from the original on 2012-02-11.

"Le philosophe Jean-Luc Marion élu à l'Académie française" .

L’Agence France-Presse (in French). 2008-11-06. Archived from the original on 2012-09-29 . Retrieved 2015-06-25 .

Caputo, John D.

(2007). "The Erotic Phenomenon by Jean-Luc Marion".

Ethics (Book review).

118 (1): 164– 168.

doi : 10.1086/521585 .

S2CID 171349563 .

Horner, Robyn (2005).

Jean-Luc Marion: a Theo-Logical Introduction . Burlington: Ashgate.

Husserl, Edmund (1969).

Ideas: General introduction to pure phenomenology . Translated by W. R. Boyce Gibson (5th ed.). London and New York: George Allen & Unwin and Humanities Press. British SBN: 04 11005 0.

Marion, Jean-Luc (1998).

Reduction and Givenness: Investigations of Husserl, Heidegger, and Phenomenology . Translated by Thomas A. Carlson. Chicago: Northwestern University Press.

ISBN 0-8101-1235-3 .

Marion, Jean-Luc (2002a).

Being Given: Toward a Phenomenology of Givenness . Translated by Jeffrey L. Kosky. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0-8047-3410-0 .

Marion, Jean-Luc (2002b).

In Excess: Studies of Saturated Phenomena . Translated by Robyn Horner and Vincent Berraud. New York: Fordham University Press.

ISBN 0-8232-2217-9 .

Marion, Jean-Luc (2002c).

Prolegomena to Charity . Translated by Stephen E. Lewis. New York: Fordham University Press.

University of Chicago (2010-02-16).

"Nine faculty members receive named chairs, distinguished service appointments" .

UChicago News . Retrieved 2012-05-25 .

University of Chicago Divinity School (2015).

"Faculty biography" . Archived from the original on 2010-08-11 . Retrieved 2015-06-25 .

Further reading [ edit ] Rethinking God as Gift: Marion, Derrida, and the Limits of Phenomenology , Robyn Horner, Fordham University Press, 2001 Givenness and God: Questions of Jean-Luc Marion , Ian Leask and Eoin G. Cassidy, eds., Fordham University Press, 2005 Counter-Experiences: Reading Jean-Luc Marion , edited by Kevin Hart , University of Notre Dame Press, 2007.

Further information: Counter-experience Reading Jean-Luc Marion:Exceeding Metaphysics , Christina M. Gschwandtner, Indiana University Press, 2007.

Interpreting Excess: Jean-Luc Marion, Saturated Phenomena, and Hermeneutics , Fordham University Press, 2010.

A Genealogy of Marion's Philosophy of Religion: Apparent Darkness , Tamsin Jones, Indiana University Press, 2011.

Degrees of Givenness: On Saturation in Jean-Luc Marion , Christina M. Gschwandtner, Indiana University Press, 2014.

Marion and Derrida on the Gift and Desire: Debating the Generosity of Things, Jason W. Alvis, Contributions to Phenomenology Series, Springer Press, 2016.

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Jean-Luc Marion at Wikiquote ‘We Are Not Yet Christians’: An interview with Jean-Luc Marion by Kenneth L. Woodward . Archived from the original in 2021 December Verleihung des Ratzinger-Preises 13. November 2021 on YouTube .

v t e Académie française seat 4 Jean Desmarets (1634) Jean-Jacques de Mesmes (1676) Jean Testu de Mauroy (1688) Camille Le Tellier (1706) Jean Baptiste Massillon (1718) Louis Jules Mancini Mazarini (1742) Gabriel-Marie Legouvé (1803) Alexandre-Vincent Pineux Duval (1812) Pierre-Simon Ballanche (1842) Jean Vatout (1848) Alexis Guignard, comte de Saint-Priest (1849) Pierre-Antoine Berryer (1852) François-Joseph de Champagny (1869) Charles de Mazade (1882) José-Maria de Heredia (1894) Maurice Barrès (1906) Louis Bertrand (1925) Jean Tharaud (1946) Alphonse Juin (1952) Pierre Emmanuel (1968) Jean Hamburger (1985) Albert Decourtray (1993) Jean-Marie Lustiger (1995) Jean-Luc Marion (2008) v t e Current members of the Académie française Dagens Laferrière vacant Marion Makine Jambet Hoffmann Rondeau Grainville vacant vacant Thomas Serra vacant Vitoux Gaillard Orsenna vacant Agacinski vacant Finkielkraut Aspect Rosenberg Sureau Fernandez Rouart vacant Rufin Maalouf Sallenave Edwards Ory Bona Cheng Compagnon Cassin Zink Lambron Clair Darcos v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jean-Luc_Marion&oldid=1298079359 " Categories : 1946 births Living people People from Meudon Lycée Condorcet alumni École Normale Supérieure alumni Paris Nanterre University alumni University of Chicago Divinity School faculty Academic staff of the University of Paris Academic staff of the University of Poitiers French historians of philosophy Catholic philosophers Postmodernists Phenomenologists Descartes scholars 20th-century French philosophers 20th-century French Catholic theologians 21st-century French philosophers 21st-century French Catholic theologians Members of the Académie Française Knights of the Legion of Honour Heidegger scholars French male non-fiction writers French Roman Catholic writers Ratzinger Prize laureates Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages with French IPA CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 10:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jean-Luc Marion 23 languages Add topic

