Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fundamental concepts Toggle Fundamental concepts subsection 1.1 Intrinsic characterization 1.2 Extrinsic characterization 2 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 2.1 Geodesy 3 References Toggle the table of contents Spherical circle 2 languages Français Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Circle of a sphere ) Mathematical expression of circle like slices of sphere "Small circle" redirects here. For the typographical symbol, see Degree symbol .

This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Small circle of a sphere.

In spherical geometry , a spherical circle (often shortened to circle ) is the locus of points on a sphere at constant spherical distance (the spherical radius ) from a given point on the sphere (the pole or spherical center ).  It is a curve of constant geodesic curvature relative to the sphere, analogous to a line or circle in the Euclidean plane ; the curves analogous to straight lines are called great circles , and the curves analogous to planar circles are called small circles or lesser circles . If the sphere is embedded in three-dimensional Euclidean space , its circles are the intersections of the sphere with planes , and the great circles are intersections with planes passing through the center of the sphere.

Fundamental concepts [ edit ] Intrinsic characterization [ edit ] A spherical circle with zero geodesic curvature is called a great circle , and is a geodesic analogous to a straight line in the plane. A great circle separates the sphere into two equal hemispheres , each with the great circle as its boundary. If a great circle passes through a point on the sphere, it also passes through the antipodal point (the unique furthest other point on the sphere). For any pair of distinct non-antipodal points, a unique great circle passes through both. Any two points on a great circle separate it into two arcs analogous to line segments in the plane; the shorter is called the minor arc and is the shortest path between the points, and the longer is called the major arc .

A circle with non-zero geodesic curvature is called a small circle , and is analogous to a circle in the plane. A small circle separates the sphere into two spherical disks or spherical caps , each with the circle as its boundary. For any triple of distinct non-antipodal points a unique small circle passes through all three. Any two points on the small circle separate it into two arcs , analogous to circular arcs in the plane.

Every circle has two antipodal poles (or centers) intrinsic to the sphere. A great circle is equidistant to its poles, while a small circle is closer to one pole than the other.

Concentric circles are sometimes called parallels , because they each have constant distance to each-other, and in particular to their concentric great circle, and are in that sense analogous to parallel lines in the plane.

Extrinsic characterization [ edit ] B C 2 = A B 2 + A C 2 {\displaystyle BC^{2}=AB^{2}+AC^{2}} , where C is the center of the sphere, A is the center of the small circle, and B is a point in the boundary of the small circle. Therefore, knowing the radius of the sphere, and the distance from the plane of the small circle to C, the radius of the small circle can be determined using the Pythagorean theorem.

If the sphere is isometrically embedded in Euclidean space , the sphere's intersection with a plane is a circle, which can be interpreted extrinsically to the sphere as a Euclidean circle: a locus of points in the plane at a constant Euclidean distance (the extrinsic radius ) from a point in the plane (the extrinsic center ). A great circle lies on a plane passing through the center of the sphere, so its extrinsic radius is equal to the radius of the sphere itself, and its extrinsic center is the sphere's center. A small circle lies on a plane not passing through the sphere's center, so its extrinsic radius is smaller than that of the sphere and its extrinsic center is an arbitrary point in the interior of the sphere. Parallel planes cut the sphere into parallel (concentric) small circles; the pair of parallel planes tangent to the sphere are tangent at the poles of these circles, and the diameter through these poles, passing through the sphere's center and perpendicular to the parallel planes, is called the axis of the parallel circles.

The sphere's intersection with a second sphere is also a circle, and the sphere's intersection with a concentric right circular cylinder or right circular cone is a pair of antipodal circles.

Applications [ edit ] Geodesy [ edit ] In the geographic coordinate system on a globe, the parallels of latitude are small circles, with the Equator the only great circle. By contrast, all meridians of longitude , paired with their opposite meridian in the other hemisphere , form great circles.

References [ edit ] Allardice, Robert Edgar (1883), "Spherical Geometry" , Proceedings of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society , 2 : 8– 16, doi : 10.1017/S0013091500037020 Casey, John (1889), A treatise on spherical trigonometry , Hodges, Figgis, & co., ISBN 978-1-4181-8047-8 {{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Papadopoulos, Athanase (2014), "On the works of Euler and his followers on spherical geometry", Gaṇita Bhārati , 36 : 53– 108, arXiv : 1409.4736 Todhunter, Isaac ; Leathem, John Gaston (1901), Spherical Trigonometry (Revised ed.), MacMillan This geometry-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spherical_circle&oldid=1236807016 " Categories : Spherical curves Circles Geometry stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2024 All articles lacking in-text citations CS1 errors: ISBN date All stub articles This page was last edited on 26 July 2024, at 16:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spherical circle 2 languages Add topic

