Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 1.1 Lineage 1.2 Upbringing 2 Career 3 Works Toggle Works subsection 3.1 Detailed Critical Examination 3.2 Jurisprudence 3.3 Logic 3.4 Ethics 3.5 Poetry 3.6 Medicine 4 Views Toggle Views subsection 4.1 Language 4.2 Literalism 4.3 Philosophy 4.4 Shia 4.5 Kharijites 4.6 Homosexuality 4.7 Female Prophets 4.8 Music 5 Reception 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Notes 7.2 Citations 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ibn Hazm 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Hausa हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Andalusian Muslim polymath (994–1064) Imam Ibn Hazm ٱبْن حَزْم A statue of Ibn Hazm standing in Córdoba , Spain Title Imam Allamah Hafiz Muhaddith Faqih Mujtahid Ocean of Knowledge Possessor of Sciences and Knowledge [ 1 ] Personal life Born 7 November 994 CE (384 AH ) Córdoba , Córdoban Caliphate Died 15 August 1064 CE (456 AH) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Montíjar, near Huelva , Taifa of Seville Era Islamic Golden Age Region Al-Andalus Main interest(s) Jurisprudence hadith philosophy Notable work(s) Al-Fisal fi al-Milal wa-l-Nihal al-Muhalla al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam Tawq al-Hamama Occupation Polymath scholar traditionist philosopher theologian Religious life Religion Islam Denomination Sunni Jurisprudence Zahiri Creed Independent [ 5 ] Muslim leader Influenced by Dawud al-Zahiri Muhammad ibn Dawud al-Zahiri Ibn al-Mughallis Ibn Kullab Epicurus Prodicus Influenced Followers of the Zahiri school Ibn Khaldun Ibn Taymiyya Ibn Tumart al-Shawkani Rashid Rida al-Albani Muhammad Asad Muqbil ibn Hadi al-Wadi'i Arabic name Personal ( Ism ) ʿAlī عَلِيّ Patronymic ( Nasab ) Ibn Aḥmad ibn Saʿīd ibn Ḥazm ٱبْن أَحْمَد بْن سَعِيد بْن حَزْم Teknonymic ( Kunya ) Abū Muḥammad أَبُو مُحَمَّد Toponymic ( Nisba ) Al-Andalusī ٱلْأَنْدَلُسِيّ Ibn Hazm [ a ] ( Arabic : ابن حزم , romanized : Ibn Ḥazm ; November 994 – 15 August 1064) was an Andalusian Muslim polymath , historian , traditionist , jurist , philosopher , and theologian , born in the Córdoban Caliphate , present-day Spain .

[ 6 ] Described as one of the strictest hadith interpreters, Ibn Hazm was a leading proponent and codifier of the Zahiri school of Islamic jurisprudence , [ 3 ] and produced a reported 400 works, of which only 40 still survive.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] In all, his written works amounted to some 80,000 pages.

[ 8 ] Also described as one of the fathers of comparative religion , the Encyclopaedia of Islam refers to him as having been one of the leading thinkers of the Muslim world .

[ 3 ] [ 9 ] Personal life [ edit ] The Ring of the Dove (Ms. Or. 927 in Leiden University Library ) Lineage [ edit ] Ibn Hazm's grandfather Sa'id and his father, Ahmad, both held high advisory positions in the court of Umayyad Caliph Hisham II .

[ 10 ] Scholars believe that they were Iberian Christians who converted to Islam ( Muwallads ).

[ 11 ] al-Dhahabi said:
"Ali Ibn Ahmad Ibn Saeed Ibn Hazm, known for his extensive knowledge and skills, hailed from Persian origin and later became an integral figure in Andalusia, specifically in Cordoba. His notable contributions and lineage are detailed in the respected historical text 'Siyar A'lam al-Nubala.'" [ 12 ] Upbringing [ edit ] Having been raised in a politically and economically important family, Ibn Hazm mingled with people of power and influence all his life. He had access to levels of government by his adolescence that most people then would never know throughout their whole lives. Those experiences with government and politicians caused Ibn Hazm to develop a reluctant and even sad skepticism about human nature and the capacity of human beings to deceive and to oppress.

[ 13 ] His reaction was to believe that there was no refuge or truth except with an infallible God and that with men resided only corruption. He was thus known for his cynicism regarding humanity and a strong respect for the principles of language and sincerity in communication.

[ 3 ] Career [ edit ] Ibn Hazm lived among the circle of the ruling hierarchy of the Caliphate of Córdoba government. His experiences produced an eager and observant attitude, and he gained an excellent education at Córdoba.

After the death of the grand vizier, al-Muzaffar , in 1008, the Caliphate of Iberia became embroiled in a civil war that lasted until 1031 and resulted in the collapse of the central authority of Córdoba and the emergence of many smaller independent states, the taifas .

[ 6 ] Historic map of Majorca and Minorca by the Ottoman admiral Piri Reis .

Ibn Hazm's father died in 1012. Ibn Hazm was frequently imprisoned as a suspected supporter of the Umayyads.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] By 1031, Ibn Hazm retreated to his family estate at Manta Lisham and had begun to express his activist convictions in the literary form.

[ 6 ] He was a leading proponent and codifier of the Zahiri school of Islamic thought , [ 3 ] and he produced a reported 400 works, but only 40 still survive.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] [ 14 ] His political and religious opponents gained power after the collapse of the caliphate and so he accepted an offer of asylum from the governor of the island of Majorca in the 1040s. He continued to propagate the Zahiri School there before he returned to Andalusia.

[ 15 ] Contemporaries coined the saying "the tongue of Ibn Hazm was a twin brother to the sword of al-Hajjaj ", an infamous 7th century general and governor of Iraq. Ibn Hazm became so frequently quoted that the phrase "Ibn Hazm said" became proverbial.

[ 6 ] As an literalist, he opposed the allegorical interpretation of religious texts and preferred a grammatical and syntactical interpretation of the Qur'an . He granted cognitive legitimacy only to revelation and sensation, and he considered deductive reasoning insufficient in legal and religious matters. He rejected practices common among more orthodox schools such as juristic discretion .

[ 16 ] He was initially a follower of the Maliki school of law within Sunni Islam , but he switched to the Shafi'i school at around the age of thirty. He finally settled with the Zahiri school.

[ 13 ] [ 17 ] He is perhaps the most well-known adherent of the school and the main source of extant works on Zahirite law. He studied the school's precepts and methods under Abu al-Khiyar al-Dawudi al-Zahiri of Santarém Municipality and was eventually promoted to the level of a teacher of the school himself.

In 1029, both were expelled from the main mosque of Cordoba for their activities.

[ 18 ] Works [ edit ] Main article: List of works by ibn Hazm Much of Ibn Hazm's substantial body of works, [ 4 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 7 ] which approached that of Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari and As-Suyuti 's, was burned in Seville by his sectarian and political opponents. His surviving works, while criticised as repetitive, didactic and abrasive in style, [ 19 ] also show a fearless irreverence towards his academic critics and authorities.

Ibn Hazm wrote works on law and theology and over ten medical books. He called for science to be integrated into a standard curriculum. In Organization of the Sciences , he diachronically defines educational fields as stages of progressive acquisition set over a five-year curriculum, from language and exegesis of the Qur'an to the life and physical sciences to a rationalistic theology.

[ 20 ] Apart from his rational works, Ibn Hazm's The Ring of the Dove ( Tawq al-hamamah) is considered a major work of Arabic literature from Al-Andalus.

[ 21 ] The manuscript of Ṭawq al-ḥamāma (MS Or. 927) is kept at Leiden University Libraries and is also available digitally.

[ 22 ] Detailed Critical Examination [ edit ] In Fisal ( Detailed Critical Examination ), a treatise on Islamic science and theology , Ibn Hazm promoted sense perception above subjectively flawed human reason . Recognizing the importance of reason, as the Qur'an itself invites reflection , he argued that reflection to refer mainly to revelation and sense data since the principles of reason are themselves derived entirely from sense experience . He concludes that reason is not a faculty for independent research or discovery , but that sense perception should be used in its place, an idea that forms the basis of empiricism .

[ 23 ] Jurisprudence [ edit ] Perhaps Ibn Hazm's most influential work in the Arabic, selections of which have been translated into English, is now The Muhalla , or The Adorned Treatise . It is reported to be a summary of a much longer work, known as Al-Mujalla . Its essential focus is on matters of jurisprudence, but it also touches of matters of creed in its first chapter, Kitab al-Tawheed , whose focus is on credal matters related to monotheism and the fundamental principles of approach to divine texts. One of the main points that emerges from the masterpiece of jurisprudencial thought is that Ibn Hazm rejects analogical reasoning (qiyas) in favor of direct reliance on the Quran , sunnah , and ijma of the companions.

[ 24 ] Logic [ edit ] Ibn Hazm wrote the Scope of Logic , which stressed on the importance of sense perception as a source of knowledge.

[ 25 ] He wrote that the "first sources of all human knowledge are the soundly used senses and the intuitions of reason , combined with a correct understanding of a language". Ibn Hazm also criticized some of the more traditionalist theologians who were opposed to the use of logic and argued that the first generations of Muslims did not rely on logic. His response was that the early Muslims had witnessed the revelation directly, but later Muslims have been exposed to contrasting beliefs and so the use of logic is necessary to preserve the true teachings of Islam .

[ 26 ] The work was first republished in Arabic by Ihsan Abbas in 1959 and most recently by Abu Abd al-Rahman Ibn Aqil al-Zahiri in 2007.

[ 27 ] Ethics [ edit ] In his book, In Pursuit of Virtue , Ibn Hazm had urged his readers: Do not use your energy except for a cause more noble than yourself. Such a cause cannot be found except in Almighty God Himself: to preach the truth, to defend womanhood, to repel humiliation which your creator has not imposed upon you, to help the oppressed. Anyone who uses his energy for the sake of the vanities of the world is like someone who exchanges gemstones for gravel.

[ 28 ] Poetry [ edit ] A poem or fragment of a poem by him is preserved in Ibn Said al-Maghribi 's Pennants of the Champions : [ 29 ] You came to me just before the Christians rang their bells.

The half-moon was rising looking like an old man's eyebrow or a delicate instep.

And although it was still night when you came a rainbow gleamed on the horizon, showing as many colours as a peacock's tail.

Medicine [ edit ] Ibn Hazm's teachers in medicine included al-Zahrawi and Ibn al-Kattani , and he wrote ten medical works, [ 30 ] including Kitab fi'l-Adwiya al-mufrada mentioned by al-Dhahabi .

[ 31 ] Views [ edit ] Language [ edit ] In addition to his views on honesty in communication, Ibn Hazm also addressed the science of language to some degree. He viewed the Arabic language , the Hebrew language and the Syriac language as all essentially being one language which branched out as the speakers settled in different geographic regions and developed different vocabularies and grammars from the common root.

[ 32 ] He also differed with many Muslim theologians in that he did not view Arabic as superior to other languages since the Qur'an does not describe Arabic as such. Ibn Hazm viewed that there was no proof for claiming any language was superior to another.

[ 32 ] Literalism [ edit ] Ibn Hazm was well known for his strict literalism and is considered the champion of the literalist Zahirite school within Sunni Islām. A commonly cited example is his interpretation of the first half of verse 23 in the Qur'anic chapter of Al-Isra prohibiting one from saying "uff" to one's parents. Ibn Hazm said that half of the verse prohibits only saying "uff", not hitting one's parents, for example.

[ 33 ] However, he considered that hitting them is prohibited by the second half of the verse as well as verse 24 which command kind treatment of parents.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Ibn Hazm's works lightly touched upon the traditions of Greek philosophy. Agreeing with both Epicurus and Prodicus of Ceos , he stated that pleasure brings happiness in life and that there is nothing to fear in death. He believed that these philosophical traditions were useful but not enough to build an individual's character properly, and he stated that the Islamic faith was also necessary.

[ 15 ] The concept of absolute free will was rejected by Ibn Hazm, as he believed that all of an individual's attributes are created by God .

[ 15 ] Shia [ edit ] Ibn Hazm was highly critical of the Shia .

[ 36 ] He said about the sect: The Persians possessed a great kingdom and an upper hand above all other nations. They magnified the danger they posed [to others nations] by calling themselves al-Ahrār (the free ones) and al-Asyād (the noble ones). As a result, they considered all other people their slaves. However, they were afflicted with the destruction of their empire at the hands of the Arabs whom they had considered a lesser danger among the other nations [to their empire]. Their affairs became exacerbated and their afflictions doubled as they plotted wars against Islam various times. However, in all of their plots, Allāh made the Truth manifest. They continued to plot more useful stunts. So, some of their people accepted Islām only to turn towards Shī'ism, with the claim of loving Ahl al-Bayt (the family of the Prophet) and abhorrence to the oppression against 'Alī. Then, they traversed upon this way until it led them away from the path of Guidance [Islām].

[ 37 ] Kharijites [ edit ] He was critical of Kharijites ( Ibadism ): However, the predecessors of the Khārijites were bedouins who read the Qurʾān before they had gained understanding of the established Sunnah from the Messenger of Allāh (ﷺ). None of the jurists (fuquhāʾ) were amongst them... Hence, you will find them declaring each others disbelievers on the occasion of the smallest issue that arises between them which pertains to the minutest and smallest matters of jurisprudence. Thus, the weakness of these people and the strength of their ignorance manifests itself... Then Satan blinded them and Allāh misguided them with His knowledge [that they do not desire guidance]. So they dissolved their pledge of allegiance to the likes of  ʿAlī, turned away from Saīʿd bin Zayd, Saʿd, Ibn ʿUmar and others from those who spent of their wealth and fought before the victory and they turned away (likewise) from the Companions who spent and fought after the victory... and they abandoned all of the Companions...

[ 38 ] Homosexuality [ edit ] Ibn Hazm clearly states that homosexual acts are a sin , since they are condemned in the Quran and the sunnah .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] However, his rejection of Qiyas prevents him from assimilating Liwat to Zina . The punishment prescribed by him is therefore not that which is incurred by zina (stoning or intensive flogging), but a maximum of ten lashes and imprisonment with the aim of bringing about the reformation of the sinner. Ibn Hazm rejects those reports and traditions which proclaim that Homosexuality is worse than Zina , including certain traditions from the canonical collections. Nevertheless, for both acts will be a punishment of up to ten lashes.

[ 39 ] Most Hanafis hold the same view, but suggesting no physical punishment at all, leaving the choice to the judge's discretion.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Abu Hanifa refused to recognize the analogy between sodomy and zina.

[ 44 ] The Hanafi scholar Abu Bakr Al-Jassas (d. 981 AD/370 AH) argued that the two hadiths on killing homosexuals "are not reliable by any means and no legal punishment can be prescribed based on them".

[ 45 ] Female Prophets [ edit ] Ibn Hazm believed Mary , Sarah , Jochebed , Asiya , Eve , and Hajar were Prophets in Islam .

[ 46 ] Al-Qurtubi also held this opinion, so did Abu Hasan al-Ash'ari , the founder of the Ashari school of Islamic theology.

[ 47 ] Music [ edit ] Ibn Hazm is well known for rejecting the prohibition of music. He believed that the hadiths prohibiting musical instruments were weak and fabricated.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] He said: "The Messenger of God (peace and blessings be upon him) said, "Actions are judged according to intentions, and every person will get the reward according to what he intended." [So], whoever listens to music as an aid to something unlawful is immoral. The same applies to all things other than singing. And whoever listens to music seeking entertainment to give him strength in obeying God the Exalted and motivating him to pious acts, is good, obedient and his deed is lawful. Whoever intends neither obedience nor disobedience, his idleness is forgiven, such as the person who takes a walk in his orchard or sits on his doorstep for relaxation." [ 50 ] Reception [ edit ] Muslim scholars, especially those subscribing to Zahirism, have often praised Ibn Hazm for what they perceive as his knowledge and perseverance.

Yemeni preacher Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i was one of Ibn Hazm's admirers in recent times, holding the view that no other Muslim scholar had embodied the prophetic tradition of the Muhammad and the Sahaba . On several occasions, al-Wadi'i rejected the validity of Qiyas while referencing Ibn Hazm's works. As a matter of fact, al-Wadi'i would at times advice his students to be Zahiri when approaching Fiqh altogether.

[ 51 ] Similarly, Pakistani cleric Badi' ud-Din Shah al-Rashidi taught Ibn Hazm's book Al-Muhalla to students in Masjid al-Haram , while living in Mecca .

[ 52 ] al-Wadi'i himself taught Al-Muhalla in Al-Masjid an-Nabawi , while in Medina .

Abu Abd al-Rahman Ibn Aqil al-Zahiri , the primary biographer of Ibn Hazm in the modern era, has authored a number of works on Ibn Hazm's life and career, many published through Ibn Aqil's printing press which is named after Ibn Hazm.

[ 53 ] Modernist revival of Ibn Hazm's general critique of Islamic legal theory has seen several key moments in Arab intellectual history, including Ahmad Shakir 's re-publishing of Al-Muhalla, Muhammad Abu Zahra 's biography of Ibn Hazm, and the re-publishing of archived epistles on legal theory by Sa'id al-Afghani in 1960 and Ihsan Abbas between 1980 and 1983.

[ 54 ] See also [ edit ] Hazm (name) Ibn Hazm bibliography Miguel Asín Palacios Sunni fatwas on Shias Shia view of the Quran References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Full name Abū Muḥammad ʿAlī ibn Aḥmad ibn Saʿīd ibn Ḥazm al-Andalusī ( Arabic : أَبُو مُحَمَّد عَلِيّ بْن أَحْمَد بْن سَعِيد بْن حَزْم ٱلْأَنْدَلُسِيّ ) Citations [ edit ] ^ Al-Dhahabi .

Tadhkirah al-Huffaz . Vol. 3. p. 227.

^ a b Ibn Hazm.

The Ring of the Dove: A Treatise on the Art and Practice of Arab Love (Preface). Trans. A. J. Arberry. Luzac Oriental, 1997 ISBN 1-898942-02-1 ^ a b c d e f R. Arnaldez, Ibn Ḥazm .

Encyclopaedia of Islam , Second Edition. Brill Online, 2013. Reference. 9 January 2013 ^ a b "USC-MSA Compendium of Muslim Texts" . Usc.edu. Archived from the original on 28 November 2008 . Retrieved 12 September 2010 .

^ Schmidtke, Sabine; Abrahamov, Binyamim (2014). "Scripturalist and Traditionalist Theology".

The Oxford Handbook of Islamic Theology . New York, United States of America: Oxford University Press. pp.

265– 270.

ISBN 978-0-19-969670-3 .

^ a b c d e f g Fiegenbaum, J.W.

"Ibn Ḥazm" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 3 March 2018 .

^ a b c d Joseph A. Kechichian, A mind of his own .

Gulf News : 21:30 20 December 2012.

^ Ibrahim Kalin, Salim Ayduz (ed.), The Oxford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Science, and Technology in Islam , Volume 1, p. 328 ^ Islamic Desk Reference , pg. 150. Ed. E. J. Van Donzel. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 1994.

ISBN 9789004097384 ^ The court was under the effective rule of the grand vizier , al-Mansur , and his successor and son, al-Muzaffar ^ Britannica "Ibn Ḥazm was born into a notable family that claimed descent from a Persian client of Yazīd, the son of Muʿāwiyah, the first of the Umayyad dynasty rulers in Syria. Muslim families of Iberian (Spanish) background commonly adopted genealogies that identified them with the Arabs; some scholars, therefore, tend to favor evidence suggesting that Ibn Ḥazm was a member of a family of Iberian Christian background from Manta Līsham (west of Sevilla)." ^ Shamsuddeen al-Thahabi, Siyar A'lam al-Nubala, vol. 18, p. 184.

^ a b Lois A. Giffen, "Ibn Hazm and the Tawq al-Hamama". Taken from The Legacy of Muslim Spain , p. 428, ed.

Salma Jayyusi .

Leiden : Brill Publishers , 1994.

^ Camilla Adang, This Day I have Perfected Your Religion For You: A Zahiri Conception of Religious Authority, pg. 19. Taken from Speaking for Islam: Religious Authorities in Muslim Societies . Ed.

Gudrun Krämer and Sabine Schmidtke .

Leiden : Brill Publishers , 2006.

^ a b c Sharif, M.M. (2013).

A History of Muslim Philosophy: With Short Accounts of Other Disciplines and the Modern Renaissance in Muslim Lands, Volume 2 . Adam. pp.

280– 284.

ISBN 9788174352880 .

^ Bilal Orfali , "In the Shadow of Arabic: The Centrality of Language to Arab Culture." Pg. 34.

Brill Publishers , 2011. Print.

^ Adang, "From Malikism to Shafi'ism to Zahirism: The Conversions of Ibn Hazm", p. 73-87.

Conversions islamiques. Identites religieuses en Islam mediterraneen , ed. Mercedes Garcia-Arenal.

Paris : 2001.

^ Delfina Serrano, "Claim or complaint?" Taken from Ibn Hazm of Cordoba: The Life and Works of a Controversial Thinker , p. 200, ed.

Camilla Adang , Maribel Fierro and Sabine Schmidtke. Volume 103 of Handbook of Oriental Studies. Section 1 The Near and Middle East. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 2012.

ISBN 9789004234246 ^ Adang, Zahiri Conceptions , p. 20.

^ Francoise Micheau, "The scientific institutions in the medical Near East". Taken from Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, Volume 3: Technology, Alchemy and Life Sciences , p. 1008. Ed. Roshdi Rashed. London: Routledge, 1996.

ISBN 0415124123 ^ Stearns, Peter N. "Arabic Language and Literature." In The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern World . Oxford University Press, 2008.

^ "Digital version of Ṭawq al-ḥamāma fī 'al-ulfa wa-al-ullīf - Or. 927" .

Leiden University Libraries .

hdl : 1887.1/item:1567570 . Retrieved 11 April 2024 .

^ Ibn Hazm , Islamic Philosophy Online .

^ Abdallah, Fadel I. (1985).

"Notes on Ibn Hazm's Rejection of Analogy (Qiyas) in Matters of Religious Law" .

American Journal of Islam and Society (PDF).

2 (2): 223.

^ Muhammad Iqbal , The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam , "The Spirit of Muslim Culture" ( cf.

[1] and [2] ) ^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr and Oliver Leaman (1996), History of Islamic Philosophy , pp. 107–109, Routledge , ISBN 0-415-05667-5 .

^ Jose Miguel Puerta Vilchez, "Inventory of Ibn Hazm's Works". Taken from Ibn Hazm of Cordoba: The Life and Works of a Controversial Thinker , pg. 743. Eds. Camilla Adang, Maribel Fierro and Sabine Schmidtke. Volume 103 of Handbook of Oriental Studies. Section 1 The Near and Middle East. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 2012.

ISBN 9789004234246 ^ In Pursuit of Virtue, section under Treatment to be given to Souls, and the Reform of Vicious Characters, #9 ^ Gómez, translated by Cola Franzen from the Spanish versions of Emilio García (1989).

Poems of Arab Andalusia . San Francisco: City Lights Books.

ISBN 978-0-87286-242-5 .

^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Oliver Leaman (ed.), History of Islamic Philosophy , Routledge, 2013, p. 945 ^ Camilla Adang, Maribel Fierro, Sabine Schmidtke (ed.), Ibn ?azm of Cordoba: The Life and Works of a Controversial Thinker , BRILL, 2012, p. 685 ^ a b Kees Versteegh , The Arabic Linguistic Tradition , pg. 175. Volume three of Landmarks in Linguistic Thought.

London : Routledge , 1997.

ISBN 9780415157575 ^ Robert Gleave, Islam and Literalism: Literal Meaning and Interpretation in Islamic Legal Theory , pg. 169.

Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press , 2012.

ISBN 9780748625703 ^ Robert Gleave, Islam and Literalism , pg. 170.

^ Ibn Hazm, al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam , vol. 7, pg. 976. Ed. Mahmud Hamid Uthman. Cairo: Dar al-Hadith, 2005.

ISBN 9772251191 ^ Israel Friedlaender (1908).

"The Heterodoxies of the Shiites in the Presentation of Ibn Hazm" (PDF) .

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

29 . American Oriental Society . Retrieved 11 April 2015 .

^ Ibn Hazm, 'Ali.

Kitab al-Fisal fi al-milal wa-al-ahwa' wa-al-nihal . pp. 2/273.

^ "Ibn Ḥazm Al-Andalūsī (456H): The Khārijites Are Ignoramuses with No Understanding of the Qurʾān, Ready to Make Takfīr of Each Other at the Slightest Difference" .

www.kharijites.com . Retrieved 11 July 2025 .

^ a b Adang, Camilla (2003).

"Ibn Hazm on Homosexuality. A case of Zahiri legal methodolgy" .

Al-Qanṭara .

24 : 5– 31.

doi : 10.3989/ALQANTARA.2003.V24.I1.172 .

S2CID 170550553 .

^ Quran An-Naml (The Ants) 27:55 ^ Surah Al-A'raf (The Heights) 7:80-84 ^ Peters, Rudolph (2006). Crime and Punishment in Islamic Law: Theory and Practice from the Sixteenth to the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge University Press. pp. 61–62.

^ https://referenceworks.brill.com/display/entries/EIEO/SIM-4677.xml ^ https://web.archive.org/web/20130517035334/https://iranicaonline.org/articles/homosexuality-ii ^ "IslamOnline: Should beheading be the penalty for homosexuals? – CultureWatch" .

BillMuehlenberg.com .

Archived from the original on 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ "Imam Ibn Hazm: On Prophethood of women" . Archived from the original on 12 March 2005.

^ "Ibn Hazm, al qurtubi and Abul Hasan Asharee and their evidences on female Prophets | Islam" . 3 May 2020.

^ "Facing the Music: The Hadith of Instruments – Fussilat Blog" . 11 May 2024.

^ "NotFound" .

^ Al-Muhallā (7/567).

^ Al-Waadi'i, Muqbil "Ijabat al-Sa`il fi Ahamm al-Masa`il", pg. 333 ^ Abdullaah Nasir Rehmaani, "A Biography of Shaykh Badee-ud-Deen Shah Rashidee as-Sindhee." Trns. Abu Naasir and Abu Handhala. Prepared by al-Meezaan.com.

^ See: * Maribel Fierro , "Heresy in al-Andalus". Taken from The Legacy of Muslim Spain , pg. 905. Ed. Salma Jayyusi. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 1994.

* Ibn Hazam Khilal Alf Aam .

Lebanon : Dar al-Gharab al-Islami, 1982. 303 pages.

* Tahrir ba'd al-masa'il 'ala madh'hab al ashab . 1st Ed. Riyadh: Maktabat Dar al-Ulum, 1981.

^ Adam Sabra, "Ibn Hazm's Literalism: A Critique of Islamic Legal Theory". Taken from: Ibn Ḥazm of Cordoba: The Life and Works of a Controversial Thinker , pg. 98. Volume 103 of Handbook of Oriental Studies, Section 1: The Near and Middle East. Eds.

Camilla Adang , Maribel Fierro , and Sabine Schmidtke. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 2012.

ISBN 9789004234246 Sources [ edit ] The Ring of the Dove by Ibn Hazm, translation and preface by A. J. Arberry ISBN 1-898942-02-1 al-Fasl fi al-milal wa-al-ahwa' wa-al-nihal , by Ibn Hazm. Bairut: Dar al-Jil, 1985 Abenházam de Córdoba y su Historia crítica de las ideas religiosas vols. 1–5, by Miguel Asín Palacios. Madrid, 1928–1932 Muslim writers on Judaism and the Hebrew Bible : from Ibn Rabban to Ibn Hazm , by Camilla Adang . Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1996.

ISBN 90-04-10034-2 Ibn Hazm et la polémique islamo-chrétienne dans l´histoire de l´Islam , by Abdelilah Ljamai. Leiden: Brill, 2003.

ISBN 90-04-12844-1 Ibn Hazam Khilal Alf Aam , by Abu Abd al-Rahman Ibn Aqil al-Zahiri .

Lebanon : Dar al-Gharab al-Islami, 1982. 303 pages.

Kitab al-'axlaq wa-s-siyar ou Risala fi mudawat an-nufus wa-tahdib al-'axlaq wa-z-zuhd fi r-rada'il / Ibn Hazm al-'Andalusi; introd., éd. critique, remarques par Eva Riad . Uppsala : Univ.; Stockholm : Almqvist & Wiksell international (distr.), 1980.

ISBN 91-554-1048-0 The Zahiris, Their Doctrine and Their History: a contribution to the history of Islamic theology by Ignaz Goldziher, trans. and ed. Wolfgang Behn. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1971.

"Ibn Hazm of Cordova: on Porphyry's Isagoge", by Rafael Ramón Guerrero, in J. Meirinhos - O. Weijers (eds.): Florilegium mediaevale. Études offertes à Jacqueline Hamesse à l'occasion de son éméritat , Louvain-La-Neuve, FIDEM, 2009, pp. 525–540.

External links [ edit ] Ibn Hazm at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Scholia has an author profile for Ibn Hazm .

Biodata at MuslimScholars.info The original Arabic manuscript of Tawq Alhamama Global webpost Ibn Hazm and female prophethood Muslim Heritage Biography Britannica.org Encyclopædia Britannica article on Ibn Hazm Polemics (Muslim-Jewish) , Camilla Adang, Sabine Schmidtke: Andalusi Ibn Ḥazm, who was known for his rather indiscriminate vilification of opponents, even if they were Muslims.

, p. 6, in "Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World", ed.

Norman Stillman (in French) The Position of Ibn Hazm about Asharism by at-tawhid.net v t e Islamic theology Fields Theologians Books Fields Aqidah Eschatology Ethics Kalam Philosophy ‘Aql Education Logic Peace Science Astronomy Cosmology Physics Sufism Cosmology Metaphysics Philosophy Theologians Ash'arism ( al-Ash'ari ) Al-Bayhaqi Al-Baqillani Al-Juwayni Al-Qushayri Al-Shahrastani Al-Ghazali Al-Taftazani Al-Maziri Ibn Furak Ibn Abi Zayd al-Qayrawani Zakariyya al-Ansari Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini Ibn Aqil Ibn Tumart Abdul Qadir Gilani Abu al-Walid al-Baji Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi Ibn al-Jawzi Qadi Ayyad Ahmad al-Rifa'i Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Sayf al-Din al-Amidi Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam Taqi al-Din al-Subki Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati Al-Baydawi Ibn Khaldun Ibn Arafa Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi Ibn Hajar al-Haytami Al-Sha'rani Jalal al-Din al-Dawani Al-Maqqari al-Tilmisani Abd al-Rahman al-Fasi Ibn Ashir Al-Bahūtī Muhammad Mayyara Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi 'Illish Ibrahim al-Bajuri Abdullah ibn Alawi al-Haddad Ahmad al-Dardir Muhammad Arafa al-Desouki Ahmad Zayni Dahlan Said Nursî Early Sunni Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nu'mān ibn Thābit ( Hanafiyah ) Malik ibn Anas ( Maliki ) Al-Shafi'i ( Shafi‘i ) Maturidism ( Al-Maturidi ) Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi Al-Sarakhsi Al-Bazdawi Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari Al-Sharif al-Jurjani Akmal al-Din al-Babarti Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi Nur al-Din al-Sabuni Najm al-Din 'Umar al-Nasafi Siraj al-Din al-Ushi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Khidr Bey Ibn Kemal Ali Qushji Ali al-Qari Al-Maydani Ahmad Sirhindi Anwar Shah Kashmiri Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Shah Abdul Aziz Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri Zakariyya Kandhlawi Rahmatullah Kairanawi Murtada al-Zabidi Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi Muhammad Abu Zahra Kanthapuram A. P. Aboobacker Musliyar Rumi Mu'attila Al-Ja'd ibn Dirham Mu'jbira Abū Muḥrīz Jahm ibn Ṣafwān ar-Rāsibī as-Samarqāndī at-Tirmidhī Jahmīyya Abū Abdirrahmān Bishr ibn Ghiyāth ibn Abī Karīma al-Marīsī al-Baghdādī Mu'jassimā Abu’l-Hassan Muqātil ibn Sulaymān ibn Bashīr al-Azdī al- |Balkhī (Muqātilīyya) Abū Muḥāmmad (Abū’l-Hākem) Heshām ibn Sālem al-Jawālikī al- Juzjanī al- Kūfī Jawālikīyya Rum Abdals Ibn Karram ( Karramiyya ) Murji'ah Abū Marwān Gaylān ibn Mūslīm ad- Dimashqī an- Nabati al-Qībtī ( Murjī - Qadariyah ) Mu'tazila ( Wasil ibn 'Ata' ) Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm ibn Sayyār ibn Hāni’ an-Nazzām (Nazzāmīyya) Abū Bakr Abdurrahmān ibn Kaysān al-Asāmm Abū Mūsā Isā ibn Subeyh (Sabīh) al-Murdār al-Bāsrī (Murdārīyya) Hīshām ibn Amr al-Fuwātī ash-Shaybānī (Hīshāmīyya) Abū Sahl Abbād ibn Sulaimān (Salmān) as-Sāymarī Abū Alī Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb ibn Sallām al-Jubbā'ī (Jubbāīyya) Abū’l-Hūsayn Abdūrrāhīm ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Uthmān al-Hayyāt (Hayyātīyya) Ja'far ibn Harb Ja'far ibn Mūbassīr Abū Uthmān Amr ibn Bhār ibn Māhbūb al-Jāhiz al-Kinānī (Jāhizīyya) Al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar Abu al-Husayn al-Basri Al-Zamakhshari Amr ibn Ubayd Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Sahib ibn Abbad Abū Amr Ḍirār ibn Amr al-Gatafānī al-Kūfī (Ḍirārīyya) Najjārīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh al-Husayn ibn Muḥāmmad ibn ʿAbdillāh an-Najjār ar-Rāzī Abū Amr (Abū Yahyā) Hāfs al-Fard Muḥāmmad ibn ʿĪsā (Burgūsīyya) Abū ʿAbdallāh Ibnū’z-Zā‘farānī (Zā‘farānīyya) Mustadrakīyya Salafi Theologians Ibn Taymiyyah Ibnul Qayyim Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Wahhabism Al-Shawkani Rashid Rida Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i Al-Albani Saleh Al-Fawzan Rabee al-Madkhali Madkhalism Syed Nazeer Husain Ahl-i Hadith Siddiq Hasan Khan Zubair Ali Zai Safar Al-Hawali Sahwa movement Salman al-Ouda Osama bin Laden Salafi Jihadism Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hazimi Hazimism Yasir Qadhi Post-Salafism Twelver Shi'ism Twelve Imams Ali Hasan ibn Ali Husayn ibn Ali Ali al-Sajjad Muhammad al-Baqir Ja'far al-Sadiq Musa al-Kazim Ali al-Rida Muhammad al-Jawad Ali al-Hadi Hasan al-Askari Muhammad al-Mahdi Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid Sharif al-Murtaza Shaykh Tusi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Allamah Al-Hilli Mohammad-Baqer Majlesi Zurarah ibn A'yan Hisham ibn Hakam Agha Zia ol Din Araghi Ja'far Sobhani Ruhollah Khomeini Wilayat al-faqih Isma'ili Shi'ism Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi Abu'l-Fawaris Ahmad ibn Ya'qub Tayyibi Ismā'īlī doctrine Dhu'ayb ibn Musa Hassan Ala Dhikrihi's Salam Idris Imad al-Din Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid Zaydi Shi'ism Abu'l-Jarud al-Hamdani Ahmad ibn Isa ibn Zayd Al-Qasim al-Rassi Al-Hadi ila'l-Haqq Yahya Al-Mansur al-Qasim Key books Sunni books Asas al-Taqdis Al-Baz al-Ashhab Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq Al-Milal wa al-Nihal Al-Irshad Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah Al-Sawad al-A'zam Kitab al-Tawhid Tabsirat al-Adilla Masnavi Fihi Ma Fihi Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi The Moderation in Belief Shia books Eʿteqādātal-Emāmīya Al-Amali Al-Khisal Awail Al Maqalat Tashih al-I'tiqad Tajrid al-I'tiqad Independent Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Kitab al-Majmu of Alawis Malfūzāt of Ahmadiyya Umm al-kitab of Musta'li Isma'ilism Early Muslim scholars List of contemporary Muslim scholars of Islam Islamic schools and branches Sunni Islam Ahl al-Hadith ( Atharism ) Kullabiyya Ibn Kullab Hanbalis Ahmad ibn Hanbal Al-Qadi Abu Ya'la Khwaja Abdullah Ansari Zahiris Dawud al-Zahiri Salafism Ahl-i Hadith Syed Nazeer Husain / Siddiq Hasan Khan Wahhabism Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Al-Albani Other Salafi trends Jihadism Madkhalism Sahwa Salafi Modernism Muhammad bin Dawud Maqrizi Ahl ar-Ra'y ( Ilm al-Kalam ) Ash'arism Malikis Shafi'is Abdullah al-Harari – Al-Ahbash Maturidism Hanafis Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi / Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi / Rashid Ahmad Gangohi – Deobandi Shia Islam Zaydism Zayd ibn Ali Jarudiyya Batriyya Imamate Alid dynasties of northern Iran Hasan al-Utrush Yahya ibn Umar Imams of Yemen Extinct Zaydi Shi'a sects Dukayniyya Khalafiyya Imami Mahdiist Shi'ite Sects in Islam Imami Twelver Theology of Twelvers Ja'fari Akhbari Usuli Shaykhism Qizilbash Sheikh Haydar / Shah Ismail / Pir Sultan / Kul Nesîmî – Safavid Islam Ghulat al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism Baktāshism Demir Bābā – Alians Bābā Rexheb – Hārābātīs Imami Isma'ilism Fathite Abdallah al-Aftah Batiniyyah Hamdan Qarmat – Sevener Qarmatians Hamza / Baha al-Din al-Muqtana / ad-Darazi – Druzes Fatimids Musta'li Tayyibi Alavi Dawoodi Sulaymani Hafizi Nasir Khusraw al-Qubadiani – Badakhshan Alevism Nizari Hassan-i Sabbah – Assassins Aga Khans – Nizaris / Khojas Pir Sadardin – Satpanth Kaysanites Shia Mukhtār Abū ʿAmra Kaysān Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah – Hashimiyya Hārbīyya ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Hārb ibn al-Kindi Janāhiyya Abdallah ibn Mu'awiya Hārithīyya Riyāhīyya Sam‘ānīyya Bayān ibn Sam‘ān Rezāmīyya Abu Muslim Sunpadh Muḥammirah Khurramites Babak Mazyar al-Muqanna Ishaq al-Turk Khashabiyya Shia Other Mahdists An-Nafs Az-Zakiyyah Hurufiyya Maḥmūd Pasīkhānī – Nuktawiyya Shayki Nuqta-yi Ula – Bábīyya Tawussite Shia ʿAjlan ibn Nawus Waqifite Shia Muhakkima ( Arbitration ) Kharijites Ajardi Abd al-Karīm ibn Adjrād Maymunīyyah Sa'labīyyah Azariqa Nafi ibn al-Azraq al-Hānafī al-Handhalī Bayhasīyyah Abu Bayhas al-Hāytham ibn Jābir Najdat Najdah ibn 'Amir al-Hānafī Sufri Abu Qurra Abū Yazīd Mukhallad ibn Kayrād al- Nukkari Ibadism 'Abdullāh ibn Ibāḍ al-Tamimi Jābir ibn Zayd Abu Qudama Yazid ibn Fandin al- Ifrani Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi Wahbiyyah Azzabas Murji'ah ( Hasan ibn Muḥāmmad ibn al- Hanafiyyah ) Karrāmīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh Muḥāmmad ibn Karrām ibn Arrāk ibn Huzāba ibn al-Barā’ as-Sijjī ʿĀbidīyya (ʿUthmān al-ʿĀbid) Dhīmmīyya Hakāiqīyya Haisamīyya (Abū ʿAbdallāh Muhammad ibn al-Haisam) Hīdīyya (Hīd ibn Saif) Ishāqīyya (Abū Yaʿqūb Ishāq ibn Mahmashādh) Maʿīyya Muhājirīyya (Ibrāhīm ibn Muhājir) Nūnīyya Razīnīyya Sauwāqīyya Sūramīyya Tarā'ifīyya (Ahmad ibn ʿAbdūs at-Tarā'ifī) Tūnīyya (Abū Bakr ibn ʿAbdallāh) Wāhidīyya Zarībīyya Other sects Gaylānīyya Gaylān ibn Marwān Yūnusīyya Yūnus ibn Awn an-Namīrī Gassānīyya Gassān al-Kūfī Tūmanīyya Abū Muāz at-Tūmanī Sawbānīyya Abū Sawbān al-Murjī Sālehīyya Sāleh ibn Umar Shamrīyya Abū Shamr Ubaydīyya Ubayd al-Mūktaib Ziyādīyya Muhammad ibn Ziyād al-Kūfī Other Murjīs Al-Harith ibn Surayj Sa'id ibn Jubayr Hammād ibn Abū Sūlaimān Muhārīb ibn Dithār Sābit Kutna Awn ibn Abdullāh Mūsā ibn Abū Kasīr Umar ibn Zar Salm ibn Sālem Hālaf ibn Ayyūb Ibrāhim ibn Yousūf Nusayr ibn Yahyā Ahmad ibn Hārb Amr ibn Murrah Mu'shabbiha Tamsīl Jawārībīyya Dāwūd al-Jawāribî Hāshwīyya Hulmānīyya Abū Hulmān al- Fārisī ad- Dimashqī Qalandariyya Barak Baba Tajsīm Khaṭṭābiyya Abu al-Khattab Bāzīghiyya Bāzīgh ibn Mūsā Muʿāmmarīyya Muʿāmmar ibn Ahmar ʿIjlīyya/Umayrīyya Umayr ibn Bayān al-ʿIjlī Mufaḍḍaliyya al-Mufaddal ibn Umar al-Ju'fi Ghurābīyya Mānsūrīyya Abū Mānsūr al-ʿIjlī Mughīrīyya Abū Abdillāh Mugīre ibn Sāīd al-ʿIjlī el-Bajalī Mukhāmmīsa Namiriya ‘Ulyanīyya/'Alyaīyya Saba'īyya Abdullah ibn Saba' Qadariyah ( Ma'bad al-Juhani ) Alevism Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Malamatiyya / Qalandariyya Baba Ishak – Babai revolt Balım Sultan – Bektashi Order Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Galibi Order Muʿtazila ( Rationalism ) Mā’marīyya Abū Amr (Abū Mu‘tamīr) Muāmmar ibn Abbād as-Sūlamī Bishriyya Abū Sahl Bīshr ibn al-Mu‘tamīr al-Hilālī al-Baghdādī Abū Abdi’l-Lāh Ahmad ibn Abī Du'ad Faraj ibn Carīr ibn Mâlik al-Iyādī Bahshamiyya Abū Hāshīm Abdu’s-Salām ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb al-Jubbā'ī Huzaylīyya Abū’l-Huzayl Muḥāmmad ibn al-Huzayl ibn Abdillāh al-Allāf al-Abdī al-Bāsrī Abū Ma‘n Sūmāma ibn Ashras an-Nūmayrī al-Bāsrī al-Baghdādī Ikhshīdiyya Nazzāmīyya Ali al-Aswarī Abū Bakr Muḥāmmad ibn Abdillāh ibn Shabīb al-Basrī Hābītīyya Ahmad ibn Hābīt Sumamīyya Sumāma ibn Ashras Kā‘bīyya Abū’l-Kāsīm Abdullāh ibn Ahmad ibn Māhmūd al-Balhī al-Kā‘bī Quranism Ahle Qur'an Kala Kato United Submitters International Rashad Khalifa Edip Yüksel Independent Muslim beliefs Messianism Ahmadiyya Mirza Ghulam Qadiani Lahori Kabbalist Dönmes Sabbatai Zevi – Sabbatean Mahdavīyya Muhammad Jaunpuri / Bandagi Mian Syed Khundmir – Zikris Nation of Islam Wallace Fard Muhammad 's doctrine Modernism Modernist Salafism Muhammad Abduh Muhammad Asad Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani Rashid Rida Other Islamic modernists Taṣawwuf Tariqah Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Hilmi Tunahan – Süleymancı Ahmad al-Rifa'i – Rifa`i Other orders Tawassul Other beliefs Sadaqah Sunnah Taqwa Tawakkul Tewafuq Thawab Other scholars of Sunni schools of jurisprudence : Hanafi Hanbali Maliki Shafi'i Zahiri v t e Muslim scholars of the Zahiri School Medieval Dawud al-Zahiri (founder of the school; d. 883/884) Abd Allah al-Qaysi (d. 885/886) Ibn Abi Asim (d. 900) Muhammad bin Dawud al-Zahiri (d. 909) Ruwaym (d. 915) Niftawayh (d. 935) Ibn al-Mughallis (d. 936) Mundhir ibn Sa'īd al-Ballūṭī (887–966) Al-Qassab (d. 970) Ibn Hazm (994–1064) Al-Humaydī (1029–1095) Ibn Tahir of Caesarea (d. 1113) Ibn Tumart (d. 1128/30) Ibn Maḍāʾ (1116–1196) Ibn Dihya al-Kalby (1150–1235) Ibn Arabi (1165-1240) Abu al-Abbas al-Nabati (1166–1239) Abu Bakr Ibn Sayyid al-Nās (1200–1261) Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati (1256–1344) Contemporary Abu Turab al-Zahiri (1923–2002) Ihsan Abbas (1920–2003) Muhammad Abu Khubza (1932–2020) Abu Abd al-Rahman Ibn Aqil al-Zahiri (b. 1942) Abdul Aziz al-Harbi (b. 1965) Scholars of other Sunni Islamic schools of jurisprudence Hanafi Hanbali Maliki Shafi'i v t e Arabic literature Old Namara inscription Pre-Islamic Arabic inscriptions Pre-Islamic Abu Layla al-Muhalhel Adi ibn Zayd Afira bint 'Abbad Al-Fāriʿah bint Shaddād Al-Hujayjah Al-Ḥurqah Al-Khirniq bint Badr Al-Shanfara Al-Nu'man ibn Humaydah 'Alqama ibn 'Abada 'Amir ibn al-Tufayl Amr ibn Kulthum Antarah ibn Shaddad Al-A'sha Harith ibn Hilliza Al-Yashkuri Hatim al-Tai Labīd Laila bint Lukaiz Mahd al-Aadiyya Mu'aqqir Al-Nabigha Imru' al-Qais Samaw'al ibn 'Adiya Tarafa Uthman ibn al-Huwayrith Zuhayr bin Abi Sulma Zuhayr ibn Janab Aktham ibn Saifi Al-Munakhal Classical Early Islamic Al-Akhtal al-Taghlibi Al-Farazdaq Abd al-Hamid al-Katib Fadl Ashsha'ira Hassan ibn Thabit Ibn Abi Hasina Maysun bint Bahdal Jamil ibn Ma'mar Suraqa bin Malik Jarir ibn Atiyah Ka'b bin Zuhayr Al-Khansa Kuthayyir Layla al-Akhyaliyya Suraqah al-Bariqi Qutayla ukht al-Nadr Waddah al-Yaman Yunus al-Katib al-Mughanni Zufar ibn al-Harith al-Kilabi Dhu Jadan al-Himyari Dorayd bin Al Soma Qatari ibn al-Fuja'a al-Mufaddal Abbasid era Bint al-Mahdī Ibn al-Ahnaf Ibn al-Mu'tazz Abu Firas al-Hamdani Abu Tammam Al-Mudabbir Abu'l-Qasimbal-Maghribi Arib al-Ma'muniyya Al-Asma'i Ahmad al-Tifashi Abu al-Atahiya ibn al-'Amid Al-Hamadani Baha' al-din Zuhair Bashshar ibn Burd Buhturi Al-Busiri Al-Isfahani Al-Fath ibn Khaqan Al-Hariri of Basra Ibn al-Farid Ibn al-Rumi Ibn Duraid al-Zajjaj Abu Mansur al-Azhari ibn al-Mahdi ibn al-Mudabbir Al-Ma'arri Marwan ibn Abi Hafsa Marwan ibn Abi al-Janub Al-Mutanabbi Abu Nuwas Al-Jahiz Shāriyah Al-Armanazi Aban al-Lahiqi Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani Rabia of Basra Yunus ibn Habib Abu Nasr al-Jawhari Al-Farahidi Al-Shafi'i Ibn al-Muqaffa' Al-Mubarrad Ibn Abi Tahir Tayfur Safiyya al-Baghdadiyya Al-Zahiri Abu Muhammad al-Anbari Ibn al-Anbari Al-Qasabani Ibn Qutaybah Dik al-Jinn ‘Inān Abu Ahmad Monajjem Ibn Bakkar Al-Sarī al-Raffā’ Al-Suli Niftawayh Al-Tughrai Laylā bint Ṭarīf Al-Tha'alibi Al-Daylami al-Tawhīdī Al-Sharif al-Radi Ibn Hayyus Al-Raghib al-Isfahani Sharif al-Murtaza Al Uyuni Yaqut al-Hamawi Al Suhrawardi Al-Hallaj Usama ibn Munqidh Ibn al-Qatta' al-Siqilli Ibn al-Shajari Ibn al-Nafis Ibn 'Adlan Al-Andalus and Maghreb Abu Ja'far Al-Rumaikiyya Maria Alphaizuli Ibn Ammar Buthaina Al-Rukuniyya Hamda bint Ziyad al-Muaddib Ibn Hamdis Ibn Abd Rabbih Ibn al-Abbar Ibn al-Zaqqaq Ibn Amira Ibn Baqi Ibn Bassam Ibn Juzayy Ibn Khafaja Ibn al-Khatib Ibn Quzman Ibn Sahl Ibn Zamrak Ibn Zaydún Lubna of Córdoba Al-Mu'tamid ibn Abbad ibn Hani al-Azdi Muhya Nazhun Qasmuna Al-Tutili Umm Al-Kiram Yusuf III Yusuf III Ibn Hazm Ibn Arabi al-Shushtari Abu Madyan al-Rundi Ibn al-Arif Ibn Wahbun Ibn Abdun Avempace al-Baji al-Fazazi Ibn al-Yayyab Ibn Jubayr Ibn al-Kattani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Abi al-Khisal Mamluk era Ahmad ibn Arabshah Al-Busiri Ibn Manzur Ibn Battuta 'A'isha al-Ba'uniyya Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Nubata al-Nafzawi Ibn Khaldun Al-Qalqashandi Ottoman era Al-Nabulsi Fuzûlî Abdul Qadir al-Baghdadi Hanna Diyab Ibn al-Wannan Ahmed Ben Triki Modern Nahda El Baroudy Maruf al Rusafi Nasif al-Yaziji Ibrahim al-Yaziji Jamil Sidqi al-Zahawi Ahmad Faris Shidyaq Naoum Mokarzel Ahmad Rida Ameen Rihani Qustaki al-Himsi al-Kawakibi Suleyman al-Boustani Butrus al-Bustani Ahmad Zaki Pasha Rifa'a al-Tahtawi Abdallah Marrash Francis Marrash Maryana Marrash Hafez Ibrahim Ahmed Shawqi Mikhail Naimy Kahlil Gibran Farah Antun Jurji Zaydan May Ziadeh Taha Hussein Tawfiq al-Hakim Contemporary Nawal El Saadawi Naguib Mahfouz Yusuf Idris Sonallah Ibrahim Ahlam Mosteghanemi Mahmoud Darwish Adunis Ahmad Abd al-Ghafur Attar Abdur Rahman Kashgari Muhammad al-Maghut Nizar Qabbani Abbās al-Aqqād Mustafa Wahbi al-Tal Said Akl Fayeq Abdul-Jaleel Sinan Antoon Ibrahim Tuqan Emile Habibi Ghassan Kanafani Ghada al-Samman Abdul Rahman Munif al-Gosaibi Echebbi Hanna Mina Colette Khoury Saadallah Wannous Zakaria Tamer Tayeb Salih Leila Aboulela Ihsan Abdel Quddous al-Aswany Mohamed Choukri Leila Abouzeid Mohammed Bennis Abdellatif Laabi Mohamed Said Raihani Waciny Laredj Tahar Djaout Alifa Rifaat Ali Douagi Youssef Rzouga Salah Jahin Amal Donqol Ahmed Zaki Abu Shadi Hasan Tawfiq al-Mazini al-Jawahiri Safa Khulusi Nazik Al-Malaika Ahmed Matar Al-Bayati al-Sayyab Saadi Yousef Ibrahim Nasrallah Elia Abu Madi Omar Abu Risha Yusuf al-Khal Mourid Barghouti Jabra Ibrahim Jabra al-Qasim Fadwa Tuqan Nuri Ayyub National literatures of Arab states Algeria Bahrain Comoros Djibouti Egypt Copto-Arabic Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco Oman Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Somalia Sudan Syria Tunisia U.A.E.

Yemen Portals : Biography Islam History Philosophy Religion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kkzmh
Cached time: 20250817203420
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.867 seconds
Real time usage: 1.090 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5680/1000000
Revision size: 37788/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 361052/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10049/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 171145/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.420/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17328673/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  829.697      1 -total
 41.20%  341.865      2 Template:Infobox
 33.15%  275.076      1 Template:Infobox_religious_biography
 22.17%  183.949      2 Template:Reflist
 13.58%  112.709      1 Template:Infobox_Arabic_name
 12.42%  103.081     11 Template:Br_separated_entries
 11.59%   96.169      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 10.63%   88.182      4 Template:Lang
 10.58%   87.751      1 Template:Islamic_theology
 10.15%   84.188      5 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1467830:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817203420 and revision id 1306447769. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Hazm&oldid=1306447769 " Categories : Ibn Hazm 994 births 1064 deaths 11th-century writers from al-Andalus 11th-century Muslim theologians Critics of Shia Islam Spanish genealogists Hadith scholars Medieval Islamic philosophers Mujaddid People from Córdoba, Spain Scholars from the Caliphate of Córdoba Biographical evaluation scholars Muwallads Zahiris Hidden categories: Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2024 Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 20:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn Hazm 43 languages Add topic

