Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Family 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Johann Gottfried Schadow 30 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German sculptor (1764–1850) Lithographic print (1830) of Johann Gottfried Schadow Schadow's grave in Berlin Johann Gottfried Schadow (20 May 1764 – 27 January 1850) was a German Prussian sculptor .

His most iconic work is the chariot on top of the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin.

Biography [ edit ] Schadow was born in Berlin , where his father was a poor tailor.

He trained as a sculptor under Antoine Tassaert , [ 1 ] who was patronized by Frederick the Great . Taessert offered his daughter in marriage, but the pupil preferred to elope with a Jewish girl, Marianne Devidel in Rome [ 1 ] and Taessert not only condoned the offense but furnished money for their stay in Italy.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] After he married Devidel in Rome he also won the sculptors prize from the Accademia di San Luca in 1786.

[ 1 ] Having been influenced by the sculptor Antonio Canova during his stay in Rome he returned to Berlin in 1788 to succeed Tassaert as sculptor [ 1 ] to the court and secretary to the Prussian Academy of Arts and Roral Porcelain Factory . Upon his return, his first work was the tomb of the son of the Prussian King Friedrich Wilhelm II , Alexander von der Mark.

[ 1 ] Over half a century he produced upwards of two hundred works, varied in style as in subjects.

[ 2 ] Among his ambitious efforts are Frederick the Great in Stettin , Blücher in Rostock and Luther in Wittenberg .

[ 2 ] His portrait statues of Frederick the Great with the dogs and the Princess Monument Louise and her sister Frederica with the princesses Louise and Federica became very popular.

[ 1 ] The second one was copied many times illegally which lead to a temporary dispute between his gypsum modeler Beyer and the sculptor in September 1795.

[ 1 ] His busts, of which there are more than one hundred, include seventeen colossal heads in the Walhalla , Ratisbon; Goethe , Wieland , and Fichte were modelled from life.

[ 2 ] Of church monuments and memorial works thirty are enumerated; yet Schadow hardly ranks among Christian sculptors. He is claimed by classicists and idealists: the quadriga on the Brandenburger Tor and the allegorical frieze on the facade of the Royal Mint, both in Berlin, are judged among the happiest studies from the antique. Schadow, as director of the Berlin Academy, had great influence. He wrote on the proportions of the human figure, on national physiognomy, etc.; and many volumes by himself and others describe and illustrate his method and his work.

[ 2 ] His interest in physiognomy is documented by the drawing he made of Harry Maitey , the first Hawaiian in Prussia.

Today, some of his sculptures and busts are displayed in the Friedrichswerdersche Kirche and the Alte Nationalgalerie in Berlin.

Schadow developed a friendship with Johann Wolfgang von Goethe when at first Goethe's son visited Schadow in Weimar. Schadow created 12 bronze medals of Goethe. One such medal is in the property of the British Museum .

[ 4 ] He died in Berlin in 1850. His sons Rudolph and Friedrich Wilhelm were notable for sculpture and painting, respectively. He was the grandfather of admiral Felix von Bendemann of the German Imperial Navy .

[ 5 ] The centrepiece of the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin Frederica of Prussia Melanchthon with Luther behind, by Schadow, Melanchthon House Museum, Wittenberg The Prinzessinengruppe : Schadow's famous statue of Friederica (right), with her sister, Louise Drawing of Harry Maitey , chalk and graphite, October 26, 1824 Family [ edit ] He was uncle to the sculptor Emil Wolff .

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Kilb, Andreas.

"Schadow-Ausstellung in Berlin: Die Erfindung der preußischen Schönheit" .

FAZ.NET (in German).

ISSN 0174-4909 . Retrieved 2022-10-26 .

^ a b c d e One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Atkinson, Joseph Beavington (1911). " Schadow ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 24 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 310.

^ Hertz, Deborah. Jewish High Society In Old Regime Berlin, 2005.

^ Bronze medal of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, by Johann Gottfried Schadow , Explore, Highlights, British Museum , retrieved 4 June 2012.

^ Judentum in Deutschland , Luebeck-kunterbunt.de (in German) External links [ edit ] Media related to Johann Gottfried Schadow at Wikimedia Commons "Schadow, Johann Gottfried" .

Encyclopedia Americana . 1920.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav Musée d'Orsay ADK Städel FID People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johann_Gottfried_Schadow&oldid=1303737876 " Categories : 1764 births 1850 deaths Sculptors from Berlin People from the Margraviate of Brandenburg Sculptors from the Kingdom of Prussia 18th-century German sculptors 18th-century German male artists German male sculptors 19th-century German sculptors Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 19:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Johann Gottfried Schadow 30 languages Add topic

