Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aristotle's tragic hero 2 In other media 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Tragic hero 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Português Русский Suomi Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Stock character whose flaws cause their downfall For other uses, see Tragic hero (disambiguation) .

Oedipus , a figure commonly considered a tragic hero A tragic hero (or sometimes tragic heroine if they are female) is the protagonist of a tragedy . In his Poetics , Aristotle records the descriptions of the tragic hero to the playwright and strictly defines the place that the tragic hero must play and the kind of man he must be. Aristotle based his observations on previous dramas.

[ 1 ] Many of the most famous instances of tragic heroes appear in Greek literature , most notably the works of Sophocles and Euripides .

Aristotle's tragic hero [ edit ] In Poetics , Aristotle suggests that the hero of a tragedy must evoke a sense of pity and fear within the audience, stating that “the change of fortune presented must not be the spectacle of a virtuous man brought from prosperity to adversity." [ 2 ] In essence, the focus of the hero should not be the loss of his goodness. He establishes the concept that pity is an emotion that must be elicited when, through his actions, the character receives undeserved misfortune, while the emotion of fear must be felt by the audience when they contemplate that such misfortune could possibly befall themselves in similar situations. Aristotle explains such change of fortune "should be not from bad to good, but, reversely, from good to bad.” Such misfortune is visited upon the tragic hero "not through vice or depravity but by some error of judgment." This error, or hamartia , refers to a flaw in the character of the hero, or a mistake made by the character.

Therefore, the Aristotelian hero is characterized as virtuous but not "eminently good," which suggests a noble or important personage who is upstanding and morally inclined while nonetheless subject to human error . Aristotle's tragic heroes are flawed individuals who commit, without evil intent, great wrongs or injuries that ultimately lead to their misfortune, often followed by tragic realization of the true nature of events that led to this destiny.

[ 3 ] This means the hero still must be – to some degree – morally grounded. The usual irony in Greek tragedy is that the hero is both extraordinarily capable and highly moral (in the Greek honor -culture sense of being duty-bound to moral expectations), and it is these exact, highly-admirable qualities that lead the hero into tragic circumstances. The tragic hero is snared by his own greatness: extraordinary competence, a righteous passion for duty, and (often) the arrogance associated with greatness ( hubris ).

In other media [ edit ] Kullervo , a tragic hero from the Karelian and Finnish Kalevala The influence of the Aristotelian hero extends past classical Greek literary criticism . Greek theater had a direct and profound influence on Roman theater and formed the basis of Western theater, with other tragic heroes including Macbeth in William Shakespeare 's The Tragedy of Macbeth , and Othello in his Othello .

[ 4 ] Kullervo , a tragic hero from the Karelian and Finnish 19th century epic poetry Kalevala by Elias Lönnrot , curses beasts from the woods to attack his tormenter, the Maiden of the North.

J. R. R. Tolkien wrote an interpretation of the Kullervo cycle in 1914; the piece was finally published in its unfinished form as The Story of Kullervo .

[ 5 ] Theatre deeply influences a wide variety of arts throughout the world, in diverse media such as literature, music, film, television and even video games. Many iconic characters featured in these genres follow the archetype of the tragic hero. Examples of such characters include Anakin Skywalker from George Lucas ' Star Wars films, Jay Gatsby from The Great Gatsby and Eddard Stark from George R. R. Martin 's novel series A Song of Ice and Fire and the HBO television series adaptation Game of Thrones . Some film historians regard Michael Corleone of The Godfather as a tragic hero, although using traditional literary conventions, the character would more closely fit the role of anti-hero .

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Aristotle, On Poetics, Ingram Bywater ^ S.H. Butcher, The Poetic of Aristotle (1902), pp. 45-47 ^ Charles H. Reeves, The Aristotelian Concept of The Tragic Hero, Vol. 73, No. 2 (1952), Published by: The Johns Hopkins University Press JSTOR 291812 pp. 172-188 ^ Duckworth, Courtney (23 January 2015).

"How Accurate Is American Sniper?" .

Slate.com . Retrieved 4 March 2020 .

^ "Tolkienin Kalevala-tarina julkaistaan sadan vuoden viipeellä – Kullervo vannoo kostoa taikuri-Untamolle" [Tolkien's Kalevala story published after a hundred-year lag – Kullervo vows revenge on Untamo the magician] (in Finnish). 8 June 2015 . Retrieved 2015-06-29 .

^ AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains Archived October 23, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Sources [ edit ] Carlson, Marvin. 1993.

Theories of the Theatre: A Historical and Critical Survey from the Greeks to the Present.

Expanded ed. Ithaca and London: Cornell UP.

ISBN 0-8014-8154-6 .

Janko, Richard, trans. 1987.

Poetics with Tractatus Coislinianus, Reconstruction of Poetics II and the Fragments of the On Poets.

By Aristotle . Cambridge: Hackett.

ISBN 978-0-87220-033-3 .

Pavis, Patrice . 1998.

Dictionary of the Theatre: Terms, Concepts, and Analysis.

Trans. Christine Shantz. Toronto and Buffalo: U of Toronto P.

ISBN 978-0-8020-8163-6 .

v t e Stock characters List Archetype By ethics and morality Heroes Classic hero Action hero Christ figure Chosen One Everyman Folk hero Knight-errant Legacy hero Mythological king Paladin Superhero Youngest son Antihero Byronic hero Man alone Tragic hero Other Cyberhero Super soldier Space marine Rogues Lovable rogue Gentleman detective Jack Trickster Tricky slave Zanni (servants, clowns: Harlequin , Brighella , Scapino , Pulcinella and Pierrot ) Outlaw Bad boy Gentleman thief Pirate Air pirate Space pirate Other Good cop/bad cop Rake Villains Antivillains False hero The mole Double agent Evil twin Terrorist Social Darwinist Dark lord Mad scientist Supervillain Monsters Bug-eyed monster Evil clown Killer robot Killer toy Monster girl Skeleton Slime Swamp monster Vampires Zombie Nazi zombies Zombie animal Other Alazon Archenemy Folk devil Igor Masked villain Miser Vecchio (wealthy old men, Pantalone and Il Dottore ) Il Capitano (self styled captain, braggart) By sex and gender Feminine Love interest Bishōjo Blonde stereotype Farmer's daughter Girl next door Hooker with a heart of gold Ingénue Loosu ponnu Magical girlfriend Catgirl Monster girl Manic Pixie Dream Girl Vixen Hag Cat lady Crone Fairy godmother La Ruffiana Loathly lady Hawksian woman Dragon Lady Femme fatale Tsundere Woman warrior Jungle girl Magical girl Virago Strong female character Queen bee Princesse lointaine Southern belle Valley girl Yamato nadeshiko LGBT Class S Laotong Lady-in-waiting Columbina Mammy stereotype Geek girl Gamer girl Damsel in distress Final girl Princess and dragon Masculine Harlequin Pierrot Scaramouche Father figure Wise old man Elderly martial arts master Young American mappillai Himbo Ivan the Fool Jack Jock Little Johnny Nice guy Nice Jewish boy Superfluous man Prince Charming Bishōnen Knight-errant Primitive Feral child Noble savage Caveman Mountain man LGBT Seme and uke Otokonoko Bad boy Pachuco Black knight Others Adolescent clique Barbarian Clown Dragonslayer Donor Fool Identity formation Imaginary friend Innamorati ("The Lovers") Little green men Magical Negro Mole people Pop icon Redshirt Shoulder angel Sidekick Straight man Tokenism Town drunk Tragic mulatto Truck-kun Village idiot White savior v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tragic_hero&oldid=1291718785 " Categories : Philosophy of Aristotle Drama genres Heroes Tragedy Hidden categories: CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Japanese-language text This page was last edited on 22 May 2025, at 23:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tragic hero 11 languages Add topic

