Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 2.1 Chapter One: What is Law?

2.2 Chapter Two: Interpretive Concepts 2.3 Chapter Three: Jurisprudence Revisited 2.4 Chapter Four: Conventionalism 2.5 Chapter Five: Pragmatism and Personification 2.6 Chapter Six: Integrity 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Law's Empire 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1986 book by Ronald Dworkin This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Law's Empire Cover of the first edition Author Ronald Dworkin Language English Subject Jurisprudence Publisher Belknap Press Publication date 1986 Publication place United States Media type Print Pages 470 ISBN 9780674518353 (1st ed) OCLC 631282485 Law's Empire is a 1986 text in legal philosophy by Ronald Dworkin , in which the author continues his criticism of the philosophy of legal positivism as promoted by H. L. A. Hart during the middle to late 20th century. The book introduces the concept of " law as integrity ". Dworkin creates Judge Hercules as an idealized version of a jurist with extraordinary legal skills who is able to challenge various predominating schools of legal interpretation and legal hermeneutics prominent throughout the 20th century.

[ 1 ] Judge Hercules is eventually challenged by Judge Hermes, another idealized version of a jurist who is affected by an affinity to respecting historical legal meaning arguments which do not affect Judge Hercules in the same manner. Judge Hermes' theory of legal interpretation is found by Dworkin in the end to be inferior to the approach of Judge Hercules.

Background [ edit ] Much of the twentieth century in legal philosophy has been characterized by the confrontation of legal positivism with natural law theory as being among the most prominent legal theories seen in the century. One major proponent of the Anglo-American version of legal positivism was H. L. A. Hart, a professor at Oxford University, who was a teacher of Dworkin's and with whom eventually Dworkin would come to strongly disagree. To challenge the prevailing schools of legal interpretation and legal philosophy in the late twentieth century, Dworkin invented the personage of Judge Hercules to represent a version of legal philosophy which he saw as effectively answering many of the shortcomings he had come to identify with Hart and other legal schools prominent in his time.

Dworkin's approach in the book is to present his argument in ten chapters with one summary chapter added at the end of the book titled, "Law Beyond Law". The book is original in its format compared to conventional approaches to academic studies in the law by introducing the personage of Judge Hercules early in the text to answer many of the legal theories which Dworkin wishes to discuss as to their being insufficient to meet the requirements of late 20th century jurisprudence. In Dworkin's perspective, the prevailing climate of legal theory at the end of the 20th century was understood by him as being represented by the deficiencies of many competing and contradictory legal theories being presented by the legal academy. The ten chapters of the book build their logical argument sequentially and in growing complexity of exposition where each chapter is dependent upon the logical demonstrations made in previous chapters in order to establish the rationale and comprehension at work in the mind of the legal personage represented by Judge Hercules.

Summary [ edit ] Dworkin concisely states his primary concern in the preface of this volume concerning his approach to the philosophy of law: "We are subjects of law's empire, liegemen to its methods and ideals, bound in spirit while we debate what we must therefore do." The "empire" of the law is expansive for Dworkin and includes not only the domain of jurisprudence but extends fully into the domain of politics and sociology, including the philosophical domain of morals, ethics and even aesthetics as these affect the lives of all individuals of society.

Chapter One: What is Law?

[ edit ] In this chapter, Dworkin tells his readers that there are three types of law with which he is primarily concerned. These three areas of law are outlined as (a) Conventionalism, (b) Pragmatism (semantic theory), and (c) Law as integrity. Dworkin shall make a primary point of defending Law as integrity throughout the subsequent chapters of his text.

Chapter Two: Interpretive Concepts [ edit ] Dworkin introduced his principle of the "semantic sting" of the semantic philosophy of law. He develops and distinguishes between two forms of skepticism to present his arguments differentiating between "internal skepticism" and "external skepticism", for use in subsequent chapters.

Chapter Three: Jurisprudence Revisited [ edit ] Dworkin informs his readers that the concept of law is the theory of what forms the ground of law. The "concept of law" was used by H. L. A. Hart as the title for an approach to law strongly oriented to Anglo-American reading of positive law to which Dworkin would find insufficient for dealing with issues of jurisprudence encountered throughout the 20th century.

Chapter Four: Conventionalism [ edit ] In this chapter, Dworkin begins his three-part, three-tier assessment of law with his criticism of Conventionalism . He differentiated Conventionalism as falling into two different kinds, which are insufficient, in the end, to the needs of contemporary jurisprudence at the end of the 20th century leading to the start of the 21st century. Dworkin ends the chapter asserting the failure of Conventionalism.

Chapter Five: Pragmatism and Personification [ edit ] Dworkin rejects pragmatism here as insufficient to the adjudication requirements and legislative principles that he sees as prevailing at the end of the twentieth century. Dworkin begins to stress that contemporary jurisprudence in his view needs to hold in high esteem the values of justice as integrity, fairness, and due process.

Chapter Six: Integrity [ edit ] For Dworkin, "Justice is a matter of outcomes: a political decision causes injustice, however fair its procedures that produced it, when it denies people some resource, liberty, or opportunity that the best theories of justice entitle them to have." For Dworkin, the answerability of jurisprudence to political theory and political obligations is central. Political ideals are presented as operating from a base of moral concerns that influence what is legislated as law.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ Guest, Stephen (2013).

Ronald Dworkin (3rd ed.). Stanford Law Books. p. 83.

ISBN 9780804784009 .

OCLC 823654726 .

^ Dworkin, Ronald (1987).

Law's Empire . Harvard University Press. p. 191.

Further reading [ edit ] Allard, Julie.

Dworkin et Kant: Réflexions sur le judgement . Bruxelles: Editions de l'ULB, 2001.

Brown, Alexander.

Ronald Dworkin's Theory of Equality: Domestic and Global Perspectives . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.

Benjamin Brown, From Principles to Rules and from Musar to Halakhah - The Hafetz Hayim's Rulings on Libel and Gossip Burke, John J.A.

The Political Foundation of Law: The Need for Theory with Practical Value . San Francisco: Austin & Winfield, 1992.

Burley, Justine, ed.

Dworkin and His Critics . Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2004.

Cohen, Marshall, ed.

Ronald Dworkin and Contemporary Jurisprudence . London: Duckworth, 1984.

Gaffney, Paul.

Ronald Dworkin on Law as Integrity: Rights as Principles of Adjudication . Lewiston, New York: Mellen University Press, 1996.

Guest, Stephen.

Ronald Dworkin (Jurists: Profiles in Legal Theory). Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2012.

Hershovitz, Scott, ed.

Exploring Law's Empire: The Jurisprudence of Ronald Dworkin . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.

Hunt, Alan, ed.

Reading Dworkin Critically . New York: Berg, 1992.

Ripstein, Arthur, ed.

Ronald Dworkin (Contemporary Philosophers in Focus). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.

Wesche, Stefen and Zanetti, Véronique, eds.

Dworkin: Un débat . Paris: Ousia, 2000.

External links [ edit ] NYU Law Faculty profile UCL Faculty of Laws profile Archived 2013-06-15 at the Wayback Machine Ronald Dworkin obituary by The Guardian New York Review of Books archive "Ronald Dworkin – Mr Justice", The Times Literary Supplement , 5 December 2007 "Interpretation and Coherence in Legal Reasoning" at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy "Interpretivist Theories of Law" at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Ronald Dworkin International Balzan Prize Foundation Law's Empire at IMDb Appearances on C-SPAN v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Law%27s_Empire&oldid=1304644892 " Categories : 1986 non-fiction books Books about jurisprudence Books by Ronald Dworkin English-language non-fiction books Philosophy of law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations Webarchive template wayback links People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 08:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Law's Empire 1 language Add topic

