Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of reason 2 Normative reasons Toggle Normative reasons subsection 2.1 Epistemic versus practical reasons 2.1.1 Epistemic reasons in argumentation 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Reason (argument) 14 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Consideration which justifies or explains This article is about factors favoring a belief or action in an argument. For other related topics, see Reasons (disambiguation) . For the human faculty of reason or rationality, see Reason .

In general terms, a reason is a consideration in an argument that justifies or explains an action, belief , attitude , or fact .

[ 1 ] A reason, in many cases, is brought up by the question "why?" and is answered following the word because . Additionally, words and phrases such as since , due to , as , a result of , considering ( that ), and in order ( to ), for example, all serve as explanatory locutions that precede the reason to which they refer.

Normative reasons are appealed to when arguments are made about what one should do or believe. For example, that a doctor's patient is grimacing is a reason to believe that the patient is in pain. That the patient is in pain is a reason for the doctor to take action to alleviate this pain.

Explanatory reasons are explanations of why things happened. For example, the reason that the patient is in pain is that their nerves are sending signals from their tissues to their brain.

Types of reason [ edit ] In philosophy, it is common to distinguish between three kinds of reason.

[ 2 ] Normative or justifying reasons are often said to be "considerations which count in favor" of some state of affairs (this is, at any rate, a common view, notably held by T. M. Scanlon and Derek Parfit ).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Explanatory reasons are considerations which serve to explain why things have happened or why states of affairs are the way they are. In other words, "reason" can also be a synonym for " cause ". For example, a reason a car starts is that its ignition is turned. In the context of explaining the actions of beings who act for reasons (i.e., rational agents ), these are called motivating reasons —e.g., the reason Bill went to college was to learn; i.e., that he would learn was his motivating reason. At least where a rational agent is acting rationally, her motivating reasons are those considerations which she believes count in favor of her so acting.

[ citation needed ] Normative reasons [ edit ] Some philosophers (one being John Broome [ 5 ] ) view normative reasons as the same as "explanations of ought facts". Just as explanatory reasons explain why some descriptive fact obtains (or came to obtain), normative reasons on this view explain why some normative facts obtain, i.e., they explain why some state of affairs ought to come to obtain (e.g., why someone should act or why some event ought to take place).

Epistemic versus practical reasons [ edit ] Philosophers, when discussing reasoning that is influenced by norms , commonly make a distinction between theoretical reason and practical reason .

[ 6 ] These are capacities that draw on epistemic reasons (matters of fact and of explanation) or practical reasons (reasons for action) respectively.  Epistemic reasons (also called theoretical or evidential reasons ) are considerations which count in favor of believing some proposition to be true.  Practical reasons are considerations which count in favor of some action or the having of some attitude (or at least, count in favor of wanting or trying to bring those actions or attitudes about).

Epistemic reasons in argumentation [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In informal logic , a reason consists of either a single premise or co-premises in support of an argument . In formal symbolic logic , only single premises occur. In informal reasoning, two types of reasons exist. An evidential reason is a foundation upon which to believe that or why a claim is true. An explanatory reason attempts to convince someone how something is or could be true, but does not directly convince one that it is true.

See also [ edit ] Is-ought problem Normative Positive statement References [ edit ] ^ Merriam-Webster.com Merriam-Webster Dictionary definition of reason ^ Alvarez, Maria (2017), "Reasons for Action: Justification, Motivation, Explanation" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2017 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2019-01-03 ^ Scanlon, T.M. (2000-11-15).

What We Owe to Each Other . Belknap Press. p.

17 .

ISBN 9780674004238 .

^ Parfit, Derek (January 23, 2009).

On What Matters (forthcoming) (PDF) . Rutgers University. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 31, 2010 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

^ Broome, John. "Reasons". In Reason and Value: Themes from the Moral Philosophy of Joseph Raz.

Edited by R. Jay Wallace et al. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. p. 28.

^ Wallace, R. Jay (2014-01-01).

"Practical Reason" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2014 ed.).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reason_(argument)&oldid=1301203310 " Categories : Arguments Reasoning Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Articles that may contain original research from January 2012 All articles that may contain original research This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 16:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reason (argument) 14 languages Add topic

