Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Chapters 2 Editorial reviews 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents The Portable Atheist 3 languages العربية Español فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2007 anthology The Portable Atheist: Essential Readings for the Nonbeliever Editor Christopher Hitchens Language English Subject Atheism Publisher Da Capo Press Publication date November 2007 Publication place United States Media type Paperback , Audiobook ISBN 978-0-306-81608-6 OCLC 156811900 The Portable Atheist: Essential Readings for the Nonbeliever (2007) is an anthology of atheist and agnostic thought edited by Christopher Hitchens .

Going back to the early Greeks , Hitchens introduces selected essays of past and present philosophers, scientists, and other thinkers such as Lucretius , Benedict de Spinoza , Charles Darwin , Karl Marx , Mark Twain , George Eliot , Bertrand Russell , Emma Goldman , H. L. Mencken , Albert Einstein , Daniel Dennett , Sam Harris , Victor J. Stenger and Richard Dawkins − with original pieces by Salman Rushdie , Ian McEwan , and Ayaan Hirsi Ali .

For Hitchens, "religion invents a problem where none exists by describing the wicked as also made in "the image of god and the sexually nonconformist as existing in a state of incurable mortal sin that can incidentally cause floods and earthquakes." [ 1 ] "The only position that leaves me with no cognitive dissonance is atheism. Death is certain ... Life on this earth, with all its mystery and beauty and pain, is then to be lived far more intensely: we stumble and get up, we are sad, confident, insecure, feel loneliness and joy and love. There is nothing more; but I want nothing more." [ 2 ] Hitchens dedicated the anthology to the memory of Primo Levi and prefaces the book with quotes from Levi's If This Is a Man and The Drowned and the Saved .

Overview [ edit ] For Hitchens, arguments for atheism can be divided into two main categories: those that dispute the existence of God and those that demonstrate the ill effects of religion .

[ 3 ] "Religion", he defines, "is, after all, more than the belief in a supreme being. It is the cult of that supreme being and the belief that his or her wishes have been made known or can be determined." He mentions great critics such as Thomas Jefferson and Thomas Paine , who perhaps paradoxically regarded religion as an insult to God.

"An agnostic does not believe in god, or disbelieve in him", writes Hitchens. Non-belief is not quite unbelief, he explains. "One is continually told, as an unbeliever", he writes, "that it is old-fashioned to rail against the primitive stupidities and cruelties of religion because after all, in these enlightened times, the old superstitions have died away. Nine times out of ten, one will be told not of some dogma of religious certitude but of some instance of charitable or humanitarian work undertaken by a religious person. Of course, this says nothing about the belief system involved." Hitchens points out that if Louis Farrakhan 's Nation of Islam (NoI) succeeds in weaning young black men off narcotics, this would not alter the fact that the NoI is a racist crackpot organization. He reminds readers that Hamas – which publishes The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion on its website – won a reputation for its provision of social services. He challenges: which ethical statement made or which action performed by a believer could not have been made or performed by a non-believer?

Chapters [ edit ] Hitchens and Richard Dawkins Lucretius : De rerum natura ( On the Nature of Things ) – Books I, II, III, V,  translation by W. Hannaford Brown Omar Khayyám : Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám : A Paraphrase from Several Literal Translations by Richard Le Gallienne Thomas Hobbes : "Of Religion", from Leviathan Benedict de Spinoza : Theological-Political Treatise David Hume : " The Natural History of Religion ", " Of Miracles " James Boswell : "An Account of My Last Interview with David Hume, Esq." Percy Bysshe Shelley : "A Refutation of Deism" John Stuart Mill : "Moral Influences in My Early Youth", from Autobiography Karl Marx : Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right George Eliot : "Evangelical Teaching" Charles Darwin : Autobiography Leslie Stephen : "An Agnostic's Apology" Anatole France : "Miracle" from Le Jardin d'Épicure Mark Twain : "Thoughts of God", from Fables of Man ; "Bible Teaching and Religious Practice", from Europe and Elsewhere and A Pen Warmed Up in Hell Joseph Conrad : author's note to The Shadow Line Thomas Hardy : poem "God's Funeral" Emma Goldman : "The Philosophy of Atheism" H. P. Lovecraft : "A Letter on Religion" Carl Van Doren : "Why I Am an Unbeliever" from Twelve Modern Apostles and Their Creeds H. L. Mencken : "Memorial Service" from A Mencken Chrestomathy Sigmund Freud : from The Future of an Illusion , translated and edited by James Strachey Albert Einstein : Selected Writings on Religion George Orwell : From A Clergyman's Daughter John Betjeman : poem "In Westminster Abbey" Chapman Cohen : "Monism and Religion" and "An Old Story" from Essays in Freethinking Bertrand Russell : "An Outline of Intellectual Rubbish" Philip Larkin : poems "Aubade" and "Church Going" Martin Gardner : "The Wandering Jew and the Second Coming" Carl Sagan : The Demon-Haunted World , and "The God Hypothesis" from The Varieties of Scientific Experience John Updike : from Roger's Version J. L. Mackie : "Conclusions and Implications", from The Miracle of Theism: Arguments for and against the Existence of God Michael Shermer : "Genesis Revisited: A Scientific Creation Story" A. J. Ayer : "That Undiscovered Country" Daniel C. Dennett : "Thank Goodness!" Charles Templeton : "A Personal Word" from A Farewell to God , and "Questions to Ask Yourself" Richard Dawkins : "Why There Almost Certainly Is No God" from The God Delusion , " Gerin oil ", and "Atheists for Jesus" Victor Stenger : "Cosmic Evidence" from God: The Failed Hypothesis Daniel C. Dennett : "A Working Definition of Religion" from Breaking Which Spell?

Elizabeth Anderson : "If God is Dead, Is Everything Permitted?" Penn Jillette : "There Is No God" Ian McEwan : "End of the World Blues" (original contribution) Steven Weinberg : "What About God?" from Dreams of a Final Theory Salman Rushdie : " 'Imagine There's no Heaven': A Letter to the Six Billionth World Citizen" (updated and expanded) Ibn Warraq : "The Koran" and "The Totalitarian Nature of Islam" from Why I Am Not a Muslim Sam Harris : "In the Shadow of God", from The End of Faith A. C. Grayling : "Can an Atheist Be a Fundamentalist?" from Against All Gods Ayaan Hirsi Ali : How (and Why) I Became an Infidel (original contribution) Editorial reviews [ edit ] Hitchens believes we will never cure ourselves of this belief in the divine and the only hope of salvation lies in "our contempt for our own weakness". At 500 pages this excellent anthology is only just portable, but it is the perfect Christmas stocking-filler for the atheist in your life.

— PD Smith, The Guardian [ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ "October 08 Book Club Meeting" .

Humanist Society of Santa Barbara . Archived from the original on 15 April 2013 . Retrieved 3 March 2021 .

^ Megan Gibson (16 December 2011).

"Christopher Hitchens (1949–2011): A Career in Quotes" .

Time . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ "Excerpt from The Portable Atheist " .

USA Today . 1 November 2007.

^ PD Smith (9 December 2007).

"Non-fiction: Dec 8" .

The Guardian .

External links [ edit ] The Portable Atheist , Da Capo Press 2007 v t e Christopher Hitchens Bibliography Political views Works written Imperial Spoils Blood, Class, and Nostalgia The Missionary Position Prepared for the Worst No One Left to Lie To Unacknowledged Legislation Letters to a Young Contrarian The Trial of Henry Kissinger Why Orwell Matters A Long Short War Love, Poverty, and War Thomas Jefferson: Author of America Thomas Paine's "Rights of Man": A Biography God Is Not Great Hitch-22 Arguably Mortality Works edited Blaming the Victims The Portable Atheist Other 57901 Hitchens Hell's Angel The Trials of Henry Kissinger Peter Hitchens Hitchens's razor v t e New Atheism Key people Dan Barker Peter Boghossian Greta Christina Jerry Coyne Richard Dawkins Daniel Dennett Rebecca Goldstein Sam Harris Christopher Hitchens TJ Kirk Michel Onfray Victor J. Stenger Michael Schmidt-Salomon Rebecca Watson Former New Atheists Ayaan Hirsi Ali PZ Myers Major works The End of Faith (2004) Atheist Manifesto (2005) Manifesto of Evolutionary Humanism (2005) Breaking the Spell (2006) The God Delusion (2006) Letter to a Christian Nation (2006) The Root of All Evil?

(2006) God Is Not Great (2007) God: The Failed Hypothesis (2007) The Portable Atheist (2007) Godless (2008) Institutions The Clergy Project Pitchstone Publishing Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science Opposition " Go God Go " (2006) Darwin's Angel (2007) The Dawkins Delusion?

(2007) The Irrational Atheist (2008) Atheist Delusions (2009) The Case for God (2009) Unscientific America (2009) The Rage Against God (2010) The Evolution of Atheism (2015) Related Blasphemy Day Ex-Muslims Flying Spaghetti Monster Out Campaign RationalWiki Reason Rally Regressive left Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Portable_Atheist&oldid=1257957275 " Categories : 2007 non-fiction books Antitheism Books about atheism Books by Christopher Hitchens Books critical of Christianity Books critical of Islam Books critical of religion New Atheism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 November 2024, at 11:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Portable Atheist 3 languages Add topic

