Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Features Toggle Features subsection 3.1 Admission and treatment of all 3.2 Hygiene 3.3 Education 4 Function and organization 5 Notable Islamic hospitals Toggle Notable Islamic hospitals subsection 5.1 Baghdad 5.1.1 Al-Adudi Hospital 5.2 Cairo 5.2.1 Al-Fustat Hospital 5.2.2 Al-Mansuri Hospital 5.3 Damascus 5.3.1 Al-Walid Hospital 5.3.2 Al-Nuri Hospital 5.4 Other notable bimaristans in the Islamic world 6 Advancements in medicine Toggle Advancements in medicine subsection 6.1 Al-Mawsili and Ibn Isa 6.2 Al-Zahrawi 6.3 Al-Razi (Rhazes) 6.4 Ibn Sina (Avicenna) 6.5 Other Notable Scholars 7 Legacy and aftermath Toggle Legacy and aftermath subsection 7.1 Separate wards 7.2 Medical records 7.3 Education and qualification 7.4 Pharmacology 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Bimaristan 14 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Bahasa Melayu Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски ไทย Türkçe Zazaki Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Healthcare center in the Islamic World Reconstruction of the Nasrid Bimaristan of Granada , in Spain (former al-Andalus ) A bimaristan ( Persian : بيمارستان , romanized : bīmārestān ; Arabic : بِيْمَارِسْتَان , romanized : bīmāristān ), or simply maristan , [ clarification needed ] known in Arabic also as dar al-shifa ("house of healing"; darüşşifa in Turkish ), is a hospital in the historic Islamic world . Its origins can be traced back to Sassanian Empire prior to the Muslim conquest of Persia .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The word "bimaristan" is still used in the dialect of Persian spoken in Iran for hospitals.

Etymology [ edit ] Bimarestān is a New Persian word inherited from Middle Persian : 𐭥𐭩𐭬𐭠𐭫𐭮𐭲𐭠𐭭 , romanized: wēmārestān , from wēmār "sick, ill person" plus the suffix -stan "place, location." [ 1 ] [ 3 ] In English literature , the term designates institutions of medicine in the medieval Islamic world . It is still used sometimes in languages of Persianate societies to refer to modern hospitals or specific types of medical institutions.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Main articles: History of medicine and History of hospitals Many centers of health in antiquity helped shape the ways Muslim scholars would pursue the study and advancement of medical science .

Mobile hospitals were the first version of the bimaristans.

[ 5 ] These mobile hospitals carried medications , food, and water, and traveled with physicians and pharmacists to aid those in need.

[ 5 ] According to tradition, the first bimaristan was located in a tent set up by Rufaidah al-Asalmia in 627 CE during the Battle of Khandaq .

[ 5 ] Later on, these mobile care centers would evolve from one or two tents to enormous units of medical care equipped with medicinal herbs, food, physicians, and pharmacists.  Under the Seljuq Sultanate reign of Muhammad Saljuqi, a single mobile care center required 40 camels for transportation.

[ 6 ] The idea was to be able to better extend medical care to rural communities that lived on the outskirts of major cities.

[ 5 ] The services provided from the mobile hospitals transitioned into the other Islamic hospitals as time went on.

Though the Islamic realm was very large, Baghdad , Damascus , and Cairo housed the most well-known bimaristans.

[ 1 ] The first six bimaristans show major changes within Islamic hospitals in a short period of time.

[ 7 ] The first bimaristan, built in 706 in Damascus by the Umayyad Caliph Al-Walid , focused on treating individuals with leprosy , but served patients with other concerns as well.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] Around the same period, the second bimaristan was built in Cairo, quickly followed by two more in Baghdad, including the first documented general hospital.

[ 1 ] More were soon built by Abbasid Caliph Harun al-Rashid .

[ 7 ] [ 1 ] Features [ edit ] Admission and treatment of all [ edit ] As hospitals developed during the Islamic civilization, specific characteristics were maintained. For instance, Bimaristans served all people regardless of their race, religion, citizenship, or gender.

[ 8 ] The Waqf documents stated nobody was ever to be turned away.

[ 9 ] This included those with mental illnesses or disorders—in Aleppo 's Arghun Hospital, for example, care for mental illness included abundant light, fresh air, running water and music.

[ 10 ] [ better source needed ] The ultimate goal of all physicians and hospital staff was to work together to help the well-being of their patients.

[ 9 ] There was no time limit a patient could spend as an inpatient.

[ 11 ] Instead, waqf documents stated the hospital was required to keep all patients until they were fully recovered.

[ 8 ] Men and women were admitted to separate but equally equipped wards.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The separate wards were further divided to address mental illnesses , contagious diseases , non-contagious diseases, surgery , medicine , and eye diseases .

[ 9 ] [ 11 ] Patients were attended to by nurses and staff of their same gender.

[ 11 ] Each hospital contained a lecture hall , kitchen, pharmacy, library, mosque and occasionally a chapel for Christian patients.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Recreational materials and musicians were often employed to comfort and cheer patients up.

[ 11 ] Hygiene [ edit ] The Qur'an provided the basis for the development of professional ethics. The rise of washing to attain ritual purity in Islam and in in Judaism also influenced the importance of hygiene in medical practice. The importance of hygiene promotes healthy lifestyles and cuts down on disease by enticing communities to create hygienic infrastructures. Bimaristans promoted hygiene by regularly bathing patients and staff, providing clean bedding and medical materials, and through their architecture, which promoted air circulation and bright, open lighting.

[ 13 ] Pharmacies were periodically visited by government inspectors called muhtasib , who checked to see that the medicines were mixed properly, not diluted and kept in clean jars. Additionally, Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi , who was once asked to choose the site for a new hospital in Baghdad , suspended pieces of meat at various points around the city and recommended building the hospital at the location where the meat putrefied the slowest.

[ 14 ] Education [ edit ] The various Quranic injunctions and Hadith (or actions of Muhammad ), which place values on education and emphasize the importance of acquiring knowledge, played a vital role in influencing the Muslims of this age in their search for knowledge and the development of the body of science.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Bimaristans were not only used to provide care for individuals. They were also educational institutions meant to advance medical students' knowledge in the medical field , especially in cities like Baghdad, Damascus, and Cairo.

[ 18 ] Some madrasas were also closely linked with bimaristans so that students could learn in the institutions and put their theoretical knowledge directly into practice.

[ 19 ] Basic science preparation was learned through private tutors, self-study and lectures. Many of these hospitals also contained a conjoined library typically filled with any possible writings that may be relevant to the medicine practiced in the hospitals.

[ 20 ] Physicians in these proto-medical schools were not exclusively Muslim; Jewish and Christian physicians also practiced and taught.

[ 21 ] In the major hospitals at Cairo, Baghdad, and Damascus, students often visited patients while under the supervision of a practicing physician—a system comparable to a medical residency today. Like in today's medical training programs, working and learning in the bimaristans under the supervision of practicing physicians allowed medical students to gain hands-on experience treating various ailments and responding to a multitude of situations.

[ 3 ] During this era, physician licensure became mandatory in the Abbasid Caliphate.

[ 11 ] In 931 CE, Caliph Al-Muqtadir learned of the death of one of his subjects as a result of a physician's error.

[ 12 ] He immediately ordered his muhtasib Sinan ibn Thabit to examine and prevent doctors from practicing until they passed an examination.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] From this time on, licensing exams were required and only qualified physicians were allowed to practice medicine.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The early Islamicate empires, while on their quest for knowledge, translated the work of early pre-Islamic times from empires such as Rome, Greece, Pahlavi, and Sanskrit into Arabic, before this translation the work had been lost and perhaps it may have been lost forever.

[ 22 ] The discovery of this new information exposed the Islamicate empires to large amounts of scientific research and discoveries. Arabs translated a variety of different topics throughout science including Greek and Roman research in medicine and pharmacology. Translated artifacts such as medical dictionaries and books containing information on hygiene and sexual intercourse are still preserved. Perhaps one of the most notable translated pieces is a human anatomy book translated from Greek to Arabic by Muslim physician, Avicenna, the book was used in schools in the West until the mid-17th century.

[ 23 ] Function and organization [ edit ] One of the most remarkable contributions of the Islamic hospitals was the organizational structure itself and how it functioned in Islamic culture. These contributions still influence contemporary medical practice. For example, bimaristans kept written records of patients and their medical treatment—the first written medical histories for patients.

[ 9 ] Students were responsible in keeping these patient records, which were later edited by doctors and referenced in future treatments.

[ 11 ] The first documented general hospital arose in Baghdad in 805, built by the caliph Harun al-Rashid and his vizier , Yahya ibn Khalid .

[ 24 ] [ 19 ] Although not much is known about this hospital due to poor documentation, the system of the general hospital itself set forth an example for the many other hospitals to come. By the year 1000, Baghdad had five more hospitals.

[ 25 ] As new hospitals were built throughout the Islamic world, they followed similar organizational structures to the hospital in Baghdad.

The typical hospital was divided into departments such as systemic diseases, surgery, and orthopedics, with larger hospitals having more diverse specialties. "Systemic diseases" was the rough equivalent of today's internal medicine and was further divided into sections such as fever, infections and digestive issues.

[ 20 ] Every department had an officer-in-charge, a presiding officer and a supervising specialist. The hospitals also had lecture theaters and libraries. Hospitals staff included sanitary inspectors, who regulated cleanliness, and accountants and other administrative staff.

[ 10 ] The hospitals were typically run by a three-person board comprising a non-medical administrator, the chief pharmacist, called the shaykh saydalani, who was equal in rank to the chief physician, who served as mutwalli ( dean ).

[ 26 ] [ better source needed ] Medical facilities traditionally closed each night, but by the 10th century laws had been passed to keep hospitals open 24 hours a day.

[ 27 ] Both men and women worked in these hospitals, including as physicians, but hospital staff had a worked in a range of professions.

[ 28 ] Much like today's hospitals, they also relied on pharmacists, nurses, sanitary inspectors, supervising specialists, secretaries, and superintendents. The superintendents, or in Arabic, sa'ur, ensured that hospitals met certain standards in addition to managing the entire hospital institution.

[ 20 ] Pharmacists produced drugs as means for treatment of the hospitals' patients; they relied on a knowledge of chemistry , or Alchemia .

[ 20 ] Before the 10th century, hospitals operated throughout the day and closed at night. Later hospitals operated on a 24-hour basis. Nonetheless, the practicing physicians worked a set number of hours with their salaries prescribed by law; the physicians were paid generously enough so as to retain their talent. Chief of staff physician, Jabril ibn Bukhtishu , was salaried 4.9 million Dirham ; for comparison, a medical resident worked significantly longer hours salaried at 300 Dirham per month.

[ 20 ] Islamic hospitals attained their endowment through charitable donations or bequests, called waqfs.

The legal documents establishing a waqf also set forth rules for how the hospital should be organized and operate in relation to the patient, stating that anyone could be admitted regardless of race, gender, or citizenship.

[ 29 ] Patients of all socioeconomic statuses would have had access to full treatment as all costs were borne by the hospital itself. An example was the Al-Mansuri Hospital in Cairo, built under the orders of the Mamluk ruler of Egypt , Al-Mansur Qalawun . Its maximum capacity was around 8000 people and the annual endowment alone was said to be one-million Dirhams . The design was intended to accommodate various pathologies for both men and women as well as a pharmacy, a library, and lecture halls. The lecture halls were used for regular meetings on the status of the hospital, lecturing residents, and staff as well.

Notable Islamic hospitals [ edit ] The Hospital ( Darüşşifa ) and Great Mosque in Divriği , Turkey Baghdad [ edit ] The existence of hospitals in Baghdad has been documented since the 9th century CE, with the first having most likely been established in 805 by the caliph Harun al-Rashid and his vizier , Yahya ibn Khalid .

[ 24 ] It is considered the first fully integrated hospital in history and one of the oldest comprehensive healthcare institutions that combined medical care, education, and scientific research. It is estimated to have remained operational until at least the early 13th century CE.

[ 30 ] By the end of the 10th century CE, five more hospitals had been built in Baghdad.

[ 1 ] Al-Adudi Hospital [ edit ] Main article: Al-'Adudi Hospital Founded in 981 by the then ruler of Baghdad, Adud al-Dawlah , this hospital was administered by al-Razi , who also chose its location along the Tigris River .

[ 31 ] He determined where it should be located by "hanging a piece of meat in several places for a few days and deciding in favor of the place where meat was found to be least infected." [ 31 ] At its inception, the Al-Adudi Hospital had twenty-five staff members, specializing in fields ranging from optics to surgery. In addition to these specialists, the Al-Adudi Hospital also served as a teaching hospital for new doctors. The Al-Adudi Hospital remained operational into the 12th century CE when, in 1184, it was described as "...being like an enormous palace in size." [ 1 ] Ultimately, the Al-Adudi Hospital was destroyed in 1258 by Mongols led by Hulagu Khan in the siege of Baghdad.

[ 31 ] Cairo [ edit ] Sultan al-Mansur Qalawun's funerary complex in Cairo, Egypt, whose main component was a famous bimaristan (partly ruined today) The Maristan of Sultan al-Mu'ayyad Shaykh , Cairo Al-Fustat Hospital [ edit ] One of the first Egyptian hospitals was the Al-Fustat Hospital, which was founded in 872 CE. It was founded by Ahmed ibn Tulun and was located in Fustat , located in what is now modern Cairo. The Al-Fustat Hospital shared many common features with modern hospitals. Among these were bath houses separated by gender, separate wards and the safekeeping of personal items during a patient's convalescence .

[ 31 ] [ 7 ] In addition to these practices, the Al-Fustat Hospital is the first to have offered treatment for mental disorders.

[ 1 ] Beyond the practice of medicine, the Al-Fustat Hospital was also a teaching hospital and housed approximately 100,000 books. Another key feature of the Al-Fustat Hospital was that it offered all treatment for free. This was made possible by waqf revenue, and the Al-Fustat Hospital was likely the first hospital endowed in this way.

[ 7 ] Near the Al-Fustat Hospital, Ibn-Tulum also established a pharmacy to provide medical care in emergencies.

[ 7 ] The Al-Fustat Hospital remained in operation for approximately 600 years.

[ 31 ] Al-Mansuri Hospital [ edit ] Main article: Qalawun complex The Al-Mansuri Hospital was another hospital located in Cairo, and was completed in 1284 CE. Its founder, Al-Mansur Qalawun, was inspired to establish a hospital after his own experience being hospitalized in Damascus.

[ 31 ] Because of Al-Mansur's vision for the hospital, treatment was free to make the hospital accessible to both the rich and the poor. Furthermore, "...upon discharge the patient was given food and money as a compensation for the wages he lost during his stay in the hospital." [ 31 ] The Al-Mansuri Hospital was so accessible, in fact, that it treated roughly 4,000 patients every day. The Al-Mansuri Hospital was a groundbreaking institution and acted as a model for future bimaristans to come.

The Al-Mansuri Hospital was substantial, both in size and endowments. This hospital had the capability of holding 8000 beds and was funded off of annual endowments totaling one million dirhams .

[ 3 ] Like the Al-Fustat Hospital before it, the Al-Mansuri Hospital also treated mental patients and introduced music as a form of therapy . The Al-Mansuri also obtained the personal library of Ibn al-Nafis upon his death in 1258.

[ 32 ] The Al-Mansuri Hospital remained operational through the 15th century CE and still stands in Cairo today, though it is now known as " Mustashfa Qalawun ." [ 1 ] [ 31 ] Damascus [ edit ] Entrance portal of the Nur al-Din Bimaristan in Damascus, Syria Courtyard of the Arghun al-Kamili Bimaristan in Aleppo , Syria Al-Walid Hospital [ edit ] Damascus is credited with being the home of the first bimaristan, which was established between 706 and 707. Founded by al-Walid I , this hospital was meant to serve as a treatment center for both those with chronic illnesses, like leprosy and blindness, as well as the poor.

[ 7 ] This began with al-Walid gathering lepers and preventing them from spreading the illness by providing them with money. This was done so they would not beg strangers for money, thus curtailing the spread of leprosy.

[ 33 ] To accomplish these objectives, separate wards existed for infectious diseases such as leprosy, and patients faced no cost to receive treatment. The Al-Walid Hospital has been compared to the Byzantine nosokomion ( νοσοκομεῖον ) or "clinic", a charitable institution tasked with treating "the sick, the lepers, the invalid, and the poor." [ 7 ] Al-Nuri Hospital [ edit ] The Bimaristan of Nur al-Din or Al-Nuri Hospital was founded in Damascus nearly four and a half centuries after the Al-Walid Hospital, in 1156 CE. It was named after Nur al-Din Zanji. The Al-Nuri Hospital, which operated for some 700 years, was the same hospital where Al-Mansur Qalawun was treated and inspired to establish his own hospital in Cairo. The Al-Nuri Hospital, in addition to bringing about the Al-Mansuri hospital, was innovative in its practices as it became the first hospital to begin maintaining medical records of its patients.

[ 31 ] The Al-Nuri Hospital was also a prestigious medical school, with one of its most noteworthy students being Ibn al-Nafis, who would later pioneer the theory of pulmonary circulation.

[ 31 ] Exterior of the Sultan Bayezid II complex in Edirne , Turkey A bimaristan (the Darüşşifa or Bimarhane ), Amasya , Turkey Other notable bimaristans in the Islamic world [ edit ] Maristan of Sidi Frej in Fes , Morocco The Nasrid Bimaristan of Granada , Spain Maristan of al-Mu'ayyad , Cairo, Egypt Divriği Great Mosque 's adjoining Turan Melek Sultan Darüşşifa in Divriği , Turkey Sultan Bayezid II complex in Edirne , Turkey Darüşşifa and Medrese ( medical school ) of Gevher Nesibe in Kayseri , Turkey Şifaiye Medrese ( medical school ) and Darüşşifa in Sivas , Turkey Advancements in medicine [ edit ] With the development and existence of early Islamic hospitals came the need for new ways to treat patients. Bamiristans brought forth many groundbreaking medical advancements in Islamic culture during this time, which eventually spread to the entire world through trade and intellectual exchange. Distinguished physicians of this era pioneered revolutionary procedures and practices in surgeries, techniques, discoveries, and cures for ailments and the invention of countless medical instruments. Among the many developments stemming from Islamic hospitals were those designed to treat specific ailments, diseases, and anatomy.

Al-Mawsili and Ibn Isa [ edit ] Ammar al-Mawsili , a 10th-century physician and ophthalmologist , developed a revolutionary treatment for cataracts .

[ 34 ] The practice included a hollow syringe (which he developed) and removing the cataract through suction.  Although this procedure has further developed throughout the centuries, the basic treatment remains the same even today.

[ 35 ] Diseases of the eye were further explored during this era by ʻAli ibn ʻIsa al-Kahhal or Ibn Isa (died c. 1038), who practiced and taught in the Al-Adudi Hospital in Baghdad. He wrote and developed the Tadhkirat al-kaḥḥālīn ("The Notebook of the Oculist"), [ 34 ] which detailed more than 130 eye diseases based on anatomical location.

[ 36 ] The work was separated into three portions consisting of: Anatomy of the eye Causes, symptoms and treatments of diseases, Less apparent diseases and their treatments.

[ 34 ] This work was translated into Latin in 1497, and then into several other languages which allowed it to benefit the medical community for centuries to come.

[ 35 ] Al-Zahrawi [ edit ] Perhaps the largest contribution to Islamic surgical development came from Abū al-Qāsim Khalaf ibn al-‘Abbās al-Zahrāwī , also known as Abū al-Qāsim or Al-Zahrawi (936–1013). He contributed to advancements in surgery by inventing and developing over 200 medical instruments which constituted the first independent work on surgery.

[ 37 ] Such instruments included tools like forceps , pincers , scalpels , catheters , cauteries , lancets, and specula , which were accompanied by detailed drawings of each tool.

[ 35 ] Al-Zahrawi also wrote the At-Taṣrīf limanʿajazʿan at-Taʾālīf , or At-Taṣrīf ("The Method"), which was a 30-part text based on earlier authorities, such as the Epitomae from the 7th-century Byzantine physician Paul of Aegina . It was largely composed of medical observations, including what is considered the earliest known description of hemophilia .

[ 37 ] The 30-volume encyclopedia also documented Zahrawi and his colleagues' experiences with treatment of the ill or afflicted. Aside from the documentation of surgical instruments, the work included operating techniques, pharmacological methods to prepare tablets and drugs to protect the heart, surgical procedures used in midwifery, cauterizing and healing wounds, and the treatment of headaches.

[ 35 ] Although Zahrawi was somewhat disregarded by hospitals and physicians in the eastern Caliphate [ 37 ] (no doubt due to his Spanish roots, being near Córdoba, Spain ), his advancement and documentation of medical tools and observations contained in his work had a vast influence on the eventual medical development in Christian Europe, when it was translated into Latin during the 12th century.

[ 35 ] Al-Razi (Rhazes) [ edit ] The Abbasid Caliphate in Baghdad underwent extreme intellectual and medical experimentation during the 10th and 11th centuries.

[ 35 ] Among the many skilled physicians and intellectuals there was Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn Zakariyyāʾ al-Rāzī , or in Latin, Rhazes ( c.

865–925). Rhazes served as chief physician in a hospital in Rayy , Iran, before holding a similar position in the Baghdad hospital. He developed two significant works regarding advancements in medicine and philosophy. The Kitāb al-Manṣūrī and the Kitāb al-ḥāwī , ("Comprehensive Book") which surveyed early Greek, Syrian, and Arabic medicine, and added his own judgement and commentary. He also wrote several minor treatises, perhaps the most famous being Treatise on Small Pox and Measles . This treatise was translated into several modern languages as well as Latin and Byzantine Greek for teaching purposes and medical treatment of such infectious diseases.

[ 38 ] Abu-Bakr al-Razi was instrumental in improving the medical education within hospitals and was credited with the creation of 'ward rounds,' which served as a teaching method for the medical students within the hospital.

[ 39 ] The ward rounds consisted of several rounds of questions designated for students with different levels of medical expertise to answer.

[ 39 ] In the first round, students were expected to answer medical questions having to do with the current cases.

[ 39 ] The second round was designated for students with more experience to answer the remaining, more complex questions.

[ 39 ] Finally, if questions still remained after round two, al-Razi would provide answers and often document his findings.

[ 39 ] Abu-Bakr al-Razi has been credited with writing more than 200 books and treatises throughout his life.

[ 39 ] Ibn Sina (Avicenna) [ edit ] Although surgical developments and advancements made in the medieval Islamic period are of extreme importance, the largest and most wholesome contribution to the medical world stemming from Islamic medicine and hospitals came from the Baghdad firmament from Ibn Sina , or "Avicenna" in the West.

[ 35 ] Ibn Sina, who had already become a doctor by the age of 18, developed the Al-Qanun fi al-Tibb ( Canon of Medicine ).

[ 35 ] This work is largely known as one of the most famous medical works of all time. The ways in which Ibn Sina's Canon of Medicine worked to bring together various disciplines and cultures, essentially revived Greek authors and philosophers and fostered new thought patterns to develop much of the future medical practices we see today. Ibn Sina did this by combining the medical developments of Greek physician and philosopher Galen , with the philosophy of Aristotle .

[ 35 ] Furthermore, as Islamic medicine recognized that many diseases are contagious, such as leprosy, smallpox , and sexually transmitted diseases , Ibn Sina recognized tuberculosis as a contagious disease, among others which can be spread through soil and water.

[ 40 ] The Canon of Medicine continued to be studied by European medical professionals and institutions even into the 18th century. This combination and rationalization of practical science, religion, and thought highlighted the pinnacle of Muslim medical scholarship, and the nature of the true developments which were made in the medical world.

[ 35 ] In addition to his work with Canon of Medicine, Ibn Sina served as a trailblazer for 'holistic medicine,' making an emphasis on the patient as a whole, not just focusing on one certain aspect when diagnosing.

[ 41 ] While Ibn Sina looked at a patient's medical symptoms, there was also focus on the patient's nutrition, emotional health, and environmental surroundings when coming up with a diagnosis.

[ 41 ] Ibn Sina also had the belief that anatomy served as the cornerstone of medicine.

[ 41 ] Ibn Sina was the first known physician to use a flexible catheter with the purpose of irrigating the bladder and combatting urinary retention in the human body.

[ 41 ] Ibn Sina was groundbreaking in his recognition of esophageal cancer, ligation of bleeding arteries, the anatomy of nerves and tendons, compartment syndrome following injury to human appendages, and the idea that arterial repair would one day be possible.

[ 41 ] Other Notable Scholars [ edit ] Hunayn ibn Ishaq , an Arab Nestorian Christian translator, scholar, physician, and scientist, was viewed as a mediator between Greek sciences and Arabs due to his translations of multiple documents that were tremendously important.

[ 2 ] Ibn al-Nafis , an Arab polymath whose areas of work included medicine , surgery , physiology , anatomy , biology , Islamic studies , jurisprudence , and philosophy was also a physician and an author, [ 2 ] was most known for his commentary on pulmonary circulation .

[ 18 ] Mir Mu’min Husayni Tunikabuni , a 17th-century Persian scholar, focused on how yogic breath control can control the humors .

[ 18 ] Legacy and aftermath [ edit ] While people used to learn medicine by traveling, working in their homes, in madrasas, or in hospitals, people learned that bimaristans were one of the most helpful institutions for people to learn in. They had all the resources and teachers available at all times, which made it a very convenient place to learn and teach in. Bimaristans paved the way for many medical institutions.

[ 42 ] Much of the legacy surrounding the Islamic influence on modern hospitals and science can be found in the discoveries, techniques, and practices introduced by scholars and physicians working in these hospitals between the tenth and nineteenth century.  This time period was extremely important to the advancement of modern medicinal practices, and is known as one of the greatest periods of development. Many of these discoveries laid the foundation for medical development in Europe, and are still common practice in modern medicine. Among these discoveries in astronomy, chemistry, and metallurgy, scholars developed techniques for medicine such as the distillation and use of alcohol as an antiseptic, which is still being used in hospitals today. Not only did these discoveries lead to lasting improvements in medicine in the Muslim world, but through the influence of early Islamic and Arabian hospitals, medical institutions around the world were introduced to various new concepts and structures, increasing the efficiency and cleanliness which can still be found in modern-day institutions.

Some of these influential concepts include the implementation of separate wards based on disease and gender, pharmacies, housing of medical records, and the education associated with practicing medicine. Prior to the Islamic era, most European medical care was offered by priests in sanatoriums and annexes to temples. Islamic hospitals revolutionized this by being operated secularly and through a government entity, rather than being solely operated by the church.

[ 43 ] This introduction of government operated hospitals lead to not having any discrimination against people for any reason allowing the hospital to solely focus on their main goal of serving all people and working together to help everyone out.

Bimaristans were some of the first known hospitals to have been built and truly served a purpose to the people around them. They became established centers for patient care, a main source of medical education for students, and a form of practical training for all doctors and physicians that were working within the bimaristans.

[ 3 ] They documented how the centers ran: how medical records were kept safe, how doctors and physicians became properly licensed, and how upkeep was maintained so that the hospitals could continue to serve the patients that needed many different forms of help. Later hospitals were modelled from the original bimaristans, which shows that they were well-run centers that served a great purpose to the people in surrounding areas. Western hospitals may not be what they are today without the history of early medical practices in bimaristans [ 3 ] Separate wards [ edit ] Islamic hospitals also brought about the idea of separate wards or segments of the hospital that were separated by patient diagnostic.  When Islamic hospitals first brought this about, not only were the wards separated by diagnostic but by sex as well.

[ 44 ] While hospitals today are not as strict and do not separate by sex anymore, they still separate people by disease or problem.  By doing so, different wings could specialize in certain treatments specific to their patient.  This practice not only still exists today in modern hospitals but also lead to the advancement of treatments back then that now comprise the " Canon of Medicine ."  This separation of diseases not only helped the timely treatment of patients but also helped the patients and physicians from getting sick with other diseases that surrounded them because they only had to worry about the prevention of one disease.  By separating patients, the specialization of certain wings and treatments really advanced the medicine and improved the efficiency of hospitals ultimately leading to how modern day hospitals are designed.

Medical records [ edit ] With Islamic hospitals advancing medicine so quickly, they needed a way to catalogue all of their findings which in the end lead to the first medical records.

[ citation needed ] This made hospitals more efficient as they were able to check records of other patients for people that had similar symptoms and, hopefully, treat them the same way they were able to with the other patients.  Not only did physicians keep medical records but they kept notes on patients and provided them for peer review as a way to not be held responsible for malpractice.

[ 45 ] This information also enabled physicians to start to notice patterns in patients more making the medicinal practices more accurate as everything is with more trials.  The efficiency gained from keeping records allowed hospitals to run more smoothly and treat patients faster.  This information also enabled physicians to start to notice patterns in patients more making the medicinal practices more accurate as everything is with more trials.  This keeping of records ultimately lead to the accumulation of the " Canon of Medicine ", which is a book of medicine compiled by the Persian philosopher Avicenna (Ibn Sina) that was completed in 1025.

Education and qualification [ edit ] Another legacy that vastly changed the way through which medical practices were developed, was the method of education and perpetuation of medical knowledge.  Islamic hospitals modernized the qualification of physicians and education leading to a license to practice medicine in hospitals. In 931 CE, Caliph Al-Muqtadir started the movement of licensing physicians by telling Siban Ibn Thabit to only give physician licenses to qualified people. The origin of Caliph Al-Muqtadir's order to Siban Ibn-Thabit was due to the fact that a patient had previously died in Baghdad as a consequence of a physician's error.

[ 3 ] Siban Ibn-Thabit was tasked with examining each of the 860 practicing physicians at the time, resulting in the failure of 160 and setting a new precedent within the medical world.

[ 3 ] From this point on, physicians were required to pass licensing examinations prior to being able to practice medicine.

[ 3 ] In an effort to properly enforce licensing examination, the position of 'Muhtasib' was established.

[ 3 ] The Muhtasib was a government official who administered oral and practical licensing examinations to young physicians.

[ 3 ] If the young physician was successful in proving his professional competence through the examinations, the Muhtasib would administer the Hippocratic Oath and a license allowing the physician to legally practice medicine.

[ 3 ] Seeing as how one of the chief objectives of Islamic hospitals was the training of new physicians or students, senior physicians, and other medical officers would often hold instructive seminars in large lecture halls detailing diseases, cures, treatments, and techniques from class manuscripts.  Islamic hospitals were also the first to adopt practices involving medical students, accompanied by experienced physicians, into the wards for rounds to participate in patient care.

[ 43 ] Hospitals doubling as schools not only provided hospitals with more fresh working hands but also helped in the advancement of medicine.  Education in hospitals during the Islamic period modernized hospitals today in that now before people can become doctors they must complete a period of residency in which students study at a hospital and job shadow licensed physicians for a number of years before they are fully able to become licensed physicians.

[ 43 ] This came at a time when much of Europe's medical practices were much less advanced, and with the compilation and creation of Avicenna 's (Ibn Sina) medical textbook, The Canon of Medicine , these groundbreaking Islamic discoveries were able to influence Europe and the rest of the world for centuries to come.

Pharmacology [ edit ] During the Islamic Golden Age , the Graeco-Arabic translation movement aimed to provide classical texts in Arabic. Some of the books that impacted the field were Tarkib-Al-Advieh, about mixtures of drugs, Kitāb fī al-adwiya al-mufrada by ibn al-Jazzar , which was written about single drugs; Ghova-Al-Aghzieh, which concerned the potency of food for medicine; al-Adwiyah Ao Al-dava, Al-Oram which concerned swellings of the body; and Kitāb al-Diryāq "The Book of Theriac ".

[ 46 ] Through readings, Islamic doctors were able to find drugs that they could use to help treat patients.

[ 47 ] One of the most notable contributors to pharmacology was Galen , a physician in the Roman Empire who wrote on theories of drug action. Galen's theories were later recorded, simplified, and translated by Arabic scholars, notably Hunayn ibn Ishaq . Much documentation regarding naming drugs is available because the works were translated. Authors such as al-Zahrawi and Maimonides went into detail on this aspect and discussed the naming of drugs, including the linguistics, as well as the synonyms and explanations behind the name given to the drug.

[ 47 ] Avicenna also contributed to the naming and categorizing of narcotics. In his Cannon of Medicine, he explained medicine types such as antiseptics and drugs and the forms such as tablets, powders, and syrups.

[ 46 ] After learning from the different books, Arabic physicians made numerous contributions when determining patient dosage depending on their condition. Multiple scholars, including the Arabic scholar and physician al-Kindi, determined the geometric progression of dosage. They found an arithmetic increase in the drug's sensation as the dosage was increased.

[ 47 ] Some of the main areas of study regarding pharmacology involved toxicology and the science behind sedative and analgesic drugs. Many physicians, Arabic and not alike, were fascinated with poisons. They sought out knowledge on how to make them and remediate them. Similarly, the science of sedative and analgesic drugs also fascinated Arabic physicians. Substances such as Cannabis sativa ( hashish ), Hyoscyamus niger (Black henbane, a narcotic), and Papaver somniferum ( opium ) were well-studied and used in their medicine.

[ 46 ] See also [ edit ] Academy of Gondishapur Medicine in the medieval Islamic world References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j "Islamic Culture and the Medical Arts: Hospitals" .

www.nlm.nih.gov . Retrieved 2018-04-24 .

^ a b c "BrillOnline Reference Works" .

referenceworks.brillonline.com . Koninklijke Brill NV. 2017 . Retrieved 2018-04-25 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Miller, A. C. (2006-12-01).

"Jundi-Shapur, bimaristans, and the rise of academic medical centres" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine .

99 (12): 615– 617.

doi : 10.1177/014107680609901208 .

ISSN 0141-0768 .

PMC 1676324 .

PMID 17139063 .

^ "Bimaristan", in Esposito, John L. (ed.) The Oxford Dictionary of Islam . Oxford University Press. p. 43.

^ a b c d Miller, A. C. (2006-12-01).

"Jundi-Shapur, bimaristans, and the rise of academic medical centres" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine .

99 (12): 615– 617.

doi : 10.1177/014107680609901208 .

ISSN 0141-0768 .

PMC 1676324 .

PMID 17139063 .

^ Tschanz, David W. (March 1, 2017).

"The Islamic Roots of the Modern Hospital" .

Aramco World .

68 : 23.

^ a b c d e f g h Sayili, Aydin (December 2006). "The Emergence of the Prototype of the Modern Hospital in Medieval Islam".

Foundation for Science Technology and Civilisation .

^ a b c Nagamia, Hussain (October 2003).

"Islamic Medicine History and Current Practice" (PDF) .

Journal of the International Society for the History of Islamic Medicine .

2 (4): 19– 30 . Retrieved 1 December 2011 .

^ a b c d e Rahman, Haji Hasbullah Haji Abdul (2004). "The development of the Health Sciences and Related Institutions During the First Six Centuries of Islam".

ISoIT : 973– 984.

^ a b Tschanz, David W. (March 1, 2017).

"The Islamic Roots of the Modern Hospital" .

Aramco World .

^ a b c d e f g h i Miller, Andrew C (December 2006).

"Jundi-Shapur, bimaristans, and the rise of academic medical centres" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine .

99 (12): 615– 617.

doi : 10.1177/014107680609901208 .

PMC 1676324 .

PMID 17139063 . Archived from the original on 2013-02-01 . Retrieved 2016-01-31 .

^ a b c d Shanks, Nigel J.; Dawshe, Al-Kalai (January 1984).

"Arabian medicine in the Middle Ages" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine .

77 (1): 60– 65.

doi : 10.1177/014107688407700115 .

PMC 1439563 .

PMID 6366229 .

^ "Early Islamic Medicine | Jonathan Lyons" .

Lapham's Quarterly . Retrieved 2021-12-16 .

^ Hajar, R (2013).

"The Air of History (Part IV): Great Muslim Physicians Al Rhazes" .

Heart Views .

14 (2): 93– 95.

doi : 10.4103/1995-705X.115499 .

PMC 3752886 .

PMID 23983918 .

^ Groth, Hans, ed. (2012).

Population Dynamics in Muslim Countries: Assembling the Jigsaw . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 45.

ISBN 978-3-642-27881-5 .

^ Rafiabadi, Hamid Naseem, ed. (2007).

Challenges to Religions and Islam: A Study of Muslim Movements, Personalities, Issues and Trends, Part 1 . Sarup & Sons. p. 1141.

ISBN 978-81-7625-732-9 .

^ Salam, Abdus (1994).

Renaissance of Sciences in Islamic Countries . World Scientific. p. 9.

ISBN 978-9971-5-0946-0 .

^ a b c Citation needed ^ a b "Islamic Culture and Medical Arts" .

US Library of National Medicine . December 2011 . Retrieved 10 April 2018 .

^ a b c d e Nagamia, Husain (March 2003).

"Islamic Medicine History and Current Practice" (PDF) .

International Institute of Islamic Medicine : 19– 30 . Retrieved 10 April 2018 .

^ Hehmeyer, Ingrid (May 2007).

"Islam's forgotten contributions to medical science" .

The Left Atrium .

10 : 176– 177.

^ "From the Middle East, in the Middle Ages" .

medicine.yale.edu . Retrieved 2021-12-16 .

^ Majeed, Azeem (2005-12-24).

"How Islam changed medicine" .

BMJ: British Medical Journal .

331 (7531): 1486– 1487.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.331.7531.1486 .

ISSN 0959-8138 .

PMC 1322233 .

PMID 16373721 .

^ a b "Barmakids" .

Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE .

doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_com_24302 . Retrieved 2021-12-22 .

^ Nagamia, Husain F (2001-08-03).

"History of Islamic Medicine" .

Journal of the Islamic Medical Association of North America .

28 (3).

doi : 10.5915/28-3-6170 .

ISSN 2160-9829 .

^ "The Islamic roots of modern pharmacy" . aramcoworld.com.

Archived from the original on 2016-05-18 . Retrieved 2016-05-28 .

^ Rise and spread of Islam . Gale. 2002. p.

419 .

ISBN 978-0-7876-4503-8 .

^ Miller, Andrew C (December 2006).

"Jundi-Shapur, bimaristans, and the rise of academic medical centres" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine .

99 (12): 615– 617.

doi : 10.1177/014107680609901208 .

ISSN 0141-0768 .

PMC 1676324 .

PMID 17139063 .

^ Rodini, Mohammad (June 2012).

"Medical Care in Islamic Medical Care in Islamic Tradition During the Middle Ages" .

International Journal of Medicine and Molecular Medicine .

7 : 2– 14 . Retrieved 10 April 2018 .

^ "Islamic Medicine in the Middle Ages" .

The American Journal of the Medical Sciences . March 2017.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Syed, Ibrahim B.

"Islamic Hospital" .

www.irfi.org . Retrieved 2018-04-16 .

^ "Islamic Medical Manuscripts: Bio-Bibliographies – I" .

www.nlm.nih.gov . 13 December 2013 . Retrieved 2018-04-16 .

^ Dunlop, D.M.; Colin, G.S.; Şehsuvaroǧlu, bedi N. (2012-04-24).

"Bīmāristān" .

Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

^ a b c "The Notebook of the Oculists" .

World Digital Library . Library of Congress. 1631.

Archived from the original on Oct 20, 2021 . Retrieved 2018-04-25 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "How Early Islamic Science Advanced Medicine" . 2016-11-15. Archived from the original on November 21, 2016 . Retrieved 2018-04-25 .

^ "The Notebook of the Oculists" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved 2021-12-22 .

^ a b c "Abū al-Qāsim | Muslim physician and author" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 2018-04-25 .

^ "al-Razi | Biography & Facts" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 2018-04-25 .

^ a b c d e f Zarshenas, Mohamad M.; Mehdizadeh, Alireza; Zargaran, Arman; Mohagheghzadeh, Abdolali (May 2012).

"Rhazes (865–925 AD)" .

Journal of Neurology .

259 (5): 1001– 1002.

doi : 10.1007/s00415-011-6398-x .

ISSN 0340-5354 .

PMID 22302275 .

S2CID 36925522 .

^ Hajar, Rachel (2013).

"The Air of History (Part V) Ibn Sina (Avicenna): The Great Physician and Philosopher" .

Heart Views .

14 (4): 196– 201.

doi : 10.4103/1995-705X.126893 .

PMC 3970379 .

PMID 24696763 .

^ a b c d e Afshar, Ahmadreza; Steensma, David P.; Kyle, Robert A. (March 2020).

"Ibn Sina (Avicenna): The "Prince of Physicians" " .

Mayo Clinic Proceedings .

95 (3): e31 – e32 .

doi : 10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.01.023 .

PMID 32138896 .

^ Brentjes, Sonja (2018).

Teaching and Learning the Sciences in Islamicate Societies . Turnhout. p. 33.

^ a b c "Islamic Culture and the Medical Arts: Hospitals" .

www.nlm.nih.gov . Retrieved 2018-04-25 .

^ "Near East Collection: Muslim's Contributions to Medieval Medicine & Pharmacology | Yale University Library" .

www.library.yale.edu . Retrieved 2018-04-25 .

^ "Islamic Medicine – History of Medicine" . Retrieved 2018-04-25 .

^ a b c Golshani, Sayeed (September 2015).

"Drugs and Pharmacology in the Islamic Middle Era" .

Pharmaceutical Historian .

45 (3): 64– 9.

PMID 27352605 .

^ a b c Huguet-Termes, Teresa (May 2008).

"Islamic Pharmacology and Pharmacy in the Latin West: An Approach to Early Pharmacopoeias" .

European Review .

16 (2): 229– 239.

doi : 10.1017/S1062798708000203 .

hdl : 10261/37654 .

ISSN 1062-7987 .

S2CID 32009990 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bimaristan .

Morelon, Régis; Rashed, Roshdi (1996), Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science , vol. 3, Routledge , ISBN 978-0-415-12410-2 Noshwrawy, A.R., The Islamic Biarmistans in the Middle Ages , Arabic Translation by M. Kh. Badra, The Arab Legacy Bul. No. 21, P 202 Sajjādī, Ṣādeq (1989). "BĪMĀRESTĀN".

Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. IV, Fasc. 3 . pp.

257– 261.

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine v t e Islamic architecture Styles Abbasid Anatolian Seljuk Ayyubid Chinese Fatimid Hausa Indo-Islamic Bengali Deccan Qutb Shahi Mughal Indonesian / Malaysian Ilkhanid Iranian Great Seljuk Ilkhanid Timurid Safavid Mamluk Moorish Aghlabid Almoravid Almohad Hafsid Zayyanid Ottoman Somali Sudano-Sahelian Swahili Tatar Umayyad Yemeni Elements Materials Qadad Tadelakt Arches Chahartaq Discharging arch Four-centred arch Horseshoe arch Lambrequin arch Multifoil arch Ogee arch Pointed arch Squinch Vaulting Roofs Dome ( Arabic dome / Onion dome / Persian dome / South Asian dome ) Semi-dome Tajug Chhajja Religious objects Anaza Bedug Dikka (or müezzin mahfili) Gonbad Hussainiya Imamzadeh Kiswah Loudspeakers Maqsurah Mihrab Minaret Minbar Qibla Zarih Decorations ( For overview, see Islamic ornament ) Ablaq Āina-kāri Alfiz Arabesque Banna'i Girih Girih tiles Haft-rang Islamic calligraphy Islamic geometric patterns Jali Mo'araq Mosque lamp Muqarnas Nagash painting Qashani Sebka (Darj-wa-ktaf) Shabaka Shamsa Sitara Socarrat Stucco decoration Zellij Rooms Andaruni Harem Iwan Liwan Mirador Hosh Qa’a Zenana Gardens Bagh Charbagh Islamic garden Mughal garden Paradise garden Persian gardens Reflecting pool Riad Outdoor objects Chhatri Eidgah Fina Mechouar Sebil Shadirvan Passive cooling Hypostyle Howz Jharokha Kucheh Mashrabiya Riwaq Sahn Salsabil Shabestan Shading Umbrellas Windcatcher Types Religious Congregational mosque Dar al-Muwaqqit Dargah Gongbei Jama'at Khana Külliye Kuttab (or maktab) Madrasa Maqam Maqbara Mazar Mosque Musalla Qubba Rauza Surau Sufi lodge (khanqah) Takyeh Türbe Zawiya Civilian Baradari Bazaar Caravanserai Bimaristan Ghorfa Hammam Hasht-Bihisht Kasbah Mahal Medina quarter Souq Well house Military Albarrana tower Alcázar Amsar Kasbah Ksar Qalat Ribat Resources Aga Khan Award for Architecture ArchNet Museum with No Frontiers Influences Indo-Saracenic Revival Influences on Western architecture Moorish Revival Mudéjar Part of Islamic arts • Architecture portal • Islam portal v t e Articles about hospitals History of hospitals , Hospital network , Category:Hospitals Common hospital components Accreditation Bed Coronary care unit Emergency department Emergency codes Hospital administrators Hospital information system Hospital medicine Hospital museum Hospitalist Intensive care unit Nocturnist On-call room Operating theater Orderly Patients Pharmacy Wards Archaic forms Almshouse Asclepeion (Greece) Bimaristan (Islamic) Cottage hospital (England) Hôtel-Dieu (France) Medicine in ancient Rome#Hospitals (Roman) Vaishya lying in houses (India) Xenodochium (Middle Ages) Geographic service area Base hospital (Australia) Community hospital General hospital Regional hospital or District hospital Municipal hospital Complexity of services Day hospital Secondary hospital Tertiary referral hospital Teaching hospital Specialty hospital Unique physical traits Hospital ship Hospital train Mobile hospital Underground hospital Virtual Hospital Limited class of patients Military hospital Combat support hospital Field hospital Prison hospital Veterans medical facilities Women's hospital Funding Charitable hospital For-profit hospital Non-profit hospital State hospital Private hospital Public hospital Voluntary hospital Defunct Condition treated Cancer Children's hospital Eye hospital Fever hospital Leper colony Lock hospital Maternity hospital Psychiatric hospital Rehabilitation hospital Trauma center Verterinary hospital Century established 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Lists of hospitals in: Africa , Asia , Europe , North America , Oceania , South America Authority control databases İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qjrxs
Cached time: 20250814230528
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.099 seconds
Real time usage: 1.295 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4673/1000000
Revision size: 55343/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 202996/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2877/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 218086/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.657/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14539919/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  996.998      1 -total
 44.06%  439.309      1 Template:Reflist
 16.90%  168.468     21 Template:Cite_journal
 15.47%  154.232     12 Template:Cite_web
 12.90%  128.635      6 Template:Navbox
 11.30%  112.616      3 Template:Langx
  9.59%   95.634      1 Template:Islamic_medicine
  7.01%   69.867      1 Template:Short_description
  5.26%   52.480      1 Template:Commons_category
  5.07%   50.567      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8284152:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814230528 and revision id 1301268953. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bimaristan&oldid=1301268953 " Categories : Medicine in the medieval Islamic world Bimaristans Hospitals established in the 9th century Iranian traditional medicine Persian words and phrases Iranian inventions Types of hospitals History of hospitals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2023 Articles containing Turkish-language text Articles containing Middle Persian-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from July 2017 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 00:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bimaristan 14 languages Add topic

