Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Fulcanelli's Master 1.2 Conclusion 2 Meeting in Paris with Jacques Bergier 3 Rendezvous in Spain 4 The Phonetic Cabala 5 Works 6 Cultural references 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Fulcanelli 15 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français Italiano Македонски Nederlands Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French alchemist and esoteric writer Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fulcanelli ( fl.

1920s) was the name used by a French alchemist and esoteric writer, whose identity is still debated.

[ 1 ] The name Fulcanelli seems to be a play on words: Vulcan, the ancient Roman god of fire, plus El , a Canaanite name for God and so the Sacred Fire .

[ 2 ] The appeal of Fulcanelli as a cultural phenomenon is due partly to the mystery of most aspects of his life and works, and his disappearance. In particular, he is reputed to have twice performed a transmutation of lead into gold . The first was in 1922, together with his most devoted pupil Eugène Canseliet , when the two supposedly performed a successful transmutation of 100 grams of lead into gold in the presence of Julien Champagne and Gaston Sauvage. This demonstration took place in a laboratory of the gas works of the Georgi company at Sarcelles , and was achieved with the use of a small quantity of " Projection Powder " (also known as the Philosopher's Stone ) prepared by Fulcanelli.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The second was in 1937 at the Château de Léré, when Fulcanelli supposedly performed a transmutation of 225 grams of lead into gold and 100 grams of silver into uranium before witnesses including a chemist, two physicists and a geologist.

[ 5 ] After this, Fulcanelli disappeared completely.

[ 6 ] Life [ edit ] Frontispice of Le Mystère des Cathédrales by Fulcanelli (1926). Illustration by Julien Champagne.

Fulcanelli was likely a Frenchman educated in the ways of alchemical lore , architecture , art , science , and languages . Fulcanelli wrote two books that were published after his disappearance in 1926, having left his magnum opus , Le Mystère des Cathédrales , with his only student, Eugène Canseliet. Its first edition consisted of 300 copies and was published by Jean Schemit at 52 Rue Laffitte, Paris .

[ 7 ] Theories about Fulcanelli speculate that he was one or another famous French occultist of the time: perhaps a member of the former royal family, the House of Valois , or another member of the Frères d'Heliopolis ( Brothers of Heliopolis , a society centred around Fulcanelli which included Eugène Canseliet, Jean-Julien Champagne, and Jules Boucher). Patrick Rivière, a student of Canseliet's, believed that Fulcanelli's true identity was Jules Violle , a famous French physicist.

[ 8 ] In a 1996 book, samples of writing by Jean-Julien Hubert Champagne (born January 23, 1877) and Fulcanelli are compared, and show considerable similarity.

[ 9 ] In any event, by 1916, Fulcanelli had accepted Canseliet, who was then only sixteen, as his first student. During 1921, he accepted the sons of Ferdinand de Lesseps as students and in 1922 two more students: Jules Boucher and Gaston Sauvage. In 1925, Fulcanelli relocated to 59 rue Rochechouart where he allegedly succeeded in transmuting base metals into gold.

[ 10 ] However, most of the testimonies compiled in its historical context, between 1910 and 1940, always designate Julien Champagne as the author, either unique or inspired by the materials of the librarian Pierre Dujols (1862-1926). The first reference to the pseudonym dates from around 1910 and is due to Jeanne-Emilie Baheux de Puysieux (1829-1914), wife of the sculptor Auguste Bartholdi (1834-1904).

[ 11 ] [ better source needed ] In 1960, with the publication of the international bestseller The Morning of the Magicians , Pauwels and Bergier popularized the mystery of the Master Alchemist.

[ 12 ] Fulcanelli's Master [ edit ] Without neglecting the belief of some researchers that Canseliet himself could have been Fulcanelli, Canseliet himself believed Fulcanelli's Master was Basil Valentine , an alchemist of the 15th century; the theoretical Master at least, for Fulcanelli's initiator may have been his own wife. As Fulcanelli describes in a strange letter he kept as a talisman about the completion of the Great Work – by someone who is presumably Basil Valentine – he also mentions his own wife: "...When my wife told me the good news" and "...my wife, with the inexplicable intuition of sensitives, had a really strange dream." As shown by this letter, when referring to something as important as the Great Work , he mentions his wife as someone important to the Magnum Opus .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Conclusion [ edit ] According to Louis Pauwels, Fulcanelli survived World War II and disappeared completely after the Liberation of Paris . Every attempt to find him failed. In August 1945, American G-2 ( Army Intelligence ) asked Jacques Bergier to contact a certain army major who was in charge of the operation of searching for German research reports on atomic energy. The major, whose identity was apparently anonymous, or simply forgotten, wanted to know the whereabouts of Fulcanelli. Bergier could not say and the army major seemed satisfied Fulcanelli could not be found.

[ 15 ] Meeting in Paris with Jacques Bergier [ edit ] Walter Lang reports that Fulcanelli communicated with Jacques Bergier to warn French atomic physicist André Helbronner of man's impending use of nuclear weapons. According to Fulcanelli, nuclear weapons had been used before, by and against humanity. Prof. Helbronner and Chevillon , among others, were assassinated by the Gestapo towards the end of World War II .

[ 16 ] The meeting between Jacques Bergier and Fulcanelli reportedly occurred during June 1937 in a laboratory of the Gas Board in Paris. According to Neil Powell, the following is a translation of the original verbatim transcript of the rendezvous: "You're on the brink of success, as indeed are several others of our scientists today. Please, allow me. Be very very careful. I warn you... The liberation of nuclear power is easier than you think and the radioactivity artificially produced can poison the atmosphere of our planet in a very short time: a few years. Moreover, atomic explosives can be produced from a few grains of metal powerful enough to destroy whole cities. I'm telling you this for a fact: the alchemists have known it for a very long time...
I shall not attempt to prove to you what I'm now going to say but I ask you to repeat it to Mr. Helbronner: certain geometrical arrangements of highly purified materials are enough to release atomic forces without having recourse to either electricity or vacuum techniques... The secret of alchemy is this: there is a way of manipulating matter and energy so as to produce what modern scientists call ' a field of force '. The field acts on the observer and puts him in a privileged position vis-à-vis the universe. From this position he has access to the realities which are ordinarily hidden from us by time and space, matter and energy. This is what we call the Great Work ." [ 17 ] When Bergier asked Fulcanelli about the Philosopher's Stone , the alchemist answered: "...the vital thing is not the transmutation of metals but that of the experimenter himself. It is an ancient secret that a few people rediscover each century. Unfortunately, only a handful are successful..." [ 18 ] In December 1938, the German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann sent a manuscript to Naturwissenschaften reporting they had detected the element barium after bombarding uranium with neutrons .

[ 19 ] Lise Meitner and her nephew Otto Robert Frisch correctly interpreted these results as being nuclear fission .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Rendezvous in Spain [ edit ] According to Canseliet, his last encounter with Fulcanelli happened in 1953 (years after his disappearance), when he went to Spain and there was taken to a castle high in the mountains for a rendezvous with his former master. Canseliet had known Fulcanelli as an old man in his 80s but now the Master had grown younger and had physically changed in appearance: he was now an androgynous creature , a being Fulcanelli called The Divine Androgyne. The reunion was brief and Fulcanelli once again disappeared not leaving any trace of his whereabouts.

[ 22 ] The Phonetic Cabala [ edit ] According to Fulcanelli, the Phonetic Cabala (Fulcanelli's term for a special use of language, drawing on phonetic similarities and other symbolic techniques for expanding the expressive reach of words) [ dubious – discuss ] is not the Hebrew Kabbalah ; even the derivation is different: Cabala is derived from the Latin caballus , a horse, as in the Horse of Troy in the Iliad . It is basically homophonic and symphonic rather than numerical; it is based on phonetic assonance and resonance to echo The Gay Science in the words of the ancient Greek deities spoken in sacred ancient Greek nomenclature.

[ 23 ] According to Walter Lang, who wrote an introduction to the English translation of Fulcanelli's Le Mystère des Cathédrales , the basic principles of the Phonetic Cabala are restored in Fulcanelli's Magnum Opus .

[ 24 ] Works [ edit ] The two books by Fulcanelli are Le Mystère des Cathédrales ( The Mystery of the Cathedrals ), written in 1922 and published in Paris in 1926.

[ 25 ] Les Demeures Philosophales ( Dwellings of the Philosophers ), published in Paris in 1929.

[ 25 ] The books are written in a cryptic and erudite manner, replete with Latin and Greek puns, alchemical symbolism, double entendres , and lectures on and in Argot and Cant , all of which serve to keep casual readers ignorant.

A third book, Finis Gloriae Mundi ( End of the World's Glory ), [ 26 ] was also reportedly being prepared for publication. The notes for the book were left for a time with his only student, Canseliet. Fulcanelli decided that the timing for publication of the book was not right and so it was never in fact published. A book by the same name, citing Fulcanelli as the author, was published much later, but has been shown to be a counterfeit.

[ 27 ] Cultural references [ edit ] River of Ink series by Helen Dennise.

[ 28 ] The mystery thriller novel The Alchemist's Secret by Scott Mariani deals with the subject of the alchemist's disappearance and what may have happened to his manuscript.

[ 29 ] The hunt for Fulcanelli by Allied and Nazi intelligence services during World War Two is a major theme of Martin Langfield's 2009 novel The Secret Fire .

[ 30 ] Frank Zappa released a song titled "But Who Was Fulcanelli?" on his 1988 live guitar solo album, Guitar .

Michele Soavi 's 1989 film La Chiesa ( The Church ) references Fulcanelli's The Mystery of the Cathedrals throughout.

Fulcanelli and his death are depicted in Guillermo del Toro 's 1993 film Cronos .

Fulcanelli , a first-season episode of the French TV police series Astrid et Raphaëlle , involves a long treasure hunt for Fulcanelli’s secrets.

References [ edit ] ^ Patrick Riviere Fulcanelli , p. 29, Red Pill Press Ltd, 2006 ISBN 978-1-897244-21-0 ^ Mark Stavish The Path of Alchemy , p. 171, Llewellyn Worldwide, 2006 ISBN 978-0-7387-0903-1 ^ Geneviève, Dubois (2005).

Fulcanelli and the Alchemical Revival. The Man Behind the Mystery of the Cathedrals . Rochester: Destiny Books. p. 5.2.

ISBN 9781594770821 .

^ Rivière, Patrick (2006).

Fulcanelli: His True Identity Revealed . London: Red Pill Press. p. 59.

ISBN 9781897244210 .

^ Geneviève, Dubois (2005).

Fulcanelli and the Alchemical Revival. The Man Behind the Mystery of the Cathedrals . Rochester: Destiny Books. p. 5.4.

ISBN 9781594770821 .

^ Geneviève, Dubois (2005).

Fulcanelli and the Alchemical Revival. The Man Behind the Mystery of the Cathedrals . Rochester: Destiny Books. p. 5.4.

ISBN 9781594770821 .

^ Patrick Riviere Fulcanelli , p.31 ^ Rivière, Patrick.

Fulcanelli . Red Pill Press ISBN 1-897244-21-5 ^ ARCHER.

"DEDICACES DE JULIEN CHAMPAGNE - JULIEN CHAMPAGNE" .

JULIEN CHAMPAGNE .

^ Dennis William Hauck Sorcerer's Stone , p. 172, Citadel Press, 2004 ISBN 978-0-8065-2545-7 ^ José Rodríguez, "Algo sobre Fulcanelli", Buscando la Piedra Filosofal , 13 september 2022, https://buscandolapiedrafilosofal.wordpress.com/2022/09/13/algo-sobre-fulcanelli/ ^ Weidner, Jay; Bridges, Vincent.

The Mysteries of the Great Cross of Hendaye . p. 4.

^ Patrick Riviere Fulcanelli , p. 47, Red Pill Press, 2006 ISBN 978-1-897244-21-0 ^ Samael Aun Weor The Perfect Matrimony , ch. I, Glorian Publishing, 2008 ISBN 978-1-934206-03-4 ^ Alchemy, the Ancient Science , ibid. p.53 ^ Fulcanelly Le Mystère des Cathédrales , p. 29, Neville Spearman Ltd, London, 1971 ^ Powell, Neil Alchemy, the Ancient Science , p. 53, Aldus Books Ltd, London, 1976 SBN 490 00346 X ^ Dennis W. Hauck Sorcerer's Stone , p. 174, Citadel Press, 2004 ISBN 978-0-8065-2545-7 ^ Natturwissenschaften, v. 27, # 1, pp. 11–15, 1939 ^ Nature , v. 143, #3615, pp. 239–240, Feb. 11, 1939 ^ "nature physics portal - looking back - Breaking up is easy -- nuclear fission discovered" .

nature.com .

^ Patrick Harpur Mercurius , p. 336, Blue Angel Gallery, 2007 ISBN 978-0-9802865-8-8 ^ Patrick Riviere Fulcanelli , p. 42, Red Pill Press Ltd., 2006 ISBN 978-1-897244-21-0 ^ Fulcanelli Le Mystère des Cathédrales , Neville Spearman, London, 1971 [1] ^ a b Riviere, Patrick (2006).

Fulcanelli: His True Identity Revealed . Red Pill Press. p. 95.

ISBN 9781897244210 .

^ Fulcanelli Finis Gloriae Mundi , 125 pages, Obelisco, 2004 ISBN 84-7720-937-5 (Spanish ed.) ^ Fulcanelli revealed, p. 8: Finis Gloriae Mundi Archived September 6, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Genesis: River of Ink by Helen Dennis – review" .

TheGuardian.com . 14 February 2016.

^ Mariani, Scott.

The Alchemist's Secret .

ISBN 978-1-84756-079-7 ^ Langfield, Martin.

The Secret Fire .

ISBN 0-14-102507-7 .

External links [ edit ] The Fulcanelli Mystery by Patrick J. Smith In French: Jean Artero Présence de Fulcanelli In French : Johan Dreue En Héliopolis, portrait d'un Adepte du XXème siècle Le lys Rouge,320 p. 2015 v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fulcanelli&oldid=1299129797 " Categories : 20th-century alchemists 20th-century French male writers 20th-century non-fiction writers 20th-century occultists 20th-century French philosophers French alchemists French male non-fiction writers French occult writers French occultists French scholars Independent scholars Kabbalists European people whose existence is disputed French philosophers of art French philosophers of language French philosophers of science French philosophy writers Unidentified people Writers about religion and science 20th-century pseudonymous writers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from December 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2022 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from May 2022 Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 18:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fulcanelli 15 languages Add topic

