Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ludwig Wittgenstein – 20th century 2 Degrees of certainty 3 Foundational crisis of mathematics 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Certainty 25 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Italiano עברית Polski Português Română Shqip Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Svenska Українська ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief without doubt in propositions that are in fact true For statistical certainty, see Probability . For the film, see Certainty (film) .

"Certain" redirects here. For other uses, see Certain (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Certainty" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Epistemology Outline Category Schools Coherentism Contextualism Dogmatism Empiricism Fallibilism Fideism Foundationalism Infallibilism Infinitism Naturalism Perspectivism Pragmatism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Solipsism Structuralism Concepts Action Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Belief Credence Certainty Data Experience Information Justification Induction Knowledge Meaning Rationality Reason Truth Wisdom Domains Applied epistemology Evolutionary epistemology Formal epistemology Historical epistemology Metaepistemology Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Epistemologists Aristotle Sextus Empiricus Edmund Gettier Wang Yangming René Descartes David Hume Immanuel Kant W. V. O. Quine more...

Related fields Epistemic cognition Epistemic logic Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science v t e Certainty (also known as epistemic certainty or objective certainty ) is the epistemic property of beliefs which a person has no rational grounds for doubting.

[ 1 ] One standard way of defining epistemic certainty is that a belief is certain if and only if the person holding that belief could not be mistaken in holding that belief. Other common definitions of certainty involve the indubitable nature of such beliefs or define certainty as a property of those beliefs with the greatest possible justification . Certainty is closely related to knowledge , although contemporary philosophers tend to treat knowledge as having lower requirements than certainty.

[ 1 ] Importantly, epistemic certainty is not the same thing as psychological certainty (also known as subjective certainty or certitude ), which describes the highest degree to which a person could be convinced that something is true. While a person may be completely convinced that a particular belief is true, and might even be psychologically incapable of entertaining its falsity, this does not entail that the belief is itself beyond rational doubt or incapable of being false.

[ 2 ] While the word "certainty" is sometimes used to refer to a person's subjective certainty about the truth of a belief, philosophers are primarily interested in the question of whether any beliefs ever attain objective certainty.

The philosophical question of whether one can ever be truly certain about anything has been widely debated for centuries. Many proponents of philosophical skepticism deny that certainty is possible, or claim that it is only possible in a priori domains such as logic or mathematics. Historically, many philosophers have held that knowledge requires epistemic certainty, and therefore that one must have infallible justification in order to count as knowing the truth of a proposition. However, many philosophers such as René Descartes were troubled by the resulting skeptical implications, since all of our experiences at least seem to be compatible with various skeptical scenarios . It is generally accepted today that most of our beliefs are compatible with their falsity and are therefore fallible , although the status of being certain is still often ascribed to a limited range of beliefs (such as " I exist "). The apparent fallibility of our beliefs has led many contemporary philosophers to deny that knowledge requires certainty.

[ 1 ] Ludwig Wittgenstein – 20th century [ edit ] If you tried to doubt everything you would not get as far as doubting anything. The game of doubting itself presupposes certainty.

Ludwig Wittgenstein , On Certainty , #115 On Certainty is a series of notes made by Ludwig Wittgenstein just prior to his death. The main theme of the work is that context plays a role in epistemology. Wittgenstein asserts an anti-foundationalist message throughout the work: that every claim can be doubted but certainty is possible in a framework. "The function [propositions] serve in language is to serve as a kind of framework within which empirical propositions can make sense".

[ 3 ] Degrees of certainty [ edit ] See also: Inductive reasoning , Probability interpretations , and Philosophy of statistics Physicist Lawrence M. Krauss suggests that the need for identifying degrees of certainty is under-appreciated in various domains, including policy-making and the understanding of science. This is because different goals require different degrees of certainty – and politicians are not always aware of (or do not make it clear) how much certainty we are working with.

[ 4 ] Rudolf Carnap viewed certainty as a matter of degree ("degrees of certainty") which could be objectively measured, with degree one being certainty.

Bayesian analysis derives degrees of certainty which are interpreted as a measure of subjective psychological belief .

Alternatively, one might use the legal degrees of certainty . These standards of evidence ascend as follows: no credible evidence, some credible evidence, a preponderance of evidence, clear and convincing evidence, beyond reasonable doubt, and beyond any shadow of a doubt (i.e.

undoubtable – recognized as an impossible standard to meet – which serves only to terminate the list).

If knowledge requires absolute certainty, then knowledge is most likely impossible , as evidenced by the apparent fallibility of our beliefs.

Foundational crisis of mathematics [ edit ] Main article: Foundations of mathematics § Foundational crisis The foundational crisis of mathematics was the early 20th century's term for the search for proper foundations of mathematics.

After several schools of the philosophy of mathematics ran into difficulties one after the other in the 20th century, the assumption that mathematics had any foundation that could be stated within mathematics itself began to be heavily challenged.

One attempt after another to provide unassailable foundations for mathematics was found to suffer from various paradoxes (such as Russell's paradox ) and to be inconsistent .

Various schools of thought were opposing each other. The leading school was that of the formalist approach, of which David Hilbert was the foremost proponent, culminating in what is known as Hilbert's program , which sought to ground mathematics on a small basis of a formal system proved sound by metamathematical finitistic means. The main opponent was the intuitionist school, led by L.E.J. Brouwer , which resolutely discarded formalism as a meaningless game with symbols.

[ 5 ] The fight was acrimonious. In 1920 Hilbert succeeded in having Brouwer, whom he considered a threat to mathematics, removed from the editorial board of Mathematische Annalen , the leading mathematical journal of the time.

Gödel's incompleteness theorems , proved in 1931, showed that essential aspects of Hilbert's program could not be attained. In Gödel 's first result he showed how to construct, for any sufficiently powerful and consistent finitely axiomatizable system – such as necessary to axiomatize the elementary theory of arithmetic – a statement that can be shown to be true, but that does not follow from the rules of the system. It thus became clear that the notion of mathematical truth cannot be reduced to a purely formal system as envisaged in Hilbert's program. In a next result Gödel showed that such a system was not powerful enough for proving its own consistency, let alone that a simpler system could do the job. This proves that there is no hope to prove the consistency of any system that contains an axiomatization of elementary arithmetic, and, in particular, to prove the consistency of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZFC), the system which is generally used for building all mathematics.

However, if ZFC is not consistent, there exists a proof of both a theorem and its negation, and this would imply a proof of all theorems and all their negations. As, despite the large number of mathematical areas that have been deeply studied, no such contradiction has ever been found, this provides an almost certainty of mathematical results. Moreover, if such a contradiction would eventually be found, most mathematicians are convinced that it will be possible to resolve it by a slight modification of the axioms of ZFC.

Moreover, the method of forcing allows proving the consistency of a theory, provided that another theory is consistent. For example, if ZFC is consistent, adding to it the continuum hypothesis or a negation of it defines two theories that are both consistent (in other words, the continuum is independent from the axioms of ZFC). This existence of proofs of relative consistency implies that the consistency of modern mathematics depends weakly on a particular choice on the axioms on which mathematics are built.

In this sense, the crisis has been resolved, as, although consistency of ZFC is not provable, it solves (or avoids) all logical paradoxes at the origin of the crisis, and there are many facts that provide a quasi-certainty of the consistency of modern mathematics.

See also [ edit ] Almost surely Fideism Gut feeling Infallibility Justified true belief Neuroethological innate behavior, instinct Pascal's Wager Pragmatism Scientific consensus Skeptical hypothesis As contrary concepts: Fallibilism Indeterminism Multiverse References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Certainty" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 12 July 2020 .

^ Reed, Baron.

"Certainty" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Winter 2011 edition . Retrieved 2022-07-22 .

^ Wittgenstein, Ludwig .

"On Certainty" .

SparkNotes .

^ "question center, SHAs – cognitive tools" . edge.com. Archived from the original on 2013-12-05 . Retrieved 2011-03-03 .

^ Michael Hallett (1994). "Hilbert's Axiomatic Method and the Laws of Thought". In Alexander George (ed.).

Mathematics and Mind . Oxford University Press. p. 195, note 62.

ISBN 0195079299 .

External links [ edit ] Look up certainty or certain in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Certainty .

"Certitude" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . 1913.

certainty , The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language .

Bartleby.com "certainty vs. doubt" .

About.com . Archived from the original on 2009-03-01 . Retrieved 2008-02-23 .

Reed, Baron.

"Certainty" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Certainty" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

The certainty of belief v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Sufism terminology Sufis Abdal Ahl al-Khutwa Al-Insān al-Kāmil Bash Hezzab Dervish Fakir Hafiz Hezzab Imam Khatib Majzoob Marabout Mudaqiq [ ar ] Muqaddam Muqarrab Murshid Mutahaqiq [ ar ] Murid Nass al-Houdhour Pir Qalandar Qāriʾ Qutb Rabbani Salik Sheikh Siddiq Sufis ranks Talibe The Seven ranks [ ar ] Wali Wasil Concepts Aayane [ ar ] Aayane Thabita [ ar ] Aql Baqaa Dhawq Fana Ghaflah Hal Hijab Huwa Ihsan Ishq Ismul Azam Lataif-e-Sitta Maqam Nafs Qalb Ran Rūḥ Sadr Yaqeen Awrad Dhikr Djamaa [ ar ] Djoua [ ar ] Dua Ibara [ ar ] Ichara [ ar ] Latifa Lazimi Muhasabah Muraqabah Raising hands in Dua Sabr Sahar [ ar ] Salat al-Fatih Salawat Samt [ ar ] Shuhud [ ar ] Shukr Sufism pillars Tafakur Tahara [ ar ] Tahlia [ ar ] Takhlia [ ar ] Tawajud [ ar ] Tawakkul Tawassul Tazkiah Uzla [ ar ] Wajd Wazifa Zarruqiyya Wird Zuhd Waridates Barakah Basirah Bast [ ar ] Djadba [ ar ] Fath [ ar ] Haqiqa Hidayah Ilham Irfan Ishrak Karamat Kashf Khatir Ma'rifa Nūr Qabdh [ ar ] Rabita [ ar ] Ru'ya Secret Tajalli Thawab Uns [ ar ] Walayah Warid Misconducts Antinomianism Rahbaniya Shath Taqabbur Zandaqa Ceremonies Ashura Bay'ah Hadra Hizb Rateb Idjaza Mawlid Mawsim Salka Sbooa [ fr ] Sebiba Silsila Sufi orders Tariqa Tweeza Wezeea Ziyarat Arts Ashewiq [ ar ] Madih nabawi Nasheed Naʽat Qawwali Sama Sufi cosmology Sufism history Sufi literature Sufi metaphysics Sufi music Sufis persecution Sufi philosophy Sufi poetry Sufi psychology Sufi whirling Places Daara Dargah Datuk Keramat Eidgah Gonbad Gongbei Jama masjid Jama'at Khana Khalwa Khalawi Khanqah Külliye Kuttab Madrasa Maqam Maqbara Mausoleum Mazar Mosque Musalla Qubba Rauza Ribat Surau Takya Turbah Türbe Zawiya Objects Ammama Balgha Burnous Djellaba Gandoura Jellabiya Khirqa Misbaha Miswak Prayer rug Qashabiya Tagelmust Taqiyah Tarboosh Turban NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐66vv5
Cached time: 20250816100500
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.619 seconds
Real time usage: 0.791 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5252/1000000
Revision size: 11460/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 205030/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3504/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 36/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 66323/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.306/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7036023/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  634.092      1 -total
 17.08%  108.329      1 Template:Reflist
 16.55%  104.936      9 Template:Navbox
 14.26%   90.409      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 13.94%   88.398      4 Template:Cite_web
 13.85%   87.829      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.62%   86.384      1 Template:Epistemology_sidebar
 13.33%   84.552      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.45%   78.968      1 Template:Sufism_terminology
 11.16%   70.735      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:993153:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816100500 and revision id 1282406508. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Certainty&oldid=1282406508 " Categories : Cognition Concepts in epistemology Concepts in the philosophy of mind Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2007 All articles needing additional references Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia without Wikisource reference Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 26 March 2025, at 06:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Certainty 25 languages Add topic

