Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Professional service and recognition 3 Legacy 4 Selected bibliography 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents William Frankena 9 languages العربية تۆرکجه Deutsch فارسی עברית مصرى Nederlands Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American moral philosopher (1908–1994) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) William Frankena Born ( 1908-06-21 ) June 21, 1908 Manhattan, Montana , U.S.

Died October 22, 1994 (1994-10-22) (aged 86) Ann Arbor, Michigan , U.S.

Education Alma mater Harvard (Ph.D.) Michigan (M.A.) Calvin College (B.A.) Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Institutions Michigan (1937–1978) Main interests Ethics Notable ideas Definist fallacy Naturalistic fallacy William Klaas Frankena (June 21, 1908 – October 22, 1994) [ 1 ] was an American moral philosopher . He was a member of the University of Michigan 's department of philosophy for 41 years (1937–1978), and chair of the department for 14 years (1947–1961).

Life [ edit ] Frankena's father and mother immigrated to the U.S. as teenagers, in 1892 and 1896 respectively, from Friesland , a province in the north of the Netherlands . William Frankena was the middle one of three children. He was born in Manhattan, Montana , grew up in small Dutch communities in Montana and western Michigan, and spoke West Frisian and Dutch .  In primary school, his given name, Wiebe, was Anglicized to William. Throughout his life, his family and friends called him Bill. His mother died when he was nine years old. He graduated from Holland Christian High School in Holland, MI , in 1926. After farming, his father, Nicholas A. Frankena (1875–1955), devoted the later decades of his life to elected office in Zeeland, MI , where he was mayor, and to service as an elder in the Christian Reformed Church in North America , which was founded by Calvinist Dutch immigrants.

In 1930, Frankena received a B.A. with majors in English and philosophy from Calvin College , a liberal arts college of the Christian Reformed Church. At Calvin, Frankena studied with William Harry Jellema (1893–1982). Frankena then earned an M.A. from the University of Michigan (1931), where the Department of Philosophy included C. Harold Langford (1895–1964), Dewitt H. Parker (1885–1949), and Roy Wood Sellars (1880–1973). Next Frankena earned a second M.A. and a Ph.D. (1937) at Harvard University . He studied with C. I. Lewis , Ralph Barton Perry , and Alfred North Whitehead at Harvard, and with G. E. Moore and C. D. Broad at the University of Cambridge in England while he did Ph.D.

research. His doctoral dissertation, which focused on Moore's work, was entitled "Recent Intuitionism in British Ethics." Frankena became well known in the profession with his first published paper, "The Naturalistic Fallacy", Mind , 1939. During World War II, Frankena taught American history at the University of Michigan.

Frankena met his future wife, Sadie, when they were students at Calvin College. In 1928–29, Sadie was president of Calvin's forensic (oration and debate) club and editor-in-chief of Calvin's literary review, Chimes ; Frankena was business manager of the club and associate editor of the review. ( Prism , Calvin College, 1929) He and Sadie were married for 44 years, until Sadie's death in 1978. He was an avid birder, and is survived by two sons, four grandchildren, and four great-grandchildren.

Many Michigan undergraduates were introduced to philosophy in the popular, historically based course taught by Frankena and his close friend Paul Henle. For nearly his entire career, Frankena did most of his philosophical reading and writing at home at a desk made circa 1870. When he wrote a philosophical paper, he prepared a detailed outline, including very abbreviated versions of all points and cites, before writing the paper longhand using a mechanical pencil. He never used a typewriter or computer. Frankena greatly valued his many conversations with other moral philosophers throughout the U.S. and western Europe. William K. Frankena's philosophical papers are in the collection of the Bentley Historical Library at the University of Michigan. His philosophy books are in the collection of the Tanner Philosophy Library in Angell Hall at the University of Michigan.

Professional service and recognition [ edit ] While he was chair of the Michigan Philosophy Department, Frankena devoted a considerable portion of his time to service to the university and the philosophy profession, and became known for his role in defending academic freedom during the McCarthy era .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] After that period, he had more time to publish books and articles.

[ citation needed ] In his 1963 book Ethics , Frankena clarified various fundamental concepts in ethics and value theory . He emphasized the distinction between the good , which concerns any items that contribute positively to someone's life, and the right, which concerns the moral evaluation of actions and policies. Based on this distinction, he contrasted the ethical theories of teleology and deontology . According to teleological theories, an action is right if it produces the most good, meaning that the right is directly determined by the good. Frankena argues that deontological theories are different by asserting that some actions are inherently right, regardless of the outcomes they produce.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] He further explored the various meanings of the term good , the diverse types of value, and the sources of intrinsic value .

[ 6 ] During his career Frankena was chair of the Board of Officers of the American Philosophical Association (APA), chair of the Council for Philosophical Studies, president of the APA's Western Division, a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and of the National Academy of Education, and a recipient of a Guggenheim Fellowship , a Fellowship from the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences , a National Endowment for the Humanities Senior Fellowship, and a Rockefeller Fellowship . Frankena was also active on Phi Beta Kappa Society committees. In 1974, he delivered the APA's prestigious Paul Carus Lectures on "Three Questions about Morality." Calvin College named him a Distinguished Alumnus in 1984. Frankena received the University of Michigan's Distinguished Faculty Achievement Award, was Roy Wood Sellars Distinguished Collegiate Professor of Philosophy, and was the first College of Literature, Science, and the Arts Distinguished Senior Faculty Lecturer.

[ citation needed ] Legacy [ edit ] A memorial essay by a member of the Michigan Philosophy Department states that "William Frankena contributed as widely to moral philosophy and its neighboring areas as anyone in that remarkable group that dominated English-speaking ethics from the end of World War II well into the 1980s. From metaethics , the history of ethics , and normative ethical theory , to moral education , moral psychology , and applied ethics , to religious ethics and the philosophy of education , the sweep and quality of his ethical philosophizing was simply extraordinary." [ 2 ] When Frankena retired and was awarded emeritus status in 1978, the University Regents stated that "he is renowned for his learning in the history of ethics, a subject about which he is generally believed in the profession to know more than anyone else in the world." [ 2 ] The July 1981 issue of The Monist is devoted to "The Philosophy of William Frankena." [ 7 ] The university has created a chair for the " Carl G. Hempel & William K. Frankena Distinguished University Professor", and annually awards the William K. Frankena Prize for excellence in philosophy to an undergraduate student.

Selected bibliography [ edit ] Ethics , 1963, 1973 (2nd ed.). In 1976, Frankena wrote that, in this book, "I finally worked out, in an elementary version, the outlines of an ethical theory, both normative and metaethical. It is still the fullest and only systematic statement there is of my moral philosophy as a whole." (K.E. Goodpaster, ed., 1976, Chapter 17.) Philosophy of Education , 1965.

Three Historical Philosophies of Education: Aristotle, Kant, Dewey , 1965.

Introductory Readings in Ethics , W.K. Frankena and J.T. Granrose, eds., 1974.

Perspectives on Morality: Essays by William K. Frankena , K.E. Goodpaster, ed., 1976. Chapter 17, written by Frankena for this volume, is a chronological review of his thinking and writings on moral philosophy up to the mid-1970s. The volume contains a bibliography of his work through 1975.

Three Questions about Morality , 1974 Carus Lectures, 1980.

Thinking about Morality , 1980, is an expansion of the University of Michigan Distinguished Senior Faculty Lecture Series delivered by Frankena.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy Analytic philosophy Ethics List of American philosophers List of ethicists List of philosophers (D–H) List of University of Michigan faculty and staff References [ edit ] ^ "In memoriam: William K. Frankena. - Free Online Library" .

www.thefreelibrary.com . Retrieved August 7, 2024 .

^ a b c S. Darwall, "Learning from Frankena: A Philosophical Remembrance", Ethics , 1997, pp. 685–705.

JSTOR 2382301 ^ The Michigan Daily , February 26, 1998, regarding the firing of University of Michigan professors for refusing to testify before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Un-American Activities based on their rights under the U.S. Constitution. The article states that University President Harlan H. "Hatcher brought three University professors in front of the House Subcommittee on un-American Activities. After the hearings, Hatcher issued a statement that called for the immediate suspension of the three instructors 'without loss of pay from all duties and connections to the University.' Two of the professors later were fired. Several members of the University community felt Hatcher's handling of the situation was weak." See also Faculty Governance Update: Annual Lecture on Academic and Intellectual Freedom , Regents, University of Michigan, July 2007.

^ Landesman 2013 .

^ Frankena 1963 , pp. 13–16.

^ Frankena 1963 , pp. 63–73.

^ "The Philosophy of William K. Frankena," The Monist , July 1981.

Sources [ edit ] Landesman, Bruce M. (2013). "Frankena, William K.".

The International Encyclopedia of Ethics (1 ed.). Wiley.

doi : 10.1002/9781444367072.wbiee704 .

ISBN 978-1-4051-8641-4 .

Frankena, William K. (1963).

Ethics . Foundations of Philosophy Series. Prentice-Hall.

Further reading [ edit ] The Philosophy of Value , 1957, by DeWitt H. Parker, completed with considerable effort by Frankena after Parker's death in 1949, with a preface by Frankena.

A. Goldman and J. Kim, eds., Values and Morals: Essays in Honor of William Frankena, Charles Stevenson , and Richard Brandt , 1978, includes a biography and a bibliography of work by Frankena through 1977.

Michigan Philosophy News , Department of Philosophy, University of Michigan, Fall 1995, is largely devoted to William K. Frankena.

Darwall, Stephen, and Louis E. Loeb. "William Klaas Frankena 1908–1994".

Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association 68, no. 5 (1995): 95–96.

JSTOR 3130799 External links [ edit ] William K. Frankena Papers , Bentley Historical Library , Ann Arbor, Michigan.

J.J. Kole, Frankena: "The Moral Point of View Theory" , Moral Autonomy and Christian Faith: A Discussion with William K. Frankena , 2002, pp. 21–40, from Kole's personal site, includes biographical sketch.(Archived) J.J. Kole, "Bibliographies" (for William K. Frankena) , Moral Autonomy and Christian Faith: A Discussion with William K. Frankena , 2002, from Kole's personal site. (Archived) Obituary , University of Michigan.(Archived) v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=William_Frankena&oldid=1293667242 " Categories : 1908 births 1994 deaths 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American philosophers American ethicists American male non-fiction writers American people of Dutch descent American people of Frisian descent American philosophy academics Calvin University alumni Harvard University alumni People from Gallatin County, Montana Philosophers from Michigan Philosophers from Montana University of Michigan alumni University of Michigan faculty Writers from Michigan Writers from Montana Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Use mdy dates from January 2017 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 01:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents William Frankena 9 languages Add topic

