Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Representationalism 3 Color 4 Animal consciousness 5 Panpsychism 6 Books 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Michael Tye (philosopher) 5 languages Deutsch فارسی Français 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British philosopher (born 1950) Michael Tye Born 1950 Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Main interests Philosophy of mind , consciousness , metaphysics Michael Tye (born 1950) is a British philosopher who is currently the Dallas TACA Centennial Professor in Liberal Arts at the University of Texas at Austin. He has made significant contributions to the philosophy of mind .

Education and career [ edit ] Tye completed his undergraduate education at Oxford University in England, studying first physics and then physics and philosophy. He went on to complete a PhD in philosophy at the State University of New York, Stony Brook.

[ 1 ] Before moving to Texas, Tye taught at Haverford College in suburban Philadelphia and Temple University in Philadelphia proper. He was also a visiting professor at King's College, London for some ten consecutive years while at Temple and briefly took up a chair at the University of St. Andrews . In 2023, Tye met with the Dalai Lama in Dharamsala at a conference dedicated to the topic of animal consciousness. Besides philosophy of mind, Tye has interests in cognitive science , metaphysics , and philosophical logic , especially problems relating to vagueness .

Tye's third book, Ten Problems of Consciousness (1995), was a selection of the Library of Science Book Club.

Representationalism [ edit ] In the philosophy of mind, Tye has dedicated much of his work to the development and defense of representationalism . Representationalism is a thesis about the phenomenal, “qualitative” character of conscious experiences.  According to Tye, the most basic version of the representationalist thesis holds that “necessarily (visual) experiences that are alike with respect to the qualities they represent are alike phenomenally.”.

[ 2 ] Tye has argued for representationalism about conscious experience in general on the grounds that it provides the best explanation of the connection between phenomenal and representational features in experience, the "transparent" character of sensory consciousness, and perceptual accuracy conditions.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In his early work on representationalism, Tye defended materialist views about conscious representation and developed an influential account of phenomenal character known as the "PANIC theory". According to the PANIC theory, “phenomenal character is one and the same as Poised Abstract Nonconceptual Intentional Content.” Tye's proposal precludes the possibility that conceptual states such as beliefs are (or could be) phenomenally conscious.

[ 3 ] Tye later came to reject the PANIC theory in favor of the view that phenomenal character is nothing other than the cluster of properties represented by an experience (as opposed to being a representational content).

[ 5 ] In his more recent work, Tye retains his commitment to representationalism while rejecting the claim that phenomenally conscious states can be fully characterized in terms of standard materialist features.

[ 2 ] Color [ edit ] Tye endorses the realist view that “colors are physical properties whose natures are discoverable by empirical investigation.” [ 4 ] His work on color has broadly examined the extent to which contemporary science can be reconciled with pre-theoretical convictions about the nature of color. Tye affirms what he calls the “commonsense” belief that colors are objective features of surfaces.

Tye has defended his view of color in print against criticism from Ned Block .

[ 6 ] Animal consciousness [ edit ] Tye has authored papers on animal consciousness and pain in animals . He is the author of the book, Tense Bees and Shell-Shocked Crabs: Are Animals Conscious?

, published in 2016. The book defends the hypothesis that consciousness extends a considerable way down the phylogenetic scale, focusing on felt pain as a criterion.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] He states that, in the absence of defeaters, we should prefer the view that animals feel pain if they behave similarly to humans in contexts where we know that humans feel pain.

[ 10 ] He has reviewed scientific studies and concludes that mammals, birds, reptiles, fish, and arthropods are, in most cases, likely to be conscious.

[ 2 ] [ 8 ] Michael Tye meeting the Dalai Lama at a 2023 conference devoted to the topic of animal consciousness According to Tye, current evidence suggests that teleost fish feel pain while the evidence for pain in elasmobranchs and certain insects remains inconclusive. Tye has commented that "insects do not react to treatment that would undoubtedly cause severe pain in mammals. So, there is reason to doubt that generally insects feel pain." [ 11 ] However, in Chapter 5 of Vagueness And The Evolution Of Consciousness: Through The Looking Glass , Tye favorably considers opposing evidence including cases of apparent pain-behavior in elasmobranchs and insects as well as “striking commonalities in gene pathways in fruit flies and mice, pathways that aid mice in sensing pain and fixing pain thresholds.” [ 2 ] In Chapter 11 of Tense Bees and Shell-Shocked Crabs: Are Animals Conscious?

, Tye discusses arguments in favor of vegetarianism .

[ 9 ] Tense Bees and Shell-Shocked Crabs: Are Animals Conscious?

has been reviewed in Metascience and PsycCRITIQUES .

[ 8 ] [ 12 ] Panpsychism [ edit ] In his 2021 book, Vagueness And The Evolution Of Consciousness: Through The Looking Glass , Tye abandons an earlier form of physicalism and argues that sensory experience cannot be fully characterized by the resources of standard scientific investigation.

[ 2 ] On the basis of issues relating to vagueness and the emergence of consciousness, Tye endorses a modified, “ panpsychist ” form of representationalism. This view holds that fundamental physical particles possess a basic, proto-phenomenal mental property that transfers to representational states when the particles are appropriately arranged. According to his new position, this basic mental property (which Tye refers to as “ consciousness* ”) is a necessary feature of phenomenally conscious states over and above the representational features described in his previous work.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Tye holds that fundamental physics can only “tell us about the relational/structural properties of matter.” [ 2 ] Significantly, these relational/structural properties do not include the intrinsic mental property that he attributes to fundamental particles and conscious states. However, Tye maintains that his proposed property still qualifies as genuinely physical on the grounds that it is “found in things that are unconscious as well as in things that are conscious”, occurs “across all of nature at the most fundamental level”, and obeys “fundamental physical laws”.

[ 2 ] For this reason, Tye denies that his conversion constitutes an endorsement of anti-physicalism.

Books [ edit ] The Metaphysics of Mind (1989) The Imagery Debate (1991) Ten Problems of Consciousness (1995) Consciousness, Color, and Content (2000) Consciousness and Persons (2003) Consciousness Revisited: Materialism without Phenomenal Concepts (2009) Tense Bees and Shell-Shocked Crabs:  Are Animals Conscious?

(2016) Vagueness And The Evolution Of Consciousness: Through The Looking Glass (2021) See also [ edit ] Qualia Consciousness Naïve realism Fred Dretske Ned Block David Chalmers Philosophy of mind Mind–body problem References [ edit ] ^ Tye, Michael.

"ABOUT ME" . Retrieved 12 October 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g "Vagueness And The Evolution Of Consciousness: Through The Looking Glass" . Oxford Scholarship Online. Retrieved November 12, 2023.

^ a b c "Ten Problems Of Consciousness: A Representational Theory Of The Phenomenal Mind . MIT Press. Retrieved November 12, 2023.

^ a b c "Consciousness, Color, And Content" . MIT Press. Retrieved November 12, 2023.

^ Tye, Michael (2015).

"Yes, Phenomenal Character Really is Out There in the World" .

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

91 (2): 483– 488.

doi : 10.1111/phpr.12167 .

^ Tye, Michael (2006).

"The Puzzle of True Blue" .

Analysis .

66 (3): 173– 178.

doi : 10.1093/analys/66.3.173 .

JSTOR 25597729 .

^ "Tense Bees and Shell-Shocked Crabs: Are Animals Conscious?" . Oxford Scholarship Online. Retrieved February 6, 2020.

^ a b c Boisvert, M. J. (2017).

Befuddled by the question of animal consciousness (Review of the book Tense bees and shell-Shocked crabs: Are animals conscious?, by M. Tye ) .

PsycCRITIQUES 62 (12).

https://doi.org/10.1037/a0040777 ^ a b Klein, Colin. (2017).

"Tense Bees and Shell-Shocked Crabs: Are Animals Conscious?" .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews . Retrieved February 6, 2020.

^ Andrews, Kristin; Beck, Jacob. (2018).

The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy of Animal Minds . Routledge. p. 4.

ISBN 978-1-138-82288-7 ^ "Are insects sentient? Commentary on Klein & Barron on Insect Experience" .

Animal Sentience 2016. 111.

^ Monsó, Susana. (2017).

To be rational, or not to be rational—that is the question .

Metascience 26 (3): 487–491.

External links [ edit ] Michael Tye's personal webpage (includes articles for download).

Michael Tye's Academia.edu page (includes articles for download) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Qualia Interview for Mind and Consciousness A review of Consciousness, Colour, and Content by Bill Brewer of Oxford University .

v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Movement History ( Ancient world ) Timeline Europe United States By country or territory Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Brazil Canada China Denmark Ethiopia France Germany Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Anarchism Punk subculture Religion Christianity Indian religions Islam Women Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal machine Animal protectionism Animal trial Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthropocentrism Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Holocaust analogy Insects in ethics Intrinsic value Meat paradox Mentophobia Moral circle expansion Nonviolence Nonkilling Open rescue Opposition to hunting Painism Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Total liberation Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal husbandry Animal product Animal husbandry Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Crocodiles CAFOs Cow-calf separation Feedback Fish Foam depopulation Fur Fur trade Insects Intensive Pigs Livestock Live export Poultry Wildlife Slaughter Slaughterhouse Ventilation shutdown Blood sport Badger-baiting Bear-baiting Boar-baiting Bull-baiting Donkey-baiting Duck-baiting Hog-baiting Human-baiting Hyena-baiting Lion-baiting Monkey-baiting Rat-baiting Wolf-baiting Cruelty Pest control ( Varmint hunting ) Sacrifice Working animal Animal testing History Alternatives Regulations Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Non-human primates Cosmetics Model organism Vivisection ( Anti-vivisection movement ) Organizations Huntingdon Life Sciences Nafovanny Green Scare ( Operation Backfire ) Animal welfare Abandoned pets Captivity Euthanasia ( insects ) Farmed insects Killing of animals Live food Pain Amphibians Cephalopods Crustaceans Fish Invertebrates Laboratory animals Sports Fishing Bait Commercial Farming Recreational Wild animals Culling Farming Hunting Techniques Coursing Spotlighting Trail hunting Trapping Treeing Trophy hunting Upland hunting Animals Alligators Bats Bears Birds Bison Boar Raccoons Deer Dolphins Foxes Hares Jackals Lions Mink Petrels Quail Rabbit Rooks Seals Squirrels Tigers Turtles Waterfowl Wild birds Whales Wolves Management Predation problem Suffering Trade Primates Ivory Welfare Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Studies Animal ethics Anthrozoology Critical animal studies Ethology Vegan studies Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for Farmed Animals World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing World Vegan Day World Vegetarian Day Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Michael W. Fox Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Christine Korsgaard Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Tom Beauchamp Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Stephen St. C. Bostock Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Sherry Colb Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans T. Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry V. A. Holmes-Gore Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Francis Hutcheson Soame Jenyns Marie Jungius Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Robert Morris Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan John Oswald Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Joseph Ritson Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M. Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Voltaire Thomas Young Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Alex Hershaft Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Joaquin Phoenix Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Morrissey Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Ed Winters Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell William Brown Edith Carrington Joseph Collinson Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Isaac Pengelly Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Magnus Schwantje Nell Shipman Henry Spira Joseph Stratton Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Liberation Press Office Animal Liberation Victoria Animal Rights Militia Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Revolutionary Cells – Animal Liberation Brigade Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva!

Voice for Animals Humane Society Voiceless Historical Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Millennium Guild Order of the Golden Age Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party with the Environment (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection Party (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books (1755) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Humanity to Animals (1798) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights?

(2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Beating Hearts: Abortion and Animal Rights (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Animal Rights Law (2023) The Moral Circle (2025) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) Food, Inc.

(2009) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Land of Hope and Glory (2017) Carnage (2017) Okja (2017) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 138 ) v t e Veganism and vegetarianism Perspectives Veganism Animal-free agriculture Black veganism Fruitarianism History Raw veganism Straight edge Hardline Nutrition Vegan organic agriculture Vegan school meal Vegan studies Vegetarianism Economic vegetarianism Environmental vegetarianism History ( Romantic Era ) Orthopathy Lacto vegetarianism Lacto-ovo vegetarianism Ovo vegetarianism Cuisine Vegetarian Diet Pyramid Ecofeminism Nutrition By country Lists Bibliography Vegetarians Vegans Fictional characters Festivals Organizations Vegan and plant-based media Locations Cheremshanka, Altai Republic Community of the Ark Haridwar New Vrindaban Palitana Pushkar Rishikesh Tirumala The Farm (Tennessee) Ethics Secular Animal rights Animal welfare Anthropocentrism Carnism Deep ecology Environmental vegetarianism Ethics of eating meat Meat paradox Nonviolence Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Tirukkuṟaḷ Religious Buddhism Christianity ( Seventh-day Adventist Church ) Hinduism Sattvic Ahimsa Islam Jainism Judaism Pythagoreanism Rastafari Sikhism Taoism Food and drink List of vegetarian and vegan companies Dairy alternatives Coconut milk Plant cream Plant milk Soy yogurt Cheese Meat alternatives List of meat substitutes Bacon Burgers Duck Hot dogs Jambon Quorn Sausage roll Seitan Tempeh Tofu Tofurkey Gelatin substitutes Vegetarian mark Beer Wine Groups and events Vegan American Vegan Society Beauty Without Cruelty China Vegan Society Food Empowerment Project Go Vegan Nederlandse Vereniging voor Veganisme Our Hen House Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine Plamil Foods Vegan Awareness Foundation Vegan flag Vegan Outreach Vegan Prisoners Support Group The Vegan Society Veganmania Vegetarian Resource Group Veganuary Veganz World Vegan Day Vegetarian Alcott House Bible Christian Church Boston Vegetarian Society Christian Vegetarian Association Dutch Vegetarian Society Eden Gemeinnützige Obstbau-Siedlung European Vegetarian Union French Vegetarian Society Hare Krishna Food for Life International Vegetarian Union Jewish Veg Meat-free days Meatless Monday Friday fast North American Vegetarian Society Order of the Golden Age ProVeg Deutschland ProVeg International ProVeg Nederland Scottish Vegetarian Society Swissveg Toronto Vegetarian Association Vegetarian Federal Union Vegetarian Society Vegetarian Society (Singapore) Veggie Pride Viva! Health World Esperantist Vegetarian Association World Vegetarian Day Films The Animals Film (1981) Diet for a New America (1991) A Cow at My Table (1998) Meet Your Meat (2002) Post Punk Kitchen (2003–2005) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) A Sacred Duty (2007) Fat, Sick and Nearly Dead (2010) Planeat (2010) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) Live and Let Live (2013) Cowspiracy (2014) PlantPure Nation (2015) What the Health (2017) Carnage (2017) Dominion (2018) Eating You Alive (2018) The Game Changers (2018) Maa Ka Doodh (2023) You Are What You Eat: A Twin Experiment (2024) Magazines and journals The Animals' Agenda Naked Food The Pleasure Boat Satya Vegan Journal The Vegetarian Magazine Vegetarian Times VegNews Books and reports On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) Acetaria: A Discourse of Sallets (1699) The Fable of the Bees (1714) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) Primitive Cookery (1767) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Vegetable Cookery (1812) A Vindication of Natural Diet (1813) Reasons for not Eating Animal Food (1814) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) Nature's Own Book (1835) Fruits and Farinacea (1845) " The Vegetarian; or a Visit to Aunt Primitive " (1847) The Penny Domestic Assistant and Guide to Vegetarian Cookery (1850) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) What is Vegetarianism?

(1886) The First Step (1891) Shelley's Vegetarianism (1891) Behind the Scenes in Slaughter-Houses (1892) Why I Am a Vegetarian (1895) Figs or Pigs?

(1896) Fifty Years of Food Reform (1898) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) Thirty-nine Reasons Why I Am a Vegetarian (1903) The Meat Fetish (1904) The Apsley Cookery Book The New Ethics (1907) A Fleshless Diet (1910) The Benefits of Vegetarianism (1927) Living the Good Life (1954) Ten Talents (1968) Diet for a Small Planet (1971) The Vegetarian Epicure (1972) Moosewood Collective Cookbooks (1973) The Farm Vegetarian Cookbook (1975) Laurel's Kitchen (1976) Moosewood Cookbook (1977) Fit for Life (1985) Diet for a New America (1987) The Sexual Politics of Meat (1990) Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone (1997) The China Study (2005) Skinny Bitch (2005) Livestock's Long Shadow (2006) The Bloodless Revolution (2006) Eating Animals (2009) Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear Cows (2009) The Vegan Studies Project (2015) Animal (De)liberation (2016) The End of Animal Farming (2018) Vegetable Kingdom (2020) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Meat Atlas (annual) Restaurants Active Ben & Esther's Vegan Jewish Deli Cinnaholic Crossroads Kitchen Green Elephant Vegetarian Bistro Greens Restaurant Elizabeth's Gone Raw Hiltl Restaurant Little Pine Moosewood Restaurant Plant Purezza Slutty Vegan Souley Vegan The Sound Lounge Veggie Galaxy Veggie Grill Former Cranks Food for Thought InSpiral Lounge Lentil as Anything Minerva Café New Riverside Cafe Nix Penny Cafeteria Pink Peacock The Hollow Reed The Pitman Vegetarian Hotel Related Cultured meat Juice fasting Low-carbon Plant-based action plan Plant-based diet Planetary health Sustainable diet Vegaphobia Vegetarian and vegan dog diet Vegetarian and vegan symbolism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii PhilPeople Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michael_Tye_(philosopher)&oldid=1292405901 " Categories : Living people 1950 births 20th-century British philosophers 21st-century British philosophers Animal cognition writers Animal ethicists Analytic philosophers British animal rights scholars English vegetarianism activists British consciousness researchers and theorists Panpsychism British philosophers of mind Haverford College faculty Materialists Temple University faculty Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 19:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Michael Tye (philosopher) 5 languages Add topic

