Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 During the Republic 1.2 Gallic wars 1.3 Under the Empire 2 After the fall of the Western Roman Empire 3 Geographical divisions 4 Language and culture 5 Villas in Roman Gaul 6 Cities of Roman Gaul Toggle Cities of Roman Gaul subsection 6.1 Gallery 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Roman Gaul 20 languages Afrikaans Беларуская Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Latviešu Nouormand Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Gaul as a province of the Roman Empire For Gallia or Gaul before the Roman conquest, see Gaul .

Part of a series on the History of France Timeline Ancient Prehistory Greek colonies 600 BC – 49 BC Celtic Gaul until 50 BC Roman Gaul 50 BC – 486 AD Middle Ages Francia and the Frankish settlement Merovingians 481–751 Carolingians 751–987 West Francia 843–987 Kingdom of France 987–1792 Direct Capetians 987–1328 Valois 1328–1498 Early modern Ancien Régime Valois-Orléans kings 1498–1515 Valois-Angoulême kings 1515–1589 Bourbon kings 1589–1792 Long 19th century French Revolution 1789–1799 Kingdom of France 1791–1792 First Republic 1792–1804 First Empire 1804–1814 Restoration 1814–1830 July Monarchy 1830–1848 Second Republic 1848–1852 Second Empire 1852–1870 Third Republic 1870–1940 Belle Époque 1871–1914 20th century Third Republic 1870–1940 Interwar period 1919–1939 Années folles 1920–1929 Free France Vichy France 1940–1944 Provisional Republic 1944–1946 Fourth Republic 1946–1958 Fifth Republic 1958– present Topics Diplomacy Economy Health care Law LGBTQ Medicine Military Monarchs Consorts Politics Religion Christianity Islam Judaism Taxation Territory France portal · History portal v t e Roman Gaul refers to Gaul [ note 1 ] under provincial rule in the Roman Empire from the 1st century BC to the 5th century AD.

History [ edit ] See also: La Tène culture During the Republic [ edit ] The Roman Republic 's influence began in southern Gaul. By the mid-2nd century BC, Rome was trading heavily with the Greek colony of Massilia (modern Marseille ) and entered into an alliance with them, by which Rome agreed to protect the town from local Gauls, including the nearby Aquitani and from sea-borne Carthaginians and other rivals, in exchange for land that the Romans wanted in order to build a road to Hispania to improve troop movements to its provinces there. The Mediterranean settlements on the coast continued to be threatened by the powerful Gallic tribes to the north and in 122 BC the Roman general Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus campaigned in the area and defeated the Allobroges followed by Quintus Fabius Maximus against the Arverni under King Bituitus in 121 BC.

[ 1 ] The Romans respected and feared the Gallic tribes. In 390 BC, the Gauls had sacked Rome , which left an existential dread of barbarian conquest the Romans never forgot.

[ 2 ] In 109 BC, Italy had been invaded from the north and saved by Gaius Marius only after several bloody and costly battles. Around 62 BC, when a Roman client state, the Arverni, conspired with the Sequani and the Suebi nations east of the Rhine to attack the Aedui, a strong Roman ally, Rome turned a blind eye. The Sequani and the Arverni sought Ariovistus 's aid and defeated the Aedui in 63 BC at the Battle of Magetobriga .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Gallic wars [ edit ] Main article: Gallic Wars See also: La Tène culture Gaul on the eve of the Gallic Wars (58 BC) As 58 BC dawned, most of Gaul was still under independent rule. It was beginning to urbanize and shared many aspects of Roman civilization. Into this picture came the rising general Julius Caesar , who had ensured himself the position of Governor of both Transalpine and Cisalpine Gaul . He sought to pay off debts and find glory for himself, and so began a series of aggressive campaigns to conquer the Gallic tribes.

[ 5 ] The wars began with a conflict over the migration of the Helvetii in 58 BC, which drew in neighboring tribes and the Germanic Suebi . By 57 BC, Caesar had resolved to conquer all of Gaul, and led campaigns in the east, where the Nervii nearly defeated him. In 56 BC, Caesar defeated the Veneti in a naval battle and took most of northwest Gaul. In 55 BC, he sought to boost his public image, and undertook first of their kind expeditions across the Rhine river and the English Channel . Upon his return from Britain, Caesar was hailed as a hero, though he had achieved little beyond landing because his army had been too small. The next year, he went back with a proper army and invaded Britain . However, tribes rose up on the continent, and the Romans suffered a humiliating defeat. 53 BC saw a draconian campaign against the Gauls in an attempt to pacify them. This failed and the Gauls staged a mass revolt under the leadership of Vercingetorix in 52 BC. Gallic forces won a notable victory at the Battle of Gergovia , but the Romans' indomitable siege works at the Battle of Alesia utterly defeated the Gallic coalition.

[ 5 ] In 51 BC and 50 BC, there was little resistance and Caesar's troops were mostly mopping up. Gaul was conquered, although it would not become a Roman province until 27 BC, and resistance would continue until as late as 70 AD. There is no clear end-date for the war, but the imminent Roman Civil War led to the withdrawal of Caesar's troops in 50 BC. Caesar's wild successes in the war had made him extremely wealthy and provided a legendary reputation. The Gallic Wars were a key factor in Caesar's ability to win the Civil War and declare himself dictator , in what would eventually lead to the end of the Roman Republic and the establishment of the Roman Empire .

[ 5 ] Under the Empire [ edit ] Principal ancient Roman roads At the end of the Gallic Wars, the Gauls had not been entirely subjugated and were not yet a formal part of the Empire, but that task was not Caesar's and he left that to his successors. Gaul would not be made formally into Roman provinces until the reign of Augustus in 27 BC. Several rebellions happened subsequently and Roman troops were kept stationed throughout Gaul. There may have been unrest in the region as late as 70 AD.

[ 6 ] Massilia was allied to Pompey during Caesar's civil war , which led to its eventual defeat at the Siege of Massilia in 49 BC after which it lost its territories but was allowed to keep nominal autonomy, due to ancient ties of friendship and support of Rome.

In 40 BC, during the Second Triumvirate , Lepidus was given responsibility for Gallia Narbonensis (along with Hispania and Africa), while Mark Antony was given the balance of Gaul.

[ 7 ] In 22 BC, imperial administration of Gaul was reorganised establishing the provinces of Gallia Aquitania , Gallia Belgica and Gallia Lugdunensis . Parts of eastern Gaul were incorporated into the provinces Raetia (15 BC) and Germania Superior (AD 83).

Roman citizenship was granted to all in 212 by the Constitutio Antoniniana .

Several significant Roman figures were born in Gaul, including Roman Emperors Claudius , Caracalla and probably Carus , as well as the important general Gnaeus Julius Agricola . Another general born in Gaul was Marcus Antonius Primus . In addition, the family of Antoninus Pius , which was also the adoptive family of Marcus Aurelius , came from Roman Gaul. Among the Roman writers known or hypothesized to be born in Gaul there are Tacitus , Petronius , Varro Atacinus , Aemilius Magnus Arborius , Frontinus , Ausonius , Rutilius Claudius Namatianus , Sextus Pompeius Festus , Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus and the authors of the important Panegyrici latini . Many other writers were from the region of Cisalpine Gaul , which was part of Italy, including Virgil , Caecilius Statius , Catullus and Pliny the Elder .

Major cities of Roman Gaul In the Crisis of the Third Century around 260, Postumus established a short-lived Gallic Empire , which included the Iberian Peninsula and Britannia, in addition to Gaul itself. Germanic tribes, the Franks and the Alamanni , invaded Gaul at this time. The Gallic Empire ended with Emperor Aurelian 's victory at Châlons in 274.

In 286–7 Carausius , commander of the Classis Britannica , the fleet of the English Channel, declared himself Emperor of Britain and northern Gaul.

[ 8 ] His forces comprised his fleet, the three legions stationed in Britain and also a legion he had seized in Gaul, a number of foreign auxiliary units, a levy of Gaulish merchant ships, and barbarian mercenaries attracted by the prospect of booty.

[ 9 ] In 293 emperor Constantius Chlorus isolated Carausius by besieging the port of Gesoriacum (Boulogne-sur-Mer) and invaded Batavia in the Rhine delta, held by his Frankish allies, and reclaimed Gaul.

A migration of Celts from Britain appeared in the 4th century in Armorica led by the legendary king Conan Meriadoc .

[ citation needed ] They spoke the now extinct British language , which evolved into the Breton , Cornish , and Welsh languages .

[ citation needed ] The Goths , who had sacked Rome in 410, established a capital in Toulouse and in 418 succeeded in being accepted by Honorius as foederati and rulers of the Aquitanian province in exchange for their support against the Barbarian people in Spain.

[ 10 ] The Roman Empire had difficulty responding to all the barbarian raids, and Flavius Aëtius had to use these tribes against each other in order to maintain some Roman control. He first used the Huns against the Burgundians , and these mercenaries destroyed Worms , killed king Gunther , and pushed the Burgundians westward. The Burgundians were resettled by Aëtius near Lugdunum in 443. The Huns, united by Attila , became a greater threat, and Aëtius used the Visigoths against the Huns. The conflict climaxed in 451 at the Battle of Châlons , in which the Romans and Goths defeated Attila.

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire [ edit ] Invasions of the Roman Empire The Western Roman administration finally collapsed as remaining Roman troops withdrew southeast to protect Italy. Between 455 and 476, the Visigoths , the Burgundians, and the Franks assumed control in Gaul. However, certain aspects of the ancient Celtic culture continued after the fall of Roman administration and the Domain of Soissons , a remnant of the Empire , survived from 457 to 486.

In 486, the Franks defeated the last Roman authority in Gaul in the Franco-Roman War by winning the Battle of Soissons . Almost immediately afterwards, most of Gaul came under the rule of the Merovingians , the first kings of a proto-France.

In 507, the Visigoths were pushed out of most of Gaul by the Frankish king Clovis I at the Battle of Vouillé .

[ 11 ] They were able to retain Narbonensis and Provence after the timely arrival of an Ostrogoth detachment sent by Theodoric the Great .

Certain Gallo-Roman aristocratic families continued to exert power in episcopal cities (such as the Mauronitus family in Marseille and Bishop Gregory of Tours ). The appearance of Germanic given and family names becomes noticeable in Gallia/Francia from the middle of the 7th century on, most notably in powerful families, indicating that the centre of gravity had definitely shifted.

The Gallo-Roman (or Vulgar Latin ) dialect of the late Roman period evolved into the dialects of the Oïl languages and Old French in the north, and into Occitan in the south.

The name Gallia and its equivalents continued in use, at least in writing, until the end of the Merovingian period in the 750s. Slowly, during the ensuing Carolingian period (751–987), the expression Francia , then Francia occidentalis spread to describe the political reality of the kingdom of the Franks ( regnum francorum ).

Geographical divisions [ edit ] Roman Gaul after Diocletian 's reorganisation (1886 atlas) Before 22 BC, Gaul had three geographical divisions, one of which was divided into multiple Roman provinces: Gallia Cisalpina or "Gaul this side of the Alps ", covered most of present-day northern Italy .  It was conquered by the Romans around 121 BC, but was not made a formal province until 81 BC.  By the end of the republic, it was annexed into Italy itself.

Gallia Transalpina , or "Gaul across the Alps ", was originally conquered and annexed in 121 BC in an attempt to solidify communications between Rome and the Iberian peninsula. It comprised most of what is now southern France, along the Mediterranean coast from the Pyrenees to the Alps.  It was later renamed Gallia Narbonensis , after its capital city, Narbo (modern Narbonne ).

Gallia Comata , "free Gaul" or "long-haired Gaul", encompassed the remainder of present-day France, Belgium, and westernmost Germany, including Aquitania , Gallia Celtica and Belgica . It had tributary status throughout the second and first centuries BC, but was still formally independent of Rome.  It was annexed into the Empire as a result of Julius Caesar 's victory in the Gallic Wars in 50 BC.

After 22 BC, the Romans divided Gallia Comata into three provinces, the Tres Galliae (the 3 Gauls): Gallia Aquitania , corresponding to central and western France; Gallia Belgica , corresponding to northeastern France, Belgium, Luxembourg, and western Germany; capital at Reims , later Trier Gallia Lugdunensis , corresponding to eastern and northern France; capital at Lugdunum (Lyon) The Romans divided these huge provinces into civitates corresponding more or less with the pre-Conquest communities or polities sometimes described misleadingly as "tribes," such as the Aedui , Allobroges , Bellovaci , and Sequani (see List of Celtic tribes ) but the civitates were too large and in turn were divided into smaller units, pagi , a term that eventually became the modern French word "pays".

[ 12 ] These administrative groupings would be taken over by the Romans in their system of local control, and these civitates would also be the basis of France's eventual division into ecclesiastical bishoprics and dioceses , which would remain in place—with slight changes—until the French Revolution .

Language and culture [ edit ] Main article: Gallo-Roman culture The Vachères warrior, 1st century BC, a statue depicting a Romanized Gaulish warrior wearing chainmail and a Celtic torc around his neck, wielding a Celtic-style shield .

[ 13 ] In the five centuries between Caesar's invasion and the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, the Gaulish language and cultural identity underwent a syncretism with the Roman culture of the new governing class, and evolved into a hybrid Gallo-Roman culture that eventually permeated all levels of society.

[ citation needed ] Gauls continued writing some inscriptions in the Gaulish language, but switched from the Greek alphabet to the Latin alphabet during the Roman period. Current historical research suggests that Roman Gaul was "Roman" only in certain (albeit major) social contexts, the prominence of which in material culture has hindered a better historical understanding of the permanence of many Celtic elements.

[ citation needed ] The Roman influence was most apparent in the areas of civic religion and administration. The Druidic religion was suppressed by Emperor Claudius I , and in later centuries Christianity was introduced.  The prohibition of Druids and the syncretic nature of the Roman religion led to disappearance of the Celtic religion. It remains to this day poorly understood: current knowledge of the Celtic religion is based on archaeology and via literary sources from several isolated areas such as Ireland and Wales .

The Romans easily imposed their administrative, economic, artistic (especially in terms of monumental art and architecture) and literary culture.

[ citation needed ] They wore the Roman tunic instead of their traditional clothing.

[ citation needed ] Surviving Celtic influences also infiltrated back into the Roman Imperial culture in the 3rd century. For example, the Gaulish tunic—which gave Emperor Caracalla his surname—had not been replaced by Roman fashion. Similarly, certain Gaulish artisan techniques, such as the barrel (more durable than the Roman amphora ) and chain mail were adopted by the Romans.

The Celtic heritage also continued in the spoken language (see History of French ). Gaulish spelling and pronunciation of Latin are apparent in several 5th century poets and transcribers of popular farces.

[ 14 ] The last pockets of Gaulish speakers appear to have lingered until the 6th or 7th century.

[ citation needed ] Gaulish was held to be attested by a quote from Gregory of Tours written in the second half of the 6th century, [ 15 ] which describes how a shrine "called 'Vasso Galatae' in the Gallic tongue" was destroyed and burnt to the ground.

[ 16 ] Throughout the Roman rule over Gaul, although considerable Romanization in terms of material culture occurred, the Gaulish language is held to have survived and continued to be spoken, coexisting with Latin.

[ 15 ] Germanic placenames were first attested in border areas settled by Germanic colonizers (with Roman approval). In the 4th and 5th centuries, the Franks settled in northern France and Belgium , the Alemanni in Alsace and Switzerland , and the Burgundians in Savoie .

Northern Gaul " sou ", 440–450, 4240 mg.

Gallic harvester Villas in Roman Gaul [ edit ] Further information: Roman villas in northwestern Gaul Villas were usually centres of agricultural production, and were often closely associated with vineries and wine production .

[ 17 ] The owners were probably mainly local Gallic elites who became quickly romanised after the conquest , and sometimes Romans and Italians who wished to exploit rich local resources.

[ 18 ] The villas would have been the centre of complex relationships with the local area. Much of the work would have been undertaken by slave labour or by local coloni ("tenant farmers"). There would also have been a farm manager in addition to the inhabiting family.

[ 19 ] Cities of Roman Gaul [ edit ] Important cities of Roman Gaul include Lugdunum ( Lyon ), Lutetia ( Paris ), Augusta Treverorum ( Trier ), Colonia Agrippinensium ( Cologne ), Burdigala ( Bordeaux ), Massalia ( Marseille ), Tolosa ( Toulouse ), Narbo Martius ( Narbonne ), Colonia Nemausus ( Nîmes ), Arelate ( Arles ), Augustodunum ( Autun ), Arausio ( Orange ) and Glanum .

Gallery [ edit ] Model of Lugdunum Roman theatre at Lugdunum Aqueduct at Lugdunum Model of the forum of Lutecia Model of Augusta Trevorum Porta Nigra , Trier Colonia Agrippinensium The Piliers de Tutelle at Burdigala The Palais Gallien at Burdigala Reconstruction of the Roman Capitol at Tolosa The Pont du Gard near Nimes The Maison Carree at Nimes The Roman amphitheatre at Nimes Temple of Diana at Nimes Temple of Janus at Augustodunum Monumental arch and mausoleum at Glanum Roman theatre at Arausio Monumental arch at Arausio Roman amphitheatre at Arelate Roman baths at Trier See also [ edit ] Germanisation of Gaul Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul Montmaurin Praetorian prefecture of Gaul Gallo-Roman religion Jublains archeological site Marble of Thorigny Notes [ edit ] ^ The territory of Gaul roughly corresponds to modern-day France , Belgium and Luxembourg , and  adjacent parts of  the Netherlands , Switzerland and Germany .

References [ edit ] ^ Drinkwater, John (2014). Roman Gaul (Routledge Revivals): The Three Provinces, 58 BC-AD 260. Routledge.

ISBN 978-1317750741 p.6 ^ Gilliver 2003 , p. 11.

^ Goldsworthy, Adrian (2007).

Caesar, Life of a Colossus . London: Orion Books .

ISBN 978-0300126891 .

^ Grant, Michael (1974) [1969].

Julius Caesar . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson .

^ a b c Gilliver, Catherine (2003).

Caesar's Gallic wars, 58–50 BC . New York: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-203-49484-4 .

OCLC 57577646 .

^ Gilliver 2003 , pp. 83–88.

^ Boatwright et al., The Romans, From Village to Empire, p.272 ISBN 978-0-19-511876-6 ^ Panegyrici Latini, 8:6; Aurelius Victor, Book of Caesars 39:20–21; Eutropius, Abridgement of Roman History 21; Orosius, Seven Books of History Against the Pagans 7:25.2-4 ^ Panegyrici Latini 8:12 ^ O'Callaghan, Joseph. "Spain: The Visigothic Kingdom". Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved 17 September 2019.

^ Bennett, Matthew (2004). "Goths". In Holmes, Richard; Singleton, Charles; Jones, Spencer (eds.). The Oxford Companion to Military History. Oxford University Press. p. 367.

ISBN 9780191727467 ^ Patrick Galliou and Michael Jones, The Bretons, 1991, p. 79.

^ Ashton, Kasey. " The Celts Themselves ." University of North Carolina . Accessed 5 November 2017.

^ Histoire de France , ed. Les Belles lettres, Paris.

^ a b Laurence Hélix (2011).

Histoire de la langue française . Ellipses Edition Marketing S.A. p. 7.

ISBN 978-2-7298-6470-5 .

Le déclin du Gaulois et sa disparition ne s'expliquent pas seulement par des pratiques culturelles spécifiques: Lorsque les Romains conduits par César envahirent la Gaule, au 1er siecle avant J.-C., celle-ci romanisa de manière progressive et profonde. Pendant près de 500 ans, la fameuse période gallo-romaine, le gaulois et le latin parlé coexistèrent; au VIe siècle encore; le temoignage de Grégoire de Tours atteste la survivance de la langue gauloise.

^ Hist. Franc.

, book I, 32 Veniens vero Arvernos, delubrum illud, quod Gallica lingua Vasso Galatæ vocant, incendit, diruit, atque subvertit.

And coming to Clermont [to the Arverni ] he set on fire, overthrew and destroyed that shrine which they call Vasso Galatæ in the Gallic tongue.

^ "Productions and activities" .

Villa, Villae en Gaule romaine . Retrieved 2019-02-04 .

^ "The estate owners" .

Villa, Villae en Gaule romaine . Retrieved 2019-02-04 .

^ "Farm employees and slaves" .

Villa, Villae en Gaule romaine . Retrieved 2019-02-04 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Roman Gaul .

Romans in Gaul : A Webliography – A Teacher Workshop held at Temple University, November 3, 2001. Dr. Janice Siegel, Department of Classics, Hampden-Sydney College , Virginia v t e History of the Roman and Byzantine Empire in modern territories Albania (Classical - Medieval) Algeria Andorra Armenia (Classical - Late Antique) Azerbaijan Austria Balkans Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria (Classical - High Medieval) Britain (England) Crimea (Classical - Medieval) Croatia Cyprus (Classical - Medieval) Egypt (Classical ~ Late Antique) France ( Corsica (Classical - Early Medieval) ) Georgia Germany Greece (Classical - Medieval) ( Crete (Classical - Medieval) ) Guernsey Hungary Iraq (Classical - Medieval) Israel (Classical ~ Late Antique) Italy (Classical - Medieval) ( Sicily (Classical - Medieval) , Sardinia (Classical - Early Medieval) ) Jersey (Classical) Jordan (Classical - Late Antique/Medieval) Kosovo (Classical) Kuwait Lebanon (Classical ~ Late Antique) Libya Liechtenstein Luxembourg Malta Macedonia Moldova Monaco Montenegro Morocco The Netherlands North Africa Palestine (Classical ~ Late Antique) Portugal (Classical) Romania San Marino Saudi Arabia (Classical) Scotland Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain (Classical - Late Antique) Switzerland Syria (Classical ~ Late Antique) Vatican City (Classical - Early Medieval) Ukraine Tunisia ( Roman Carthage ) Turkey (Classical - Medieval) ( Thrace (Classical - Medieval) ) Wales v t e France topics History Overviews History Timeline Political history Military history Language Economic Foreign relations Journalism Liberalism and radicalism Regions History of Brittany History of Normandy Ancient Prehistory Greek colonies Celtic Gaul Roman Gaul Middle Ages Visigothic Kingdom Francia West Francia Middle Ages Kingdom of France Fundamental laws Early Modern Early modern era House of Bourbon Absolute monarchy Ancien Régime Wars of Religion Thirty Years' War Peace of Westphalia Second Hundred Years' War Louis XIV War of the Spanish Succession Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 Seven Years' War Revolution French Revolution Napoleonic era First Republic First Empire Late Modern Long nineteenth century Restoration July Monarchy Revolution of 1848 Second Republic Coup of 2 December 1851 Second Empire Government of National Defense Third Republic Belle Époque World War I Interwar Années folles World War II Vichy France Free France Liberation Provisional Government Contemporary 1900 to present Fourth Republic Algerian War Fifth Republic May 68 2005 riots Great Recession 2015 Paris attacks 2017 presidential election Coronavirus pandemic 2021 labor protests 2022 presidential election Geography Administrative divisions Cities Climate change Borders Islands Lakes Mountains National parks Rivers World Heritage Sites Politics Constitutions Elections presidential Foreign relations Politics Political scandals Human rights Intersex LGBT Judiciary Law history enforcement criminal law Military Parliament Political parties Economy Agriculture Automotive industry Banking Central bank Economic history Energy Euro Exports Franc (former currency) French subdivisions by GDP Mining Stock exchange Science and technology Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Rail Society Abortion Birth control Censorship Corruption Crime Demographics Education Health care Homelessness Immigration Life expectancy People Poverty Religion secularism Racism Social class Welfare Culture Anthem Architecture Art Coat of arms Cinema Cuisine Cultural icons Fashion Flag Gardens Language Literature Media Music Philosophy Public holidays Sport History Symbols Theatre Outline Category Portal WikiProject v t e Gauls History Battle of the Allia (ca. 387 BC) Celtic settlement of Southeast Europe Galatian War (189 BC) First Transalpine War (125–121 BC) Gallic Wars (58–50 BC) Roman Gaul (50 BC–476 AD) Culture Ambactus Bard Druid Eubages Gallo-Roman culture Nemeton Oppidum Language ( Cisalpine , Galatian ) La Tène culture Religion Vates Vergobret Peoples Belgica Ambiani Aresaces Atrebates Atuatuci Bellovaci Caeracates Caeroesi Caletes Catuslugi Catalauni Condrusi Eburones Leuci Mediomatrici Meldi Menapii Morini Nemetes Nervii Paemani Remi Silvanectes Suessiones Treveri Triboci Vadicassii Veliocasses Viromandui Celtica Abrincatui Ambiliati Aedui Ambarri Andecavi Arouii Arverni Aulerci ( Brannovices , Cenomani , Diablintes , Eburovices ) Bodiocasses Bituriges Cubi Bituriges Vivisci Cadurci Carnutes Coriosolites Durocasses Esuvii Gabali Helvetii Latobrigi Lemovices Lexovii Lingones Mandubii Namnetes Nitiobroges Osismii Parisii Petrocorii Pictones Rauraci Redones Ruteni Sagii Santoni Senones Segusiavi Sequani Tigurini Tricasses Tulingi Turoni Vellavii Venelli Veneti Viducasses Narbonensis Agesinates Albici Allobroges Anatilii Atacini Avatici Bormani Budenicenses Camactulici Cavari Cenomani Comani Dexivates Helvii Libicii Ligauni Longostaletes Memini Nearchi Oxybii Reii Salyes Segobrigii Segovellauni Suelteri Tolosates Tricastini Tricores Tricorii Tritolli Vertamocorii Verucini Vocontii Volcae ( Arecomici and Tectosages ) Vulgientes Alpina Acitavones Adanates Adunicates Alauni Ambidravi Ambilici Ambisontes Aneuniates Ausuciates Avantici Belaci Belouni Benacenses Bergalei Bodiontici Brigantii Brigianii Brixentes Calucones Carni Catenates Catubrini Caturiges Ceutrones Cosuanetes Ecdinii Eguiturii Gallitae Genauni Graioceli Iemerii Ingauni Licates Medulli Nantuates Nemaloni Nemeturii Quariates Rucinates Salassi Savincates Sebaginni Seduni Segovii Segusini Sentii Sogionti Suanetes Suetrii Tebavii Triulatti Ucennii Vediantii Velaunii Venisami Venostes Vennones Veragri Vergunni Vesubiani Vindelici Cisalpina Anamares Anauni Anesiates Arusnates Bagienni Boii Bromanenses Cenomani Gallianates Gennanates Insubres Libicii Marici Montunates Orobii Subinates Taurini Vertamocorii Votodrones Aquitania Boii Cocosates Lactorates Sotiates Tarusates Vasates Eastern Europe Anartes Arabiates Boii Britolagai Cornacates Costoboci Gotini Eravisci Hercuniates Latobici Scordisci ( Dindari and Celegeri ) Serdi Taurisci Varciani Galatia Aigosages Tectosages Tolistobogii Trocmi Pre-Roman settlements Alesia Argentomagus Avaricum Basel-Münsterhügel Bibracte Bibrax Cenabum Cularo Ensérune Entremont Gergovia Magetobria Noreia Tylis Vertillum Part of: Celts v t e Celts and modern Celts Celtic nations · Celtic studies · Celtic tribes · Celtic languages Peoples Ancient Celtic ethnic groups ( names ) Aedui Aigosages Allobroges Allotriges Ambarri Anartes Arecomici Armorica Astures Arverni Atuatuci Attacotti Atrebates Aulerci Aulerci Cenomani Cenomani Autrigones Bituriges Bituriges Vivisci Belgae Bellovaci Berones Boii Brigantii Britons Caledonians Caleti Cantabri Carni Cantii Carnutes Caristii Carpetani Catubrini Celegeri Cenomani Celtiberians Celtici Cotini Coriosolites Dumnonii Eburones Eburovices Eravisci Haedui Helvetii Gaels Gaesatae Gallaeci Gauls Galatians Helvetii Insubres Latobici Latobrigi Lemovices Lexovii Leuci Ligures Lingones Lusitanians Lepontii Menapii Morini Namnetes Nervii Noricum Orobii Osismii Parisi Parisii Petrocorii Picts Pictones Rauraci Redones Regni Remi Salluvii Santones Sequani Senones Scordisci Scoti Silures Sordones Tectosages Teurisci Tolistobogii Treveri Trinovantes Triboci Tricasses Trocmi Tulingi Turoni Ulidia Varciani Varisci Viromandui Veneti Veliocasses Vennones Vindelici Vocontii Volcae Modern Celtic ethnic groups Bretons Cornish Welsh Gaels Irish Manx Scots Celtic diaspora Cornish diaspora Irish diaspora Scottish diaspora Welsh diaspora Related ethnic groups Anglo-Celtic Breton Americans Cornish Americans English people French people Irish Americans Irish Canadians Scotch-Irish Americans Scottish Americans Scottish Canadians Scots-Irish people Spanish people Studies Places Alesia Avaricum Gergovia Hallstatt Hochdorf La Tène Vix Grave Gaelic Ireland Hill of Tara Newgrange Rathcroghan Dálriata Alba Fortriu Cumbria Brigantia Iron Age Britain Roman Britain Sub-Roman Britain Stonehenge Dumnonia Hen Ogledd Gaul Roman Gaul Britonia Armorica Domnonée Brittany Gallaecia Numantia Gallia Aquitania Gallia Belgica Gallia Celtica Cisalpine Gaul Transalpine Gaul Balkans Transylvania Galatia Ancient religion Proto-Celtic religion Celtic polytheism Celtic deities Celtic Animism Celtic mythology Celtic Christianity Celtic Rites Celtic stone idolss * Druids Monasticism Romano-Celtic temple Practices Mythology Irish Scottish Welsh British Breton Cornish Society Bard Brehon Celtic calendar Celtic festivals Celtic women Celticisation Chief of the Name Derbfine Druid Clan chief Irish Clans Scottish clans ( List ) Gaelicisation Gaelic astrology Fáinne Fili Law Tanistry Seanchaí Sept Túath Vates Warfare ( Gaelic ) Coinage Modern Celts Celtic Revival Celtic nations Pan-Celticism Celtic Congress Celtic League Celtic union Music Rock Neo-Christianity Neopaganism Celtic Wicca Neo-Druidism Nations Celtic League definition Brittany ( Breizh ) Cornwall ( Kernow ) Ireland ( Éire ) Isle of Man ( Mannin ) Scotland ( Alba ) Wales ( Cymru ) Other claimants Asturias Cantabria Cumbria Devon Galicia Norte Portugal Nova Scotia Province of León Y Wladfa England Culture Literature Arthurian Legend Bardic Poetry Breton literature Cornish literature Irish literature Manx literature Scottish literature Welsh-language literature Welsh literature in English Early Irish literature Irish annals Gaelic literature Scottish Gaelic literature National cultures Brittany Cornwall Ireland Isle of Man Scotland Wales Art Bell shrines Brooches Dragonesque Carnyx Celtic cross Knotwork High crosses Insular art Interlace Leaf-crowns Mazes Pictish stones Torcs Triple spiral Clothing Celtic Dress Highland dress Gaelic clothing Tartan Traditional Welsh costume Welsh hat Regional cultures Gaelic culture Highland culture Music Ancient Celtic music Breton Folk music Gaelic music Irish folk music Scottish folk music Welsh folk music Sean-nós singing Carnyx National music scenes Brittany Cornwall Ireland Isle of Man Scotland Wales Festivals Calendar Samhain / Calan Gaeaf Imbolc / Gŵyl Fair Beltane / Calan Mai Lughnasadh / Calan Awst Festival Interceltique de Lorient Pan Celtic Festival Hebridean Celtic Festival Celtic Connections Celtic Media Festival Eisteddfod Sport Bando Bataireacht Camogie Cammag Cnapan Cornish hurling Cornish wrestling Curling Gaelic football ( Ladies' ) Gaelic handball Gouren Rounders Highland games Hurling Road bowls Shinty Welsh handball Politics Nationalism Breton nationalism history reunification Cornish nationalism status Irish nationalism Isle of Man Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles Scottish nationalism national identity Welsh nationalism national identity Autonomy Cornish devolution Scottish devolution Welsh devolution Independence Breton independence Scottish independence Welsh independence United Ireland and Irish republicanism Pan-Celticism Celtic League Celtic Congress Celtic Revival Celtic society Celtic unity Columba Project Languages Brittonic Breton Cornish Welsh Goidelic Irish Manx Scottish Gaelic Mixed Shelta Bungi Creole Beurla Reagaird Ancient Celtic languages Extinct Proto-Celtic Proto-Brittonic Proto-Goidelic Celtiberian Gaulish Galatian Gallaecian Lepontic Noric Cumbric Pictish Hispano-Celtic Cisalpine Gaulish Scottish Gaelic dialects Arran Gaelic Deeside Gaelic Galwegian Gaelic Law and Warfare Law Early Irish law Cyfraith Hywel (Medieval Welsh law) Early Scots law Warfare Gaelic warfare Ceathairne Ceithearn Fianna Gaesatae Gallóglaigh Hobelar Redshanks Trimarcisia Lists Tribes Deities Celtic words in English – in Spanish – in Galician Gaulish words in French Celtic place names in Galicia – in Italy – in Portugal Celts portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐k84kb
Cached time: 20250815224824
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.856 seconds
Real time usage: 1.120 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4140/1000000
Revision size: 25130/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 315845/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5442/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 111211/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.463/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23047816/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  825.259      1 -total
 39.83%  328.727     21 Template:Navbox
 17.52%  144.574      2 Template:Reflist
 15.88%  131.086      1 Template:History_of_France
 15.69%  129.487      1 Template:France_topics
 15.47%  127.680      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.16%  116.816      9 Template:Lang
 10.41%   85.895      7 Template:Citation_needed
  8.64%   71.275      1 Template:Short_description
  8.36%   69.003      7 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2068003:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815224824 and revision id 1306096769. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roman_Gaul&oldid=1306096769 " Categories : Roman Gaul Former countries in French history Praetorian prefecture of Gaul 121 BC 120s BC establishments 2nd-century BC establishments in the Roman Republic 5th-century disestablishments in the Roman Empire States and territories established in the 2nd century BC States and territories disestablished in the 5th century 1st millennium in France Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Breton-language text Articles containing Cornish-language text Articles containing Irish-language text Articles containing Manx-language text Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language text Articles containing Welsh-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 22:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Roman Gaul 20 languages Add topic

