Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancestry 2 Birth and childhood 3 Inheritances 4 Reign Toggle Reign subsection 4.1 Burgundy and the Low Countries 4.2 Spanish kingdoms 4.3 Italian states 4.4 Holy Roman Empire 4.4.1 Wars with France 4.4.2 Conflicts with the Ottoman Empire 4.4.3 Protestant Reformation 5 Abdications and death Toggle Abdications and death subsection 5.1 Division of the Habsburgs 5.2 Retirement, death and burial 6 Administration Toggle Administration subsection 6.1 Europe 6.1.1 Military system 6.1.2 Finance 6.1.3 Communication, diplomatic, and espionage systems 6.1.4 Patronage of the arts and architecture 6.2 Americas 7 Dynasty and private life Toggle Dynasty and private life subsection 7.1 Ancestors 7.2 Education 7.3 Languages 7.4 Appearance and health 7.5 Siblings 7.6 Marriage 7.7 Issue 7.8 Titles and coat of arms 8 Historiography, commemoration, and popular culture Toggle Historiography, commemoration, and popular culture subsection 8.1 Public monuments 8.2 Literature 8.3 Plays 8.4 Opera 8.5 Television and film 9 Male-line family tree 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Citations 12.2 Bibliography 13 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 13.1 English 13.2 Other languages 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor 99 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ქართული Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Holy Roman Emperor from 1519 to 1556 "Karl V." redirects here. For the opera, see Karl V.

(opera) .

Charles V Imperator Romanorum Portrait of Charles V , 1548 Holy Roman Emperor as Charles V ( more...

) Reign 28 June 1519 – 3 August 1556/24 February 1558 [ a ] Coronation 23 October 1520 ( Germany ) 22 February 1530 ( Italy ) 24 February 1530 ( Empire ) [ 22 ] Predecessor Maximilian I Successor Ferdinand I King of Spain as Charles I Reign 14 March 1516 – 16 January 1556 Predecessor Joanna of Castile Successor Philip II Co-monarch Joanna (until 1555) Regents See list Adrian, Cardinal-Bishop of Tortosa Isabella, Holy Roman Empress Philip, Prince of Asturias Archduke Maximilian of Austria Infanta Maria of Spain Archduke of Austria as Charles I Reign 12 January 1519 – 21 April 1521 Predecessor Maximilian I Successor Ferdinand I (in the name of Charles V until 1556) Lord of the Netherlands , Count Palatine of Burgundy , and titular Duke of Burgundy (as Charles II) Reign 25 September 1506 – 25 October 1555 Predecessor Philip the Handsome Successor Philip II of Spain Governors See list Margaret of Austria Mary of Austria Born 24 February 1500 Prinsenhof of Ghent , Flanders , Habsburg Netherlands , Holy Roman Empire Died 21 September 1558 (1558-09-21) (aged 58) Monastery of Yuste , Crown of Castile , Spain Burial El Escorial , Spain Spouse Isabella of Portugal ​ ​ ( m.

1526 ; died 1539 ) ​ Issue more...

Philip II, King of Spain Maria, Holy Roman Empress Joanna, Princess of Portugal Illegitimate: Margaret, Duchess of Florence and Parma John of Austria House Habsburg Father Philip the Handsome Mother Joanna, Queen of Castile and Aragon Religion Catholic Church Signature Charles V [ b ] [ c ] (24 February 1500 – 21 September 1558) was Holy Roman Emperor and Archduke of Austria from 1519 to 1556, King of Spain (as Charles I ) from 1516 to 1556, King of Sicily and Naples from 1516 to 1554, and also Lord of the Netherlands and titular Duke of Burgundy (as Charles II ) from 1506 to 1555. He was heir to and then head of the rising House of Habsburg . His dominions in Europe included the Holy Roman Empire , extending from Germany to northern Italy with rule over the Austrian hereditary lands and Burgundian Low Countries , and Spain with its possessions of the southern Italian kingdoms of Sicily , Naples , and Sardinia . In the Americas, he oversaw the continuation of Spanish colonization and a short-lived German colonization . The personal union of the European and American territories he ruled was the first collection of realms labelled " the empire on which the sun never sets ".

Charles was born in Flanders to Habsburg Archduke Philip the Handsome , son of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor and Mary of Burgundy , and Joanna of Castile , younger child of Isabella I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon , the Catholic Monarchs of Spain . Heir of his grandparents, Charles inherited his family dominions at a young age. After his father's death in 1506, he inherited the Habsburg Netherlands in the Low Countries . In 1516 he became King of Spain as co-monarch of Castile and Aragon with his mother .

Spain 's possessions included the Castilian colonies of the West Indies and the Spanish Main , as well as Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia. At the death of his grandfather Maximilian in 1519, he inherited the Austrian hereditary lands and was elected as Holy Roman Emperor. He adopted the Imperial name of Charles V as his main title, and styled himself as a new Charlemagne .

Charles revitalized the medieval concept of universal monarchy . With no fixed capital, he made 40 journeys through the different entities he ruled and spent a quarter of his reign travelling within his realms. Although his empire came to him peacefully, he spent most of his life waging war, exhausting his revenues and leaving debts in his attempt to defend the integrity of the Holy Roman Empire from the Protestant Reformation , the expansion of the Ottoman Empire , and in wars with France . Charles borrowed money from German and Italian bankers and, to repay them, relied on the wealth of the Low Countries and the flow of silver from New Spain and Peru , brought under his rule following the Spanish conquest of the Aztec and Inca empires, which caused widespread inflation .

Crowned King of Germany in Aachen , Charles sided with Pope Leo X and declared Martin Luther an outlaw at the Diet of Worms in 1521. The same year, Francis I of France , surrounded by the Habsburg possessions, started a war in Italy that led to his capture in the Battle of Pavia (1525). In 1527, Rome was sacked by an army of Charles's mutinous soldiers. Charles then defended Vienna from the Turks and obtained coronations as King of Italy and Holy Roman Emperor from Pope Clement VII . In 1535, he took possession of Milan and captured Tunis . However, the loss of Buda during the struggle for Hungary and the Algiers expedition in the early 1540s frustrated his anti-Ottoman policies. After years of negotiations, Charles came to an agreement with Pope Paul III for the organization of the Council of Trent (1545). The refusal of the Lutheran Schmalkaldic League to recognize the council's validity led to a war , won by Charles. However, Henry II of France offered new support to the Lutheran cause and strengthened the Franco-Ottoman alliance with Suleiman the Magnificent .

Ultimately, Charles conceded the Peace of Augsburg and abandoned his multi-national project with abdications in 1556 that divided his hereditary and imperial domains between the Spanish Habsburgs, headed by his son Philip II of Spain , and Austrian Habsburgs, headed by his brother Ferdinand . In 1557, Charles retired to the Monastery of Yuste in Extremadura and died there a year later.

Ancestry [ edit ] The entrance gate to the Prinsenhof , Dutch for "Princes' Court", in Ghent , where Charles V was born Charles of Austria was born on 24 February 1500 in the Prinsenhof of Ghent , a Flemish city of the Habsburg Netherlands , to Philip of Austria and Joanna of Trastámara .

[ 23 ] His father Philip, nicknamed Philip the Handsome , was the firstborn son of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor , Archduke of Austria , and Mary of Burgundy , heiress to the Burgundian Netherlands . Charles's mother Joanna was a younger daughter of Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile , the Catholic Monarchs of Spain from the House of Trastámara . The political marriage of Philip and Joanna was first conceived in a letter sent by Maximilian to Ferdinand, part of the establishment of an Austro-Spanish alliance opposed to the Kingdom of France in the context the Italian Wars .

[ 24 ] From the moment he became King of the Romans in 1486, Charles's paternal grandfather Maximilian had carried a very financially risky policy of maximum expansionism, relying mostly on the resources of the Austrian hereditary lands.

[ 25 ] Even though it is often implied, among others, by Erasmus of Rotterdam [ 26 ] [ page needed ] that Charles V and the Habsburgs gained their vast empire through peaceful policies (exemplified by the saying Bella gerant aliī, tū fēlix Austria nūbe / Nam quae Mars aliīs, dat tibi regna Venus or "Let others wage war, but thou, O happy Austria, marry; for those kingdoms which Mars gives to others, Venus gives to thee.", reportedly spoken by Mathias Corvinus [ 27 ] [ 28 ] ), Maximilian and his descendants fought wars aplenty. Maximilian fought 27 wars during his four decades of ruling.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] His general strategy was to combine his intricate systems of alliance, wars, military threats and offers of marriage to realize his expansionist ambitions. Ultimately he succeeded in coercing Bohemia , Hungary and Poland into acquiescence in the Habsburgs' expansionist plan.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] The fact that the marriages between the Habsburgs and the Trastámaras, originally conceived as a marital alliance against France, would bring the crowns of Castile and Aragon to Maximilian's male line, was unexpected.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] The marriage contract between Philip and Joanna was signed in 1495, and celebrations were held in 1496. Philip was already Duke of Burgundy (although the Duchy of Burgundy itself had been lost to the French crown), given Mary's death in 1482, and also heir apparent of Austria as honorific archduke . Joanna, in contrast, was only third in the Spanish line of succession , preceded by her older brother John, Prince of Asturias and older sister Isabella of Aragon . Both heirs to the crowns of Castile and Aragon John and Isabella died in 1498. The Catholic Monarchs desired to keep the Spanish kingdoms in Iberian hands, so they designated their Portuguese grandson Miguel da Paz as heir presumptive of Spain by naming him Prince of Asturias ; but he died as a baby in 1500.

[ 35 ] [ page needed ] Ancestors of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor 4.

Maximilian of Habsburg Archduke of Austria (1493) Holy Roman Emperor (1508) 2.

Philip of Habsburg Duke of Burgundy (1482) King of Castile (1506) 5.

Mary of Burgundy Duchess of Burgundy (1477) 1.

Charles of Habsburg Holy Roman Emperor (1519) Archduke of Austria (1519) King of Castile (1516) King of Aragon (1516) Duke of Burgundy (1506) 6.

Ferdinand II of Aragon King of Aragon (1479) 3.

Joanna of Trastámara Queen of Castile (1504) Queen of Aragon (1516) 7.

Isabella I of Castile Queen of Castile (1474) Birth and childhood [ edit ] Charles's mother went into labour at a ball in February 1500. He was named in honour of Charles the Bold of Burgundy, who had tried to turn the Burgundian State into a continuous territory. When Charles was born, a poet at the court reported that the people of Ghent "shouted Austria and Burgundy throughout the whole city for three hours" to celebrate his birth.

[ 24 ] Given the dynastic situation, the newborn was originally heir apparent only of the Habsburg Netherlands , being given the honorary title Duke of Luxembourg . He was also second in line to the Austrian duchies, becoming known in his early years simply as "Charles of Ghent". He was baptised at the Church of Saint John by the Bishop of Tournai . The Burgundian nobles Charles I de Croÿ and John III of Glymes were his godfathers, and Margaret of York and Margaret of Austria , respectively his step-grandmother and aunt, his godmothers. Charles's baptism gifts were a sword and a helmet, objects of Burgundian chivalric tradition representing, respectively, the instrument of war and the symbol of peace.

[ 36 ] [ page needed ] The death in July 1500 of the young heir presumptive Miguel de Paz to the Iberian realms of his maternal grandparents meant baby Charles's future inheritance potentially expanded to include Castile, Aragon, and the overseas possessions in the Americas.

A painting by Bernhard Strigel representing the extended Habsburg family with a young Charles in the middle In 1501, his parents Philip and Joanna left Charles in care of Philip's step-grandmother Margaret of York in Mechelen and went to Spain. The main goal of their Spanish mission was the recognition of Joanna as Princess of Asturias, given Prince Miguel's death a year earlier. They succeeded despite facing some opposition from the Castilian Cortes , which were reluctant to create the premises for Habsburg succession. In 1504, when her mother Isabella died, Joanna became Queen of Castile .

[ 37 ] Charles only met his father again in 1503 while his mother returned in 1504 (after giving birth to Ferdinand in Spain). The Spanish Ambassador Gutierre Gómez de Fuensalida reported that Philip often visited and they had lots of fun. The couple's unhappy marriage and Joanna's unstable mental state however created many difficulties, making it unsafe for the children to stay with the parents.

[ 38 ] Philip was recognized King of Castile in 1506. He died shortly after, an event that was said to drive the mentally unstable Joanna into complete insanity. She was retired in isolation to the Royal Palace of Tordesillas . Charles's grandfather Ferdinand took control of all the Spanish kingdoms, under the pretext of protecting Charles's rights, which in reality he wanted to elude. Ferdinand's new marriage with Germaine de Foix failed to produce a surviving Trastámara heir to the throne, so Charles remained the heir presumptive to the Iberian realms. With his father dead and his mother confined, Charles became Duke of Burgundy and was recognised as Prince of Asturias (heir presumptive of Castile) and honorific Archduke (heir apparent of Austria).

[ 39 ] Inheritances [ edit ] A 1519 portrait of Charles V by Bernard van Orley with the insignia of the Order of the Golden Fleece prominently displayed Portrait of Charles V with a Dog , a 1532 portrait by Jakob Seisenegger The Burgundian inheritance included the Habsburg Netherlands , which consisted of a large number of the lordships in the Low Countries and covered modern-day Belgium , Netherlands and Luxembourg . It also included the Free County of Burgundy (the region of Franche-Comté ) and the County of Charolais , but excluded the Duchy of Burgundy , annexed by France in 1477. At the death of Philip in 1506, Charles was recognized as Lord of the Netherlands and count of Burgundy and Charolais, also becoming the titular Duke of Burgundy , and thus being styled as Duke Charles II of Burgundy .

[ 40 ] During his childhood and teen years, Charles lived in Mechelen together with his sisters Mary , Eleanor , and Isabella at the court of his aunt Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Savoy .

William de Croÿ (later prime minister) and Adrian of Utrecht (later Pope Adrian VI ) served as his tutors. The culture and courtly life of the Low Countries played an important part in the development of Charles's beliefs. As a member of the Burgundian Order of the Golden Fleece in his infancy, and later its grandmaster, Charles was educated to the ideals of the medieval knights and the desire for Christian unity to fight the infidel.

[ 41 ] The Low Countries were very rich during his reign, both economically and culturally . Charles was very attached to his homeland and spent a large part of his life in Brussels and Flemish cities.

The Spanish inheritance, resulting from a dynastic union of the crowns of Castile and Aragon , included Spain and the Castilian possessions in the Americas (the Spanish West Indies and the Province of Tierra Firme ) and the Aragonese kingdoms of Naples , Sicily , and Sardinia . Joanna inherited these territories in 1516 while confined, allegedly because she was mentally ill. Charles, therefore, claimed the crowns for himself jure matris , thus becoming co-monarch with Joanna with the title of Charles I of Castile and Aragon or Charles I of Spain .

[ 42 ] Castile and Aragon together formed the largest of Charles's personal possessions. They provided a great number of generals and tercios , the formidable Spanish infantry of the time, while Joanna remained confined in Tordesillas until her death.

Plus Ultra , the rendition from French into Latin of Charles's personal motto "Plus Oultre" ( Further Beyond ), later became the national motto of Spain and features on the country's flag as part of the Spanish coat of arms since the 18th century. However, at his accession to the Iberian thrones, Charles was viewed as a foreign prince.

[ 42 ] Two rebellions, the Revolt of the Germanies and the Revolt of the Comuneros , contested Charles's rule in the 1520s. Following these revolts, Charles placed Spanish counselors in a position of power and spent a significant part of his life in Castile, including his final years in a monastery. His son and heir, later Philip II of Spain , was born and raised in Castile. Nonetheless, many Spaniards believed that their resources, largely consisting of flows of silver from the Americas, were being used to sustain Imperial-Habsburg policies that were not in Spain's interest.

[ 42 ] Charles inherited the Austrian hereditary lands in 1519, as Charles I of Austria , and obtained the election as Holy Roman Emperor against the candidacy of the French king. Since the Imperial election, he was known as Emperor Charles V even outside of Germany. The dynastic motto of the House of Habsburg used by Charles was A.E.I.O.U.

("Austria Est Imperare Orbi Universo" — "it is Austria's destiny to rule the world"; although its exact meaning remains disputed). Charles staunchly defended Catholicism as Lutheranism spread. Various German princes broke with him on religious grounds, fighting against him. Charles's presence in Germany was often marked by the organization of imperial diets to maintain religious and political unity.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] He was frequently in Northern Italy, often taking part in complicated negotiations with the Popes to address the rise of Protestantism. It is important to note that the German Catholics supported the Emperor. Charles had a close relationship with important German families, like the House of Nassau , many of which were represented at his imperial court. Many German princes, noblemen and generals led his military campaigns against France and the Ottomans or accompanied him in his travels, and the bulk of his army was generally composed of German troops, especially the Imperial Landsknechte .

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Reign [ edit ] Main article: Empire of Charles V The dominions of the Habsburgs at the time of the abdication of Charles V in 1556 Burgundy and the Low Countries [ edit ] The Palace of Coudenberg in Brussels from a 17th-century portrait before it burnt down in 1731.

Brussels served as the main seat of the imperial court of Charles V in the Low Countries.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ page needed ] In 1506, Charles inherited all of his father's territories in the Low Countries, thus becoming the ruler of the Habsburg Netherlands . His inheritance also included the Free County of Burgundy (region of Franche-Comté ) within the Holy Roman Empire, and the County of Charolais in the Kingdom of France . and, most notably, the Low Countries . His territories in the Low Countries mostly lay within the Holy Roman Empire, and partialy witin the French realm. Thus, Charles's birthplace, the city of Ghent, belonged to the County of Flanders , at that time still being the fief of the French crown. Since he was a minor, his aunt Margaret of Austria acted as regent, as appointed by Emperor Maximilian until 1515. She soon found herself at war with France over Charles's requirement to pay homage to the French king for Flanders, Artois and Charolais, as his father had done. The outcome was that France relinquished its ancient claim on Flanders and Artois in 1528.

From 1515 to 1523, Charles's government in the Netherlands also had to contend with the rebellion of Frisian peasants (led by Pier Gerlofs Donia and Wijard Jelckama ). The rebels were initially successful but after a series of defeats, the remaining leaders were captured and executed in 1523.

Charles extended the Burgundian territory with the annexation of Tournai , Artois , Utrecht , Groningen , and Guelders . The Seventeen Provinces had been unified by Charles's Burgundian ancestors, but nominally were fiefs of either France or the Holy Roman Empire. Charles eventually won the Guelders Wars and united all provinces under his rule, the last one being the Duchy of Guelders. In 1549, Charles issued a Pragmatic Sanction , declaring the Habsburg Netherlands to be a unified entity of which his family would be the heirs.

[ 47 ] [ page needed ] The entire region of the Low Countries held an essential place in the Empire. For Charles V, they were his home, the region where he was born and spent his childhood. Because of trade and industry and the wealth of the region's cities, the Habsburg Netherlands also represented a significant income for the Charles' treasury.

The Burgundian territories were generally loyal to Charles throughout his reign. The important city of Ghent rebelled in 1539 due to heavy tax payments demanded by Charles. The rebellion did not last long, however, as Charles's military response, with reinforcement from Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba , [ 47 ] [ page needed ] was swift and humiliating to the rebels of Ghent.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Spanish kingdoms [ edit ] Toledo served as the main seat of the Imperial court of Charles V in Castile .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] The exterior of the Palace of Charles V in Granada , which was built upon his wedding to Isabella of Portugal in 1526.

In the Castilian Cortes of Valladolid in 1506 and of Madrid in 1510, Charles was sworn as the Prince of Asturias , heir-apparent to his mother Queen Joanna .

[ 52 ] On the other hand, in 1502, the Aragonese Corts gathered in Zaragoza and pledged an oath to Joanna as heiress-presumptive, but Alonso de Aragón , Archbishop of Zaragoza, (an illegitimate son of King Ferdinand) expressed firmly that this oath could not establish jurisprudence, that is to say, modify the right of the succession, except by virtue of a formal agreement between the Corts and the King.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] So, upon the death of King Ferdinand II of Aragon, on 23 January 1516, Joanna inherited the Crown of Aragon , which consisted of Aragon , Mallorca , Catalonia , Valencia , Naples , Sicily and Sardinia , while Charles became governor general (regent).

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Nevertheless, the Flemish wished Charles to assume the royal title, and this was supported by Emperor Maximilian I and Pope Leo X . Consequently, after Ferdinand II's funeral on 14 March 1516, Charles I was proclaimed King of Castile and of Aragon jointly with his mother. Finally, the Castilian Regent , Cardinal Jiménez de Cisneros accepted the fait accompli , and the Castilian and Aragonese Cortes paid homage to him [ 57 ] as King of Aragon jointly with his mother.

[ 58 ] Cisneros acceded to Charles's desire to be proclaimed king and imposed his instatement throughout the kingdom.

[ 59 ] Charles arrived in his new kingdoms in autumn of 1517. Cisneros came to meet him but fell ill along the way, not without a suspicion of poison, and he died before reaching the King.

[ 60 ] Due to the irregularity of Charles assuming the royal title while his mother, the legitimate queen, was alive, the negotiations with the Castilian Cortes in Valladolid (1518) proved difficult.

[ 61 ] In the end Charles was accepted under the following conditions: he would learn to speak Castilian ; he would not appoint foreigners; he was prohibited from taking precious metals from Castile beyond the Quinto Real ; and he would respect the rights of his mother, Queen Joanna. The Cortes paid homage to him in Valladolid in February 1518. After this, Charles departed to the Crown of Aragon.

[ 62 ] He managed to overcome the resistance of the Aragonese Cortes and Catalan Corts , [ 63 ] and he was recognized as King of Aragon and Count of Barcelona jointly with his mother, while his mother was kept confined and could only rule in name.

[ 62 ] The Kingdom of Navarre had been invaded by Ferdinand of Aragon jointly with Castile in 1512, but he pledged a formal oath to respect the kingdom. On Charles's accession to the Spanish thrones, the Parliament of Navarre ( Cortes ) required him to attend the coronation ceremony (to become Charles IV of Navarre). Still, this demand fell on deaf ears, and the parliament kept piling up grievances.

Charles was accepted as sovereign, even though the Spanish felt uneasy with the Imperial style. Spanish kingdoms varied in their traditions. Castile had become an authoritarian, highly centralized kingdom, where the monarch's own will easily overrode legislative and justice institutions.

[ 64 ] By contrast, in the Crown of Aragon, and especially in the Pyrenean Kingdom of Navarre, law prevailed, and the monarchy was seen as a contract with the people .

[ 65 ] This became an inconvenience and a matter of dispute for Charles V and later kings since realm-specific traditions limited their absolute power. With Charles, the government became more absolute, even though until his mother died in 1555, Charles did not hold absolute power in the country.

Soon resistance to the Emperor arose because of heavy taxation to support foreign wars in which Castilians had little interest and because Charles tended to select Flemings for high offices in Castile and America, ignoring Castilian candidates. The resistance culminated in the Revolt of the Comuneros , which Charles suppressed. Comuneros released Joanna and wanted to depose Charles and support Joanna to be the sole monarch instead. While Joanna refused to depose her son, her confinement would continue after the revolt to prevent possible events alike. Immediately after crushing the Castilian revolt, Charles was confronted again with the hot issue of Navarre when King Henry II attempted to reconquer the kingdom . Main military operations lasted until 1524, when Hondarribia surrendered to Charles's forces, but frequent cross-border clashes in the western Pyrenees only stopped in 1528 (Treaties of Madrid and Cambrai ).

After these events, Navarre remained a matter of domestic and international litigation still for a century (a French dynastic claim to the throne did not end until the July Revolution in 1830). Charles wanted his son and heir Philip II to marry the heiress of Navarre, Jeanne d'Albret . Jeanne was instead forced to marry William, Duke of Julich-Cleves-Berg , but that childless marriage was annulled after four years. She next married Antoine de Bourbon , and both she and their son Henry of Navarre would oppose Philip II in the French Wars of Religion .

After its integration into Charles's empire, Castile guaranteed effective military units and its American possessions provided the bulk of the empire's financial resources. However, the two conflicting strategies of Charles V, enhancing the possessions of his family and protecting Catholicism against Protestant heretics, diverted resources away from building up the Spanish economy. Elite elements in Spain called for more protection for the commercial networks, which were threatened by the Ottoman Empire and Barbary pirates . Charles instead focused on defeating Protestantism in Germany and the Netherlands, which proved to be lost causes. Each hastened the economic decline of the Spanish Empire in the next generation.

[ 66 ] The enormous budget deficit accumulated during Charles's reign, along with the inflation that affected the kingdom , resulted in declaring bankruptcy during the reign of Philip II.

[ 67 ] Italian states [ edit ] Pope Clement VII and Emperor Charles V on horseback under a canopy , a 1580 portrait by Jacopo Ligozzi . It depicts the entry of the Pope and the Emperor into Bologna in 1530 when Charles was crowned as Holy Roman Emperor by Clement VII.

The Crown of Aragon inherited by Charles included the Kingdom of Naples , the Kingdom of Sicily and the Kingdom of Sardinia . As Holy Roman Emperor, Charles was sovereign in several states of northern Italy as King of Italy . The Duchy of Milan , however, was under French control.

France took Milan from the House of Sforza after victory against Switzerland at the Battle of Marignano in 1515.

Imperial- Papal troops succeeded in re-installing Francesco II Sforza in Milan in 1521, in the context of an alliance between Charles V and Pope Leo X. A Franco-Swiss army was expelled from Lombardy at the Battle of Bicocca 1522. In 1524, Francis I of France retook the initiative, crossing into Lombardy where Milan, along with several other cities, once again fell to his attack.

Pavia alone held out, and on 24 February 1525 (Charles's twenty-fifth birthday), Charles's forces led by Charles de Lannoy captured Francis and crushed his army in the Battle of Pavia .

In 1535, Francesco II Sforza died without heirs, and Charles V annexed the territory as a vacant Imperial state with the help of Massimiliano Stampa , one of the most influential courtiers of the late Duke.

[ 68 ] [ page needed ] Charles successfully held on to all of its Italian territories, though they were invaded again on multiple occasions during the Italian Wars .

In addition, Habsburg trade in the Mediterranean was consistently disrupted by the Ottoman Empire and its vassal Barbary pirates . In 1538 a Holy League consisting of all the Italian states and the Spanish kingdoms was formed to drive the Ottomans back, but it was defeated at the Battle of Preveza . Decisive naval victory eluded Charles; it would not be achieved until after his death, at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571.

Holy Roman Empire [ edit ] Charles' domains in the Habsburg Netherlands , and also in the Free County of Burgundy , and the County of Charolais , c.

1540 (all in light orange) A panorama of Augsburg , the main German seat of the Imperial court and the location of many of the Imperial Diets presided over by Charles V depicted in a hand-coloured woodcut from the Nuremberg Chronicle After the death of his paternal grandfather, Maximilian , in 1519, Charles inherited the Habsburg monarchy . He was also the natural candidate of the electors to succeed his grandfather as Holy Roman Emperor . He defeated the candidacies of Frederick III of Saxony , Francis I of France , and Henry VIII of England in the 1519 Imperial election . According to some, Charles became emperor due to the fact that by paying huge bribes to the electors, he was the highest bidder. He won the crown on 28 June 1519. On 23 October 1520, he was crowned in Germany and some ten years later, on 24 February 1530 , he was crowned Holy Roman Emperor by Pope Clement VII in Bologna , the last emperor to receive a papal coronation .

[ 22 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] Others point out that while the electors were paid, this was not the reason for the outcome, or at most played only a small part.

[ 71 ] The important factor that swayed the final decision was that Frederick refused the offer, and made a speech in support of Charles on the ground that they needed a strong leader against the Ottomans, Charles had the resources and was a prince of German extraction.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] Hunting scene near Torgau with Charles V and John Frederick I, Elector of Saxony , by Lucas Cranach the Younger , 1544 Although even at the beginning of his reign, his position was more powerful than that of any of his predecessors, the decentralized structure of the Empire proved resilient, not least because of the Reformation . It was exactly during this crucial period, Charles V and Ferdinand were too busy with non-German affairs to prevent Imperial Cities in Upper Germany from becoming estranged from Imperial power.

[ 76 ] Due to Charles V's difficulties in coordinating between the Austrian, Hungarian fronts and his Mediterranean fronts in the face of the Ottoman threat, as well as in his German, Burgundian and Italian theatres of war against German Protestant Princes and France, the defense of central Europe,  as well as many responsibilities involving the management of the Empire, was subcontracted to Ferdinand. Charles V abdicated as Archduke of Austria in 1522, and nine years after that he had the German princes elect Ferdinand as King of the Romans , who thus became his designated successor as emperor, a move that "had profound implications for state formation in south-eastern Europe". Afterwards, Ferdinand managed to gain control of Bohemia , Croatia , and Hungary , with support from local nobles and his German vassals.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] Charles abdicated as emperor in 1556 in favour of his brother Ferdinand; however, due to lengthy debate and bureaucratic procedure, the Imperial Diet did not accept the abdication (and thus make it legally valid) until 24 February 1558. Up to that date, Charles continued to use the title of emperor.

Wars with France [ edit ] Francis I and Charles V made peace at the Truce of Nice in 1538. Francis refused to meet Charles in person, and the treaty was signed in separate rooms.

Charles V in the 1550s after Titian Much of Charles's reign was taken up by conflicts with France , which found itself encircled by Charles's empire while it still maintained ambitions in Italy. In 1520, Charles visited England , where his aunt, Catherine of Aragon , urged her husband, Henry VIII , to ally himself with the Emperor. In 1508 Charles had been nominated by Henry VII to the Order of the Garter .

[ 80 ] His Garter stall plate survives in Saint George's Chapel .

The first war with Charles's great nemesis Francis I of France began in 1521. Charles allied with England and Pope Leo X against the French and the Venetians , and was highly successful, driving the French out of Milan and defeating and capturing Francis at the Battle of Pavia in 1525.

[ 81 ] [ page needed ] To gain his freedom, Francis agreed to cede the Duchy of Burgundy to Charles in the Treaty of Madrid , as well as renouncing his support of Henry II's claim over Navarre .

When he was released, however, Francis had the Parlement of Paris denounce the treaty because it had been signed under duress, thus refusing to hand over the Duchy of Burgundy. France then joined the League of Cognac that Pope Clement VII had formed with Henry VIII of England, the Venetians, the Florentines , and the Milanese to resist imperial domination of Italy. In the ensuing war, Charles's sack of Rome (1527) and virtual imprisonment of Pope Clement VII in 1527 prevented the Pope from annulling the marriage of Henry VIII of England and Charles's aunt Catherine of Aragon, so Henry eventually broke with Rome, thus leading to the English Reformation .

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] In other respects, the war was inconclusive. In the Treaty of Cambrai (1529), called the "Ladies' Peace" because it was negotiated between Charles's aunt and Francis' mother, Francis renounced his claims in Italy but retained control of Burgundy.

A third war erupted in 1536. Following the death of Francesco II Sforza , Charles installed his son Philip in the Duchy of Milan , despite Francis' claims on it. Already in the summer of 1536, the emperor personally led the invasion of Provence , and took Aix-en-Provence on August 5, affirming there his imperial rights over the ancient Kingdom of Arles , but those gains were soon lost.

[ 84 ] This war too was inconclusive. Francis failed to conquer Milan, but he succeeded in conquering most of the lands of Charles's ally, Charles III, Duke of Savoy , including his capital Turin . The Truce of Nice was concluded in 1538, on the basis of uti possidetis . It ended the war, but lasted only a short time.

War resumed in 1542 , with Francis now allied with Ottoman Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent and Charles once again allied with Henry VIII. Despite the conquest of Nice by a Franco-Ottoman fleet , the French could not advance toward Milan, while a joint Anglo-Imperial invasion of northern France, led by Charles himself, won some successes but was ultimately abandoned, leading to another peace and restoration of the status quo ante bellum in 1544.

A final war erupted with Francis' son and successor, Henry II , in 1551. Henry won early success in Lorraine , where he captured Metz , but French offensives in Italy failed. Charles abdicated midway through this conflict, leaving further conduct of the war to his son, Philip II , and his brother, Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor .

Conflicts with the Ottoman Empire [ edit ] Further information: Ottoman–Habsburg wars , Habsburg–Ottoman wars in Hungary (1526–1568) , Ottoman wars in Europe , and Barbary slave trade Detail of a tapestry depicting the conquest of Tunis in the Tapestry Room of the Alcázar Palace in Seville Charles fought continually with the Ottoman Empire and its sultan, Suleiman the Magnificent . The defeat of Hungary at the Battle of Mohács in 1526 "sent a wave of terror over Europe." [ 85 ] [ 86 ] The Muslim advance in Central Europe was halted at the Siege of Vienna (1529) , followed by a counter-attack of Charles V across the Danube river. However, by 1541, central and southern Hungary fell under Ottoman control .

Suleiman won the contest for mastery of the Mediterranean, in spite of Christian victories such as the conquest of Tunis in 1535.

[ 87 ] The regular Ottoman fleet came to dominate the Eastern Mediterranean after its victories at Preveza in 1538 and Djerba in 1560 (shortly after Charles's death), which severely decimated the Spanish Navy . At the same time, the Muslim Barbary corsairs , acting under the general authority and supervision of the sultan, regularly devastated the Spanish and Italian coasts and crippled Spanish trade. The advance of the Ottomans in the Mediterranean and central Europe chipped at the foundations of Habsburg power and diminished Imperial prestige.

In 1536, Francis I allied France with Suleiman against Charles. While Francis was persuaded to sign a peace treaty in 1538, he again allied himself with the Ottomans in 1542 in a Franco-Ottoman alliance . In 1543, Charles allied himself with Henry VIII and forced Francis to sign the Truce of Crépy-en-Laonnois . Later, in 1547, Charles signed a humiliating [ 88 ] treaty with the Ottomans to gain himself some respite from the huge expenses of their war.

[ 89 ] [ page needed ] Charles V made overtures to the Safavid Empire to open a second front against the Ottomans, in an attempt at creating a Habsburg–Persian alliance . Contacts were positive, but rendered difficult by enormous distances. In effect, however, the Safavids did enter in conflict with the Ottoman Empire in the Ottoman–Safavid War , forcing it to split its military resources.

[ 90 ] During the 1541 expedition of Algiers , the losses amongst the invading force were heavy with 150 ships lost, plus large numbers of sailors and soldiers.

[ 91 ] A Turkish chronicler confirmed that the Berber tribes massacred 12,000 invaders.

[ 92 ] Leaving war materiel, including 100 to 200 guns which would be recovered to furnish the ramparts of Algiers, Charles' army was taken prisoner in such numbers that the markets of Algiers were filled with slaves.

Protestant Reformation [ edit ] Summons for Martin Luther to appear at the Diet of Worms signed by Charles V; the text on the left was on the reverse side.

16th-century perception of German soldiers during Charles's reign (1525) portrayed in the manuscript "Théâtre de tous les peuples et nations de la terre avec leurs habits et ornemens divers, tant anciens que modernes, diligemment depeints au naturel". Painted by Lucas de Heere in the second half of the 16th century. Preserved in the Ghent University Library .

[ 93 ] The issue of the Reformation was first brought to the imperial attention under Charles V. As Holy Roman Emperor , Charles called Martin Luther to the Diet of Worms in 1521, promising him safe conduct if he would appear. After Luther defended the Ninety-five Theses and his writings, the Emperor commented: "that monk will never make me a heretic". Charles V relied on religious unity to govern his various realms, otherwise unified only in his person , and perceived Luther's teachings as a disruptive form of heresy . He outlawed Luther and issued the Edict of Worms , declaring: You know that I am a descendant of the Most Christian Emperors of the great German people, of the Catholic Kings of Spain, of the Archdukes of Austria, and of the Dukes of Burgundy. All of these, their whole life long, were faithful sons of the Roman Church ... After their deaths they left, by natural law and heritage, these holy catholic rites, for us to live and die by, following their example. And so until now I have lived as a true follower of these our ancestors. I am therefore resolved to maintain everything which these my forebears have established to the present.

Charles V, however, kept his word, and left Martin Luther free to leave the city.

Frederick III, Elector of Saxony and protector of Luther, lamented the outcome of the Diet. On the road back from Worms, Luther was kidnapped by Frederick's men and hidden in a distant castle in Wartburg . There, he began to work on his German translation of the bible . The spread of Lutheranism led to two major revolts: that of the knights in 1522–1523 and that of the peasants led by Thomas Muntzer in 1524–1525. While the pro-Imperial Swabian League , in conjunction with Protestant princes afraid of social revolts, restored order, Charles V used the instrument of pardon to maintain peace. Conflict with the pope led Charles' agents to remind the pope of the bad position that the Protestants were putting the Vatican in.

[ 94 ] Charles V receives the Augsburg Confession at the Diet of Augsburg on 25 June 1530 Following this, Charles V took a tolerant approach and pursued a policy of reconciliation with the Lutherans. The 1530 Imperial Diet of Augsburg was requested by Emperor Charles V to decide on three issues: first, the defence of the Empire against the Ottoman threat; second, issues related to policy, currency and public well-being; and, third, disagreements about Christianity, in attempt to reach some compromise and a chance to deal with the German situation.

[ 95 ] The Diet was inaugurated by the emperor on 20 June. It produced numerous outcomes, most notably the 1530 declaration of the Lutheran estates known as the Augsburg Confession ( Confessio Augustana ), a central document of Lutheranism. Luther's assistant Philip Melanchthon went even further and presented it to Charles V. The Emperor strongly rejected it, and in 1531 the Schmalkaldic League was formed by Protestant princes. In 1532, Charles V recognized the League and effectively suspended the Edict of Worms with the standstill of Nuremberg . The standstill required the Protestants to continue to take part in the Imperial wars against the Turks and the French, and postponed religious affairs until an ecumenical council of the Catholic Church was called by the Pope to solve the issue.

Due to Papal delays in organizing a general council, Charles V decided to organize a German summit and presided over the Colloquy of Regensburg between Catholics and Lutherans in 1541, but no compromise was achieved. In 1545, the Council of Trent was finally opened and the Counter-Reformation began. The Catholic initiative was supported by a number of the princes of the Holy Roman Empire. However, the Schmalkaldic League refused to recognize the validity of the council and occupied territories of Catholic princes.

[ 96 ] Therefore, Charles V outlawed the Schmalkaldic League and opened hostilities against it in 1546.

[ 97 ] The next year his forces drove the League's troops out of southern Germany, and defeated John Frederick, Elector of Saxony , and Philip of Hesse at the Battle of Mühlberg , capturing both. At the Augsburg Interim in 1548, he created a solution giving certain allowances to Protestants until the Council of Trent would restore unity. However, members of both sides resented the Interim and some actively opposed it.

The council was re-opened in 1550 with the participation of Lutherans, and Charles V set up the Imperial court in Innsbruck , Austria, sufficiently close to Trent for him to follow the evolution of the debates. In 1552 Protestant princes, in alliance with Henry II of France , rebelled again and the Second Schmalkaldic War began.

Maurice of Saxony , instrumental for the Imperial victory in the first conflict, switched side to the Protestant cause and bypassed the Imperial army by marching directly into Innsbruck with the goal of capturing the Emperor. Charles V was forced to flee the city during an attack of gout and barely made it alive to Villach in a state of semi-consciousness carried in a litter. After failing to recapture Metz from the French, Charles V returned to the Low Countries for the last years of his emperorship. In 1555, he instructed his brother Ferdinand to sign the Peace of Augsburg in his name. The agreements led to the religious division of Germany between Catholic and Protestant princedoms.

[ 98 ] Abdications and death [ edit ] Division of the Habsburgs [ edit ] In Allegory on the abdication of Emperor Charles V in Brussels , Frans Francken the Younger 's depiction of Charles V in the allegorical act of dividing the entire world between Philip II of Spain and Emperor Ferdinand I Habsburg dominions in the centuries following their partition by Charles V Between 1554 and 1556, Charles V gradually divided the Habsburg empire between a senior Spanish line and an Austrian branch of the House of Habsburg . His abdications all occurred at the Palace of Coudenberg in Brussels . First he abdicated the thrones of Sicily and Naples , the latter a Papal fief, and the Imperial Duchy of Milan , in favour of his son Philip on 25 July 1554. Philip was secretly invested with Milan already in 1540 and again in 1546, but only in 1554 did the Emperor make it public. Upon the abdications of Naples and Sicily, Philip was invested by Pope Julius III with the Kingdom of Naples on 2 October and with the Kingdom of Sicily on 18 November.

[ 99 ] The most famous – and only public – abdication took place a year later, on 25 October 1555, when Charles announced to the States General of the Netherlands (reunited in the great hall where he was emancipated forty years before by Emperor Maximilian) his abdication of those territories in favour of his son Philip as well as his intention to step down from all of his positions and retire to a monastery.

[ 99 ] During the ceremony, the gout-afflicted Emperor Charles V leaned on the shoulder of his advisor William the Silent and, crying, pronounced his resignation speech : When I was nineteen ... I undertook to be a candidate for the Imperial crown, not to increase my possessions but rather to engage myself more vigorously in working for the welfare of Germany and my other realms ... and in the hopes of thereby bringing peace among the Christian peoples and uniting their fighting forces for the defense of the Catholic faith against the Ottomans...I had almost reached my goal, when the attack by the French king and some German princes called me once more to arms. Against my enemies I accomplished what I could, but success in war lies in the hands of God, Who gives victory or takes it away, as He pleases ... I must for my part confess that I have often misled myself, either from youthful inexperience, from the pride of mature years, or from some other weakness of human nature. I nonetheless declare to you that I never knowingly or willingly acted unjustly ... If actions of this kind are nevertheless justly laid to my account, I formally assure you now that I did them unknowingly and against my own intention. I therefore beg those present today, whom I have offended in this respect, together with those who are absent, to forgive me.

[ 100 ] He concluded the speech by mentioning his voyages: ten to the Low Countries, nine to Germany, seven to Spain, seven to Italy, four to France, two to England, and two to North Africa. His last public words were, "My life has been one long journey." With no fanfare, in 1556 he finalised his abdications. On 16 January 1556, he gave Spain and the Spanish Empire in the Americas to Philip. On 27 August 1556, he abdicated as Holy Roman Emperor in favour of his brother Ferdinand, elected King of the Romans in 1531. The succession was recognized by the prince-electors assembled at Frankfurt only in 1558, and by the Pope only in 1559.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] The Imperial abdication also marked the beginning of Ferdinand's legal and suo jure rule in the Austrian possessions, that he governed in Charles's name since 1521–1522, and were territorially linked with his rule over Hungary and Bohemia since 1526.

[ 104 ] According to scholars, Charles decided to abdicate for a variety of reasons: the religious division of Germany sanctioned in 1555; the state of Spanish finances, bankrupted with inflation by the time his reign ended; the revival of Italian Wars with attacks from Henry II of France; the never-ending advance of the Ottomans in the Mediterranean and central Europe; and his declining health, in particular attacks of gout such as the one that forced him to postpone an attempt to recapture the city of Metz where he was later defeated.

Retirement, death and burial [ edit ] The deathbed of the Emperor at the Monastery of Yuste , Cáceres In September 1556, Charles left the Low Countries and sailed to Spain accompanied by his sisters, Mary of Hungary and Eleanor of Austria . He arrived at the Monastery of Yuste of Extremadura in 1557. He continued to correspond widely and kept an interest in the situation of the empire, while suffering from severe gout. He lived alone in a secluded monastery, surrounded by paintings by Titian and with clocks lining every wall, which some historians believe were symbols of his reign and his lack of time.

[ 105 ] In August 1558, Charles was taken seriously ill, with what was diagnosed in the twenty-first century as malaria .

[ 106 ] He died in the early hours of the morning on 21 September 1558, at the age of 58, holding in his hand the cross that his wife Isabella had been holding when she died.

[ 107 ] Following his death, there were a plethora of commemorations in his empire, including in Mexico and Peru. Some 30,000 masses were arranged for the soul of the Emperor. Some 30,000 gold ducats that he had set aside for the ransom of prisoners, poor virgins, and paupers were distributed. He still owed huge debts from his constant warfare far beyond the funds on hand, which his heirs spent decades paying off.

[ 108 ] Charles's illegitimate son John of Austria being presented to Charles in Yuste, by Eduardo Rosales Charles was originally buried in the chapel of the Monastery of Yuste, but he left a codicil in his last will and testament asking for the establishment of a new religious foundation in which he would be reburied with Isabella.

[ 109 ] Following his return to Spain in 1559, their son Philip undertook the task of fulfilling his father's wish when he founded the Monastery of San Lorenzo de El Escorial . After the Monastery's Royal Crypt was completed in 1574, the bodies of Charles and Isabella were relocated and re-interred into a small vault directly underneath the altar of the Royal Chapel, in accordance with Charles's wishes to be buried "half-body under the altar and half-body under the priest's feet" side by side with Isabella.

[ 110 ] They remained in the Royal Chapel while the famous Basilica of the Monastery and the Royal tombs were still under construction. In 1654, after the Basilica and Royal tombs were finally completed during the reign of their great-grandson Philip IV , the remains of Charles and Isabella were moved into the Royal Pantheon of Kings, which lies directly under the Basilica.

[ 111 ] On one side of the Basilica are bronze effigies of Charles and Isabella, with effigies of their daughter Maria of Austria and Charles's sisters Eleanor of Austria and Maria of Hungary behind them. Adjacent to them on the opposite side of the Basilica are effigies of their son Philip with three of his wives and their ill-fated grandson Carlos, Prince of Asturias .

Administration [ edit ] The Empire of Charles V at its peak, with The Americas an ocean away from his European realms Given the vast dominions of the House of Habsburg, Charles was often on the road and needed deputies to govern his realms for the times he was absent from his territories. His first Governor of the Netherlands was Margaret of Austria , succeeded by his sister Mary of Hungary and Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy . His first Regent of Spain was Adrian of Utrecht (succeeded by Isabella of Portugal and Philip II of Spain ). For the regency and governorship of the Austrian hereditary lands , Charles named his brother Ferdinand archduke in the Austrian lands under his authority at the Diet of Worms (1521).

[ 104 ] Charles agreed to favor the election of Ferdinand as King of the Romans in Germany, which took place in 1531 . By virtue of these agreements Ferdinand became Holy Roman Emperor and obtained hereditary rights over Austria at the abdication of Charles in 1556.

[ 104 ] [ 112 ] [ page needed ] Charles de Lannoy , Carafa and Antonio Folc de Cardona y Enriquez were viceroys of the kingdoms of Naples, Sicily and Sardinia, respectively.

Charles V travelled ten times to the Low Countries, nine to Germany, [ 113 ] seven to Spain, [ 114 ] seven to Italy, [ 115 ] four to France, two to England, and two to North Africa.

[ 116 ] During all his travels, the Emperor left a documentary trail in almost every place he went, allowing historians to surmise that he spent 10,000 days in the Low Countries, 6,500 days in Spain, 3,000 days in Germany, and 1,000 days in Italy. He spent 195 days in France, 99 in North Africa and 44 days in England. For 260 days his exact location is unrecorded, all of them being days spent at sea travelling between his dominions.

[ 117 ] As he put it in his last public speech: "my life has been one long journey".

[ 116 ] Charles never traveled to his overseas possessions in the Americas, since a transatlantic crossing to a place not central to his political interests at the time was unthinkable.

The New World was an increasingly important part of the balance of power, but it was completely subordinate to European considerations. The Spanish colonial empire took up relatively little of Charles V's time. Its principal function was to provide resources to support his ambitions on the near side of the Atlantic: again and again, it was bullion from the Indies – a fifth of total revenue – which either funded campaigns against the French, Turks, and German princes directly, or provided the security against which the Emperor could borrow the great banking house of Fugger in Augsburg. For example, of nearly 2 million escudos' worth of treasury, the largest recipient was Germany, followed by the Low Countries. Charles's travels throughout his reign also show his priority quite clearly: he visited Italy on seven occasions, France on four, and England and Africa on two, and spent six long stays in Spain itself, but he travelled to Flanders and Germany on no fewer than nineteen occasions; he never visited the Americas. His imperial status stemmed from the Imperium Romanum , not the global sweep of his lands. In short, the Holy Roman Empire, not the emerging Spanish empire, provided the Imperial context in which the ambitions of Charles V played out.

— Europe, the Struggle for Supremacy, 1453 to the Present, p.87, Brendan Simms He did, however, establish strong administrative structures to rule them, including the European-based Council of the Indies in 1524 and the establishment of the Viceroyalty of New Spain and the Viceroyalty of Peru when the Aztec and Inca civilizations were conquered in his name.

In 1534, Charles accepted a personal audience with Maxixcatzin, a nobleman from Tlaxcala who demanded and received several special privileges for his city and its people.

[ 118 ] The Tlaxcallans had formed an alliance with Spain and were instrumental in the overthrow of the Aztecs and other conquests in the Americas. Charles' decrees recognized their contributions and promised that Tlaxcala's autonomy would be preserved. His treatment of the Tlaxcallans and other friendly native peoples as important allies rather than conquered subjects ensured strong support from Tlaxcala and other allied native groups for the next three centuries.

[ 119 ] Europe [ edit ] Military system [ edit ] See also: Landsknecht and Tercio The second tapestry in the series Battle of Pavia by Bernard van Orley : The Marquis of Pescara leading an Imperial attack on the French cavalry and Georg von Frundsberg leading the Landsknechte against the French artillery [ 120 ] Heavy cavalry at the Battle of Pavia Under the organization and patronage of Maximilian I, Southern Germany had become the leading arms industry region of the 16th century, rivalled only by Northern Italy with the chief centers being Nuremberg , Augsburg , Milan , and Brescia .

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] Charles V continued with the development of mass production and standardization of gun caliber, which greatly affected warfare.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] The Helmschmied of Augsburg and the Negroli of Milan were among the foremost families of armourers of the time. Under Charles V, the Spanish arms industry was significantly expanded, with significant improvements of muskets .

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] The Landsknechte , originally recruited and organized by Maximilian and Georg von Frundsberg , formed the bulk of Charles V's army. They surpassed the Swiss mercenaries in quality and quantity as the "best and most easily available mercenaries in Europe". They were considered  best fighting troops in the first half of the 16th century for their brutal and ruthless efficiency, with a French saying going "a Landsknecht thrown out heaven couldn't get in hell because he would frighten the devil".

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] Terrence McIntosh notes that, Charles V, like his grandfather, "relied heavily on German military manpower, fearsome landsknechts, as well as redoubtable Swiss-German mercenaries. Maximilian invaded northern Italy in 1496, 1508, and repeatedly between 1509 and 1516. Soon after the Imperial election in 1519, Charles V was waging war there. His overwhelmingly German troops won the Battle of Pavia and captured the French king in 1525; two years later they sacked the city of Rome, murdering between six and twelve thousand residents and pillaging for eight months." His expansionist and aggressive policy, in combination with the brutal behaviours of the Landsknechte, which incidentally happened right at the formation of the early modern German nation, left an indelible mark on his neighbours' impression of the German polity, despite the fact that in the long term, it was in general not belligerent.

[ 132 ] Charles V also favoured German heavy cavalry, although costly.

[ 133 ] Many cavalrymen and noblemen fighting for Charles V were of Burgundian extraction, often part of the Order of the Golden Fleece . Italian condottieri were also recruited.

In Spain, inheriting the reform work of Gonzalo Fernández de Córdoba , in 1536, Charles reorganized his infantry and created the first units of the tercios .

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] [ 138 ] Later they became "the most formidable fighting force of the sixteenth century".

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] The original tercios were exclusively Spanish and this situation remained until Philip II organized the Italian tercios in 1584.

[ 135 ] Finance [ edit ] Anton Fugger burning the debenture bonds of Charles V in 1535, a portrait by Karl Ludwig Friedrich Becker Charles's main sources of revenue were from Castile , Naples and the Low Countries , which yielded in total an annual amount of around 2.8 million Spanish ducats in the 1520s and about 4.8 million Spanish ducats in the 1540s. Ferdinand I's annual revenue totalled between 1.7 million and 1.9 million Venetian ducats (2.15–2.5 million florin or Rhine gulden). Their chief enemy, the Ottomans, had a more streamlined and profitable system, yielding 10 million gold ducats in 1527–1528 and did not suffer from deficit.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] He often had to depend on loans from bankers. He borrowed 28 million ducats in total during his reign, of which 5.5 million ducats came from the Fuggers and 4.2 million from the Welsers of Augsburg . Other creditors were from Genoa , Antwerp and Spain.

[ 143 ] Communication, diplomatic, and espionage systems [ edit ] See also: Kaiserliche Reichspost Allegory of the reign of Charles V , a 16th-century painting by anonymous French painter. Charles V and his enemies (from left to right): Suleiman I; Pope Clement VII; Francis I; the Duke of Cleves; the Duke of Saxony; and Philip I, Landgrave of Hesse The Habsburg expansion and consolidation of rule was accompanied by remarkable development of communication, diplomatic and espionage systems. In 1495, Emperor Maximilian and Franz von Taxis [ de ] (from the Thurn und Taxis family) developed the Niederländische Postkurs , a postal system that connected the Low Countries with Innsbruck . The system quickly converged with the European trade system and an emerging market for news, [ 144 ] spurring a pan-Europe communication revolution [ 145 ] [ 146 ] The system was developed further by Philip the Handsome , who negotiated new standards for the systems with the Taxis, and unified communication between Germany, the Netherlands, France and Spain by adding stations in Granada , Toledo , Blois , Paris and Lyon in 1505.

[ 147 ] After his father's death, Charles, as Duke of Burgundy, continued to develop the system. Behringer notes that, "Whereas the status of private mail remains unclear in the treaty of 1506, it is obvious from the contract of 1516 that the Taxis company had the right to carry mail and keep the profit as long as it guaranteed the delivery of court mail at clearly defined speeds, regulated by time sheets to be filled in by the post riders on the way to their destination. In return, imperial privileges guaranteed exemption from local taxes, local jurisdiction, and military service. 21 The terminology of the early modern communications system and the legal status of its participants were invented at these negotiations." [ 148 ] He confirmed Jannetto's son Giovanni Battista as Postmaster General ( chief et maistre general de noz postes par tous noz royaumes, pays, et seigneuries ) in 1520. By Charles V's time, "the Holy Roman Empire had become the centre of the European communication(s) universe." [ 144 ] Charles V inherited efficient multinational diplomatic networks from both the Trastámara and Habsburg-Burgundian dynasties. Following the example of the papal curia, in the late fifteenth century, both dynasties began to employ permanent envoys, earlier than other secular powers. The Habsburg network developed in parallel to their postal system.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] Charles V combined the Spanish and the Imperial systems into one.

[ 150 ] His opponents, chiefly France, found a counterweight though, by the alliance with the Ottoman Empire, which Francis I admitted to be the only force that could prevent the Habsburgs from transforming European states into a Europe-wide empire.

[ 152 ] Charles V's military might frightened other European rulers, thus while he was able to make the pope a reluctant agent like his grandfather Ferdinand had done, no lasting alliance could be achieved. After the Battle of Pavia, the European rulers united to prevent harsh terms from being placed upon France.

[ 153 ] In the 1530s, in the context of the conflict between the Habsburg empire and their greatest opponent, the Ottomans, an espionage network was built by Charles and Don Alfonso Granai Castriota, the marquis of Atripalda, who conducted its operations. Naples became the main rearguard of the system. Gennaro Varriale writes that, "on the eve of the Tunis campaign , Emperor Charles V possessed a network of spies based in the Kingdom of Naples that watched over all the corners of the Ottoman Empire." [ 154 ] Patronage of the arts and architecture [ edit ] Several notable men were recognized with patronage by Charles. Noted Spanish poet Garcilaso de la Vega , a nobleman and ambassador in the Imperial court of Charles, was first appointed contino (imperial guard) of the Emperor in 1520.

Alfonso de Valdés , twin brother of the humanist Juan de Valdés and secretary of the Emperor , was a Spanish humanist.

Peter Martyr d'Anghiera , an Italian historian at the service of Spain, wrote the first accounts of explorations in Central and South America in a series of letters and reports, grouped in the original Latin publications of 1511 to 1530 into sets of ten chapters called "decades". His Decades are of great value in the history of geography and discovery. His De Orbe Novo (On the New World, 1530) describes the first contacts of Europeans and Native Americans , Native American civilizations in the Caribbean and North America, as well as Mesoamerica, and includes, for example, the first European reference to India rubber .

Martyr was given the post of chronicler ( cronista ) in the newly formed Council of the Indies (1524), commissioned by Charles V to describe what was occurring in the explorations of the New World . In 1523 Charles gave him the title of Count Palatine , and in 1524 called him once more into the Council of the Indies. Martyr was invested by Pope Clement VII , as proposed by Charles V, as Abbot of Jamaica .

Juan Boscán Almogáver was a poet who participated with Garcilaso de la Vega in giving naval assistance to the Isle of Rhodes during a Turkish invasion . Boscà fought against the Turks again in 1532 with Álvarez de Toledo and Charles in Vienna. During this period, Boscán had made serious progress in his mastery of verse in the Italian style.

[ 155 ] Charles commissioned several portraits from the painter Titian , including the Portrait of Charles V and the Equestrian Portrait of Charles V , becoming a friend of the artist. These portraits helped to spread the image of Charles as a powerful ruler and protector of Christendom, promoting his image as an enlightened Renaissance ruler.

The building of the Palace of Charles V was commissioned by Charles, who wished to establish his residence close to the Alhambra palaces. Although the Catholic Monarchs had already altered some rooms of the Alhambra after the conquest of the city in 1492, Charles V intended to construct a permanent residence befitting an emperor. The project was given to Pedro Machuca , an architect whose life and development are poorly documented. At the time, Spanish architecture was immersed in the Plateresque style, with traces of Gothic architecture still visible. Machuca built a palace corresponding stylistically to Mannerism , a mode then in its infancy in Italy . The exterior of the building uses a typically Renaissance combination of rustication on the lower level and ashlar on the upper. The building has never been a home to a monarch and stood roofless until 1957.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] Americas [ edit ] The frontispiece of the 1542 New Laws issued by Charles V, Emperor and King of Spain From his maternal grandmother, Isabella I of Castile , who had funded Christopher Columbus 's first voyage in 1492, Charles inherited Castile's overseas territories in the Americas.

Spanish colonization of the Americas began in 1493, but these permanent settlements in the Caribbean and Spanish Main were marginal to Charles's European empire and not the focus of his attention.

[ 158 ] Through the Treaty of Tordesillas (1494), Spain and Portugal had agreed on a division of overseas territories, so that with the exception of Brazil , which Portugal could claim, Charles could claim the rest of the New World .

The realm of his known possessions expanded with the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire (1519–21) under conquistador Hernán Cortés and by Magellan's circumnavigation of the globe in 1522. These successes convinced Charles of his divine mission to become the leader of Christendom , which still perceived a significant threat from Islam.

[ 159 ] The conquest of central Mexico, bringing a high indigenous civilization under Spanish rule, compelled Charles to grapple with creating structures of institutional rule in the Americas. Charles had begun creating councils to oversee aspects of his realms, first reorganizing the existing Council of Castile , established by the Catholic Monarchs. Indicating the Americas' importance, he founded the Council of the Indies in 1524 to deal with the complexities of Castile's overseas possessions.

Unlike his European possessions that were not consolidated geographically but were all relatively near each other, ruling the Americas had to take into account the Atlantic Ocean. Prior to the creation of the viceroyalties, he established a high court audiencia to administer justice. He formalized conversion of indigenous populations to Christianity, the so-called "spiritual conquest", by sending Franciscan , Dominican , and Augustinian friars starting in the mid-1520s. With the discovery of large deposits of silver in northern Mexico in the 1540s and in 1545 in Peru at Potosí , Charles's advisors urged regulation of mining to ensure that bullion was directed to crown coffers.

Ad hoc administrative solutions of the early conquest period gave way to Charles's establishment of the Viceroyalty of New Spain in Mexico City (1535), the Spanish capital founded on the ruins of the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan . After the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire in the 1530s, Charles established the Viceroyalty of Peru in the newly founded Spanish capital of Lima (1544). As it became clear that establishing royal control was important, Charles sought to undermine growing power of the group of conquistadors in Mexico and Peru, awarded personal grants of indigenous labor in perpetuity , by issuing the New Laws of 1542, ending grant holders' rights in perpetuity.

[ 160 ] Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas 's long term campaign to protect indigenous populations from Spanish conquerors' exploitation influenced Charles's new policy. In Peru, it resulted in a major Spanish rebellion against the crown when the newly appointed viceroy, Blasco Núñez Vela , attempted to implement the measure. In Mexico, Viceroy don Antonio de Mendoza prudently did not. In Peru, the new viceroy was murdered. "To many Spanish settlers the New Laws seemed like a declaration of war, and their hostile reaction was swift and overwhelming." [ 161 ] The violent uprising necessitated a major military response, organized by Pedro de la Gasca , to whom Charles granted sweeping powers in order to re-establish royal authority. The rebellion in Peru coincided with one in Germany . In the Americas, Charles was forced to temper the initial order ending inheritance, allowing grants to be passed on to one further generation, but he refused to yield on the question of allowing enslavement of the indigenous.

Regarding the Spanish rebels supporting the cause of Gonzalo Pizarro , who might have set up a kingdom of Peru with himself as ruler, Charles fully supported Pizarro's beheading and his supporters' execution and confiscation of property. This was similar to the treatment of comunero rebels early in his Iberian rule. Pizarro's execution marks the end of Spanish rebellion against the crown.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] Relatively early in his rule, Charles assigned a concession (1528) in Venezuela Province to Bartholomeus V. Welser , in compensation for his inability to repay debts owed. The concession, known as Klein-Venedig ( little Venice ), was revoked in 1546 during the rebellion in Peru by Spanish colonists against Charles.

The question of labor and treatment of indigenous populations had occupied Charles's maternal grandparents, and as indigenous populations in the Caribbean were decimated by disease and overwork, transshipment of African slaves to replace the labor force began. On 28 August 1518, Charles issued a charter authorizing the transportation of slaves directly from Africa to the Americas. Up until that point (since at least 1510), African slaves had usually been transported to Castile or Portugal and had then been transshipped to the Caribbean. Charles's decision to create a direct, more economically viable Africa to America slave trade fundamentally changed the nature and scale of the transatlantic slave trade.

[ 165 ] Protection of indigenous populations against Spaniards' exploitation was the key motivation behind Charles's issuance of the 1542 New Laws. With Gasca's suppression of Spanish colonists' rebellion in Peru, Charles was still concerned about the welfare of his indigenous subjects. So, on 3 July 1549, [ 166 ] [ 167 ] [ 168 ] Charles ordered the Council of the Indies to stop all the conquests until it was certain that Spain was acting in accordance with the moral law , so penetration into the American continent was suspended until 1556.

[ 169 ] This was because philosophical questions arose, especially from Catholic jurists and scholastic philosophers , about whether the Hispanic Monarchy had the moral right to legally conquer the Indies .

Since 1542, a moral crisis was developing in the government because of the Spanish colonization in America. The Crown of Castile was overwhelmed by the constant denunciations of abuses it was receiving, especially from the conquests in Peru and those that occurred in the New Kingdom of Granada , which could cause anguish in people of all Estates , even if they were prelates or knights of the Spanish nobility .

[ 170 ] Thus, Charles, influenced by the reflections of Francisco de Vitoria and the School of Salamanca , together with the pressure of missionaries , wanted to be sure that their power was beyond reproach. Therefore, it was ordered to stop all military companies in the overseas domains until a board of wise men ruled on the fairest way to carry them out, seriously considering the total or partial abandonment of the New World until the imperial doubt was resolved, regarding how to avoid in the future the possibility of abusive discoveries, overwhelming conquests and predatory colonizations that were based on the oppressive exploitation of indigenous labor.

In 1550, Charles convened a conference at Valladolid in order to consider the morality of the force used against the indigenous populations of the New World , which included figures such as Bartolomé de las Casas , [ 171 ] from which conceptions of the human rights of the Indians would arise according to the Thomistic natural law , making the Hispanic Monarchy a pioneer, both in theory and in practice, on how to approach respect for the conquered.

[ 166 ] Theologians and jurists from all parts of the empire began to arrive in the capital, presenting themselves with the best souls of Spain, such as Domingo de Soto , Bartolomé Carranza , Melchor Cano , and also Pedro de la Gasca (Peru's first peacemaker after Civil Wars between the conquerors of Peru ) together with the jurisconsults of the Council of the Indies.

Bartolomé de las Casas defended the position that the wars of conquest were unjust, while Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda defended the opposite. The court, after long debates, voted and tied, so there was no official sentence, but there were several binding reports in which the purpose was to ensure that the treatment given to the natives was correct. It was the first time that kings and philosophers conceded that men have fundamental rights for the mere fact of being men ( Ius gentium ), rights of the eternal Law that are prior to any positive law written in the treaties. Never before had a European people wondered in such depth where their own rights of the victor ended, and where the rights of the defeated begin.

[ citation needed ] Finally, Spain did not abandon the Indies, largely based on the sayings of Vitoria: "After many barbarians have converted there, it would not be convenient or lawful for the prince to abandon the administration of those provinces." [ 169 ] Therefore, Spanish rule was maintained as Sepúlveda claimed, but it was recognized that the Indians were people with their own rights as de las Casas paid for and enshrined in the New Laws, together with the papal bull Sublimis Deus . Given this, there was no longer talks about conquest, but about pacification, so urbanization was resumed, with specific instructions to avoid harm to the Indians. The regulations on how to act in the future, in terms of discoveries and colonizations, were the following: [ 170 ] -In the discoveries: They would be made with a license from the Audiencia and carrying at least one religious designated by it. On these trips it was forbidden to steal the goods from the natives and take them by force, except for some of them who wanted to go as interpreters. No Viceroy or Governor would undertake new voyages of discovery on their own. Neither by sea nor by land.
-In the colonizations: parcels would be prohibited from the first life; Indian slaves would be freed (it was forbidden to make them slaves in the future); a revision of the repartimientos de indios (to the Audiencias) would be ordered so that those that some Spaniards had in excess would pass to the Crown; All the Indians that private individuals had without legitimate title would be transferred to the Crown; it would be forbidden to charge the natives (except where it was inexcusable); moderate rates would be imposed on taxes and services; Rates and tributes would be completely abolished in those places where the Indians had been subjected to fierce exploitation (The Antilles ).

Dynasty and private life [ edit ] Ancestors [ edit ] Ancestors of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor 8.

Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor [ 174 ] 4.

Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor [ 172 ] 9.

Eleanor of Portugal [ 174 ] 2.

Philip I of Castile 10.

Charles I, Duke of Burgundy [ 175 ] 5.

Mary, Duchess of Burgundy [ 172 ] 11.

Isabella of Bourbon [ 175 ] 1.

Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor 12.

John II of Aragon [ 176 ] 6.

Ferdinand II of Aragon [ 173 ] 13.

Juana Enriquez [ 176 ] 3.

Joanna I of Castile 14.

John II of Castile [ 177 ] 7.

Isabella I of Castile [ 173 ] 15.

Isabella of Portugal [ 177 ] Education [ edit ] His father's sister Margaret was the mother figure in his life. She was a huge influence on Charles. A canny, learned, and artistic woman, with a court that included artists Bernard van Orley and Albrecht Dürer and master tapestry-maker Pieter van Aelst , she taught her nephew "above all that a court could be a salon." [ 178 ] She saw to his education, securing as tutor Adrian of Utrecht , a member of the Brethren of the Common Life , which advocated simplicity and promoted a cult of indigence and deprivation. Adrian later became Pope Adrian VI. The Brethren had many important members, including Thomas à Kempis .

[ 179 ] A third major influence in Charles's early life was William de Croÿ , Sieur de Chièves, who became his "governor and grand chamberlain", giving Charles a chivalrous education.  He was a tough taskmaster, and when questioned about it he said "Cousin, I am the defender and guardian of his youth. I do not want him to be incapable because he has not understood affairs nor been trained to work." [ 180 ] Languages [ edit ] Charles spoke several languages from political necessity, though he does not seem to have been a very natural linguist. He was raised speaking French , which remained his most natural language, and is used in most surviving letters handwritten by him. He learned some Dutch , being given lessons from the age of thirteen. He later added an acceptable Castilian Spanish , which he was required to learn by the Castilian Cortes Generales . He could also speak some Basque , acquired by the influence of the Basque secretaries serving in the royal court.

[ 181 ] He gained a decent command of German following the Imperial election, though he never spoke it as well as French.

[ 182 ] By 1532, Charles was proficient in Portuguese , and spoke Latin.

[ 183 ] A witticism sometimes attributed to Charles is: "I speak Spanish/Latin (depending on the source) to God, Italian to women, French to men and German to my horse." [ 184 ] A variant of the quote is attributed to him by Jonathan Swift in his 1726 Gulliver's Travels , but there are no contemporary accounts referencing the quotation, which has many other variants and it is often attributed instead to Frederick the Great .

[ 185 ] Appearance and health [ edit ] Charles suffered from an enlarged lower jaw ( mandibular prognathism ), a congenital deformity that became considerably worse in later Habsburg generations, giving rise to the term Habsburg jaw . This deformity may have been caused by the family's long history of repeated intermarriages between close family members, as commonly practiced in royal families of that era to maintain dynastic control of territory.

[ 186 ] Some advisors considered him physically weak and used that as a reason for him to delay his marriage to Mary Tudor.  A diplomat in Charles's court described him as "not much of a womaniser" and did not have out of wedlock children during his marriage.

[ 187 ] He suffered from fainting spells, which might have been epilepsy .

[ 188 ] He was seriously afflicted with gout , presumably caused by a diet consisting mainly of red meat.

[ 189 ] As he aged, his gout progressed from painful to crippling. In his retirement, he was carried around the Monastery of Yuste in a sedan chair . A ramp was specially constructed to allow him easy access to his rooms.

[ citation needed ] Siblings [ edit ] The children of Philip and Joanna Name Birth Death Notes Eleanor 15 November 1498 25 February 1558 (1558-02-25) (aged 59) first marriage in 1518, Manuel I of Portugal and had children; second marriage in 1530, Francis I of France and had no children.

Isabella 18 July 1501 19 January 1526 (1526-01-19) (aged 24) married in 1515, Christian II of Denmark and had children.

Ferdinand 10 March 1503 25 July 1564 (1564-07-25) (aged 61) married in 1521, Anna of Bohemia and Hungary and had children.

Mary 15 September 1505 18 October 1558 (1558-10-18) (aged 53) married in 1522, Louis II of Hungary and Bohemia and had no children.

Catherine 14 January 1507 12 February 1578 (1578-02-12) (aged 71) married in 1525, John III of Portugal and had children.

Marriage [ edit ] Isabella of Portugal depicting Charles' wife, a 1548 portrait by Titian The bronze effigies of Charles and Isabella at the Basilica in El Escorial Don John of Austria , the natural son of Charles during his widowhood On 21 December 1507, Charles was betrothed to 11-year-old Mary , the daughter of King Henry VII of England and younger sister to the future King Henry VIII of England, who was to take the throne in two years. The engagement was called off in 1513, on the advice of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey . Mary was instead married to King Louis XII of France in 1514.

After his ascension to the Spanish thrones of Castile and Aragon, negotiations for Charles's marriage began shortly after his arrival in Castile, with the Castilian nobles expressing their wishes for him to marry his first cousin Isabella of Portugal , the daughter of King Manuel I of Portugal and Charles's aunt Maria of Aragon . The nobles desired Charles's marriage to a princess of Castilian blood, and a marriage to Isabella would have secured an alliance between Castile and Portugal. The 18-year-old King was in no hurry to marry and ignored the nobles' advice, exploring other marriage options.

[ 190 ] Instead of marrying Isabella, he sent his sister Eleanor to marry Isabella's widowed father, King Manuel, in 1518.

In 1521, on the advice of his Flemish counsellors, especially William de Croÿ , Charles became engaged to his other first cousin, Mary , daughter of his aunt, Catherine of Aragon , and King Henry VIII, in order to secure an alliance with England. However, this engagement was very problematic because Mary was only six years old at the time, sixteen years Charles's junior, which meant that he would have to wait for her to be old enough to marry.

By 1525, Charles could not wait any longer to marry and have legitimate children as heirs. He had abandoned the idea of an English alliance, cancelled his engagement to Mary and decided to marry Isabella and form an alliance with Portugal. He wrote to Isabella's brother, King John III of Portugal , making a double marriage contract – Charles would marry Isabella and John would marry Charles's youngest sister, Catherine .

[ 191 ] A marriage to Isabella was more beneficial for Charles, as she was closer to him in age, was fluent in Spanish and provided him with a very handsome dowry of 900,000 doblas de oro castellanas would help to solve the financial problems brought on by the Italian Wars. The marriage brought him the additional titles as "monarch of the Canaries [Canary Islands] and of the [Portuguese] Indies, the isles of mainland, and the Ocean Sea." Marrying Isabella would allow Charles to have her serve as regent in Spain whenever he left.

[ 192 ] Ultimately this union would result in their son Philip having the strongest claim to the Portuguese throne when the House of Aviz died out in 1580, resulting in the Iberian Union .

On 10 March 1526, Charles and Isabella met at the Alcázar of Seville . The marriage was originally a political arrangement, but on their first meeting, the couple fell deeply in love: Isabella captivated the Emperor with her beauty and charm. They were married that very same night in a quiet ceremony in the Hall of Ambassadors, just after midnight. Following their wedding, Charles and Isabella spent a long and happy honeymoon at the Alhambra in Granada . Charles began the construction of the Palace of Charles V in 1527, wishing to establish a permanent residence befitting an emperor and empress in the Alhambra palaces. However, the palace was not completed during their lifetimes and remained roofless until the late 20th century.

[ 193 ] Despite the Emperor's long absences due to political affairs abroad, the marriage was a happy one, as both partners were always devoted and faithful to each other.

[ 194 ] The Empress acted as regent of Spain during her husband's absences, and she proved herself to be a good politician and ruler, thoroughly impressing the Emperor with many of her political accomplishments and decisions.

The marriage lasted for 13 years until Isabella's death in 1539. The Empress contracted a fever during the third month of her seventh pregnancy, which resulted in antenatal complications that caused her to miscarry a stillborn son. Her health further deteriorated due to an infection, and she died two weeks later on 1 May 1539, aged 35. Charles was left so grief-stricken by his wife's death that for two months he shut himself up in a monastery, where he prayed and mourned for her in solitude.

[ 195 ] Charles never recovered from Isabella's death, dressing in black for the rest of his life to show his eternal mourning, and, unlike most kings of the time, he never remarried. In memory of his wife, the Emperor commissioned the painter Titian to paint several posthumous portraits of Isabella. The finished portraits included Titian's Portrait of Isabella of Portugal and La Gloria .

[ 196 ] Charles kept these paintings with him whenever he travelled, and they were among those that he brought with him after his retirement to the Monastery of Yuste in 1557.

[ 197 ] In 1540, Charles paid tribute to Isabella's memory when he commissioned the Flemish composer Thomas Crecquillon to compose new music as a memorial to her. Crecquillon composed his Missa 'Mort m'a privé in memory of the Empress. It expresses the Emperor's grief and great wish for a heavenly reunion with his beloved wife.

[ 198 ] During his lifetime, Charles V had several nonmarital liaisons, including some that produced children. One relationship was with his step-grandmother, Germaine de Foix , which may have produced a child, Isabel .

[ 199 ] After the death of his wife, Charles "seduced Barbara Blomberg , a teenager exactly the same age as his son Philip." He kept the relationship and the existence of this out-of-wedlock son secret, "no doubt because he felt ashamed of his affair with a teenager when he was forty-six." The child named Gerónimo, later became known as John of Austria ; the emperor made provisions for the child in a secret codicil to his will. As with his other out-of-wedlock children, the baby was taken from the mother. He met this son once. The relationship was not revealed to his legitimate children in his lifetime, but they became aware of the relationship after his death.

[ 200 ] Issue [ edit ] Charles and Isabella had seven legitimate children, but only three of them survived to adulthood. Charles also had natural children before he married and after he was widowed.

Name Portrait Lifespan Notes Philip II of Spain 21 May 1527 – 13 September 1598 Only surviving son, successor of his father in the Spanish crowns and became king of Portugal.

Maria 21 June 1528 – 26 February 1603 Married her first cousin Maximilian II, Holy Roman Emperor .

Ferdinand 22 November 1529 – 13 July 1530 Died in infancy.

Son 29 June 1534 Stillborn.

Joanna 24 June 1535 – 7 September 1573 Married her first cousin João Manuel, Prince of Portugal .

John 19 October 1537 – 20 March 1538 Died in infancy.

Son 21 April 1539 Stillborn.

Due to Philip II being a grandson of Manuel I of Portugal through his mother, he was in the line of succession to the throne of Portugal, and claimed it after his uncle's death, Henry, the Cardinal-King , in 1580, establishing the personal union between Spain and Portugal .

Charles also had six children out of wedlock: Infanta Isabella of Castile (20 August 1518 – 1537), perhaps daughter of Charles's maternal step-grandmother, Germaine of Foix , [ 199 ] but strongly disputed by biographer Geoffrey Parker .

[ 201 ] Isabella died at the age of 19, never married, and had no issue.

Margaret of Austria (1522–1586), daughter of Johanna Maria van der Gheynst , who Charles recognized [ 202 ] [ 203 ] a servant of Charles I de Lalaing , Seigneur de Montigny, daughter of Gilles Johann van der Gheynst and wife Johanna van der Caye van Cocamby. Married firstly with Alessandro de' Medici, Duke of Florence , and secondly with Ottavio Farnese, Duke of Parma .

Joanna of Austria (1522–1530), daughter of Catalina de Rebolledo (or de Xériga), a lady-in-waiting of Queen Joanna I of Castile and Aragon [ 204 ] or attached to the household of Henry of Nassau . She was brought up in an Augustinian convent in Madrigal de las Altas Torres.

[ 202 ] Tadea of Austria (1523 – c.

1562 ), daughter of Orsolina della Penna. Married to Sinibaldo di Copeschi.

[ 205 ] Cornelis de Hooghe (1541–1583), Dutch cartographer John of Austria (1547–1578), victor of the Battle of Lepanto , son of Barbara Blomberg .

[ 206 ] Margaret of Parma John of Austria Titles and coat of arms [ edit ] Further information: Coat of arms of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor The equestrian armour of Emperor Charles V. Piece drawn from the collection of the Royal Armoury of Madrid Charles V styled himself as Holy Roman Emperor after his election, according to a Papal dispensation conferred to the Habsburg family by Pope Julius II in 1508 and confirmed in 1519 to the prince-electors by the legates of Pope Leo X . Although Papal coronation was no longer necessary to confirm the Imperial title, Charles V was crowned in the city of Bologna by Pope Clement VII in the medieval fashion.

Charles V accumulated a large number of titles due to his vast inheritance of Burgundian, Spanish, and Austrian realms. Following the Pacts of Worms (21 April 1521) and Brussels (7 February 1522), he secretly gave the Austrian lands to his younger brother Ferdinand and elevated him to the status of archduke.

[ 207 ] Nevertheless, according to the agreements, Charles continued to style himself as archduke of Austria and maintained that Ferdinand acted as his vassal and vicar.

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] The pacts of 1521–1522 imposed restrictions on the governorship and regency of Ferdinand. For example, all of Ferdinand's letters to Charles V were signed "your obedient brother and servant".

[ 210 ] Nonetheless, the same agreements promised Ferdinand the designation as future emperor and the transfer of hereditary rights over Austria at the imperial succession.

Following the death of Louis II, King of Hungary and Bohemia , at the Battle of Mohacs in 1526, Charles V favoured the election of Ferdinand as king of Hungary (and Croatia ) and Bohemia . Despite this, Charles also styled himself as king of Hungary and Bohemia and retained this titular use in official acts (such as his testament) as in the case of the Austrian lands. As a consequence, cartographers and historians have described those kingdoms both as realms of Charles V and as possessions of Ferdinand, not without confusion. Others, such as the Venetian envoys, reported that the states of Ferdinand were "all held in common with the Emperor".

[ 211 ] Therefore, although he had agreed on the future division of the dynasty between Ferdinand and Philip II of Spain , during his own reign Charles V conceived the existence of a single "House of Austria" of which he was the sole head.

[ 212 ] In the abdications of 1554–1556, Charles left his personal possessions to Philip II and the Imperial title to Ferdinand. The titles of king of Hungary, Croatia, etc., were also nominally left to the Spanish line (in particular to Carlos, Prince of Asturias and son of Philip II). However, Charles's Imperial abdication marked the beginning of Ferdinand's suo jure rule in Austria and his other lands: despite the claims of Philip and his descendants, Hungary and Bohemia were left under the nominal and substantial rule of Ferdinand and his successors. Formal disputes between the two lines over Hungary and Bohemia were to be solved with the Onate treaty of 1617.

As part of Andreas Palaiologos ' will, he theoretically inherited the title of Eastern Roman Emperor from Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castille , [ 213 ] [ 214 ] [ 215 ] therefore cementing the claim of the Holy Roman Empire of inheriting the Roman legacy since the Fall of Constantinople . However, the Byzantine imperial title was never formally hereditary and rested on possession of that city, which led to imperial status being claimed by the Ottoman sultans.

Charles's full titulature went as follows: [ citation needed ] Charles, by the grace of God , Emperor of the Romans , forever August , King in (of) Germany , King of Italy , King of all Spains, of Castile , Aragon , León , of Hungary , of Dalmatia , of Croatia , Navarra , Grenada , Toledo , Valencia , Galicia , Mallorca , Sevilla , Cordova , Murcia , Jaén , Algarves , Algeciras , Gibraltar , the Canary Islands , King of both Hither and Ultra Sicily , of Sardinia , Corsica , King of Jerusalem , King of the Indies , of the Islands and Mainland of the Ocean Sea , Archduke of Austria , Duke of Burgundy , Brabant , Lorraine , Styria , Carinthia , Carniola , Limburg , Luxembourg , Gelderland , Neopatria , Württemberg , Landgrave of Alsace , Prince of Swabia , Asturia , Count of Flanders , Habsburg , Tyrol , Gorizia , Barcelona , Artois , Burgundy Palatine , Hainaut , Holland , Seeland , Ferrette , Kyburg , Namur , Roussillon , Cerdagne , Drenthe , Zutphen , Margrave of the Holy Roman Empire, Burgau , Oristano and Gociano , Lord of Frisia , the Wendish March , Pordenone , Biscay , Molina , Salins , Tripoli and Mechelen .

Title From To Regnal name Titular Duke of Burgundy 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles II Duke of Brabant 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles II Duke of Limburg 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles II Duke of Lothier 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles II Duke of Luxemburg 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles III Margrave of Namur 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles II Count Palatine of Burgundy 25 September 1506 5 February 1556 Charles II Count of Artois 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles II Count of Charolais 25 September 1506 21 September 1558 Charles II Count of Flanders 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles III Count of Hainault 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles II Count of Holland 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles II Count of Zeeland 25 September 1506 25 October 1555 Charles II King of Castile and León 14 March 1516 16 January 1556 Charles I King of Aragon 14 March 1516 16 January 1556 Charles I King of Sicily 14 March 1516 16 January 1556 Charles I (II) Count of Barcelona 14 March 1516 16 January 1556 Charles I King of Naples 14 March 1516 25 July 1554 Charles IV Archduke of Austria 12 January 1519 12 January 1521 Charles I Holy Roman Emperor 28 June 1519 27 August 1556 Charles V King of the Romans 23 October 1520 24 February 1530 Charles V Count of Zutphen 12 September 1543 25 October 1555 Charles II Duke of Guelders 12 September 1543 25 October 1555 Charles III Below is the coat of arms of Charles V according to the description: Arms of Charles added to those of Castile , Leon , Aragon , Two Sicilies and Granada present in the previous coat, those of Austria , ancient Burgundy , modern Burgundy, Brabant , Flanders and Tyrol . Charles I also incorporates the pillars of Hercules with the inscription " Plus Ultra ", representing the overseas Spanish empire and surrounding coat with the collar of the Golden Fleece , as sovereign of the Order ringing the shield with the imperial crown and Acola double-headed eagle of the Holy Roman Empire and behind it the Cross of Burgundy . From 1520 added to the corresponding quarter to Aragon and Sicily, one in which the arms of Jerusalem, Naples and Navarre are incorporated.

Coat of arms of Charles I as king of Spain before becoming Holy Roman Emperor.

Coat of Arms of Charles V as Holy Roman Emperor.

Arms of Charles, Infante of Spain, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, KG at the time of his installation as a knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter .

Variant of the Royal Bend of Castile used by Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor.

Historiography, commemoration, and popular culture [ edit ] Main article: Cultural depictions of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor Emperor Charles V and Empress Isabella.

Peter Paul Rubens after Titian , 17th century Charles V has traditionally attracted considerable scholarly attention. There are differences among historians regarding his character, his rule and achievements (or failures) in the countries in his personal empire as well as various social movements and wider problems associated with his reign. Historically seen as a great ruler by some or a tragic failure of a politician by others, he is generally seen by modern historians as an overall capable politician, a brave and effective military leader, although his political vision and financial management tend to be questioned.

[ 216 ] [ 217 ] [ 218 ] [ 219 ] References to Charles in popular culture include a large number of legends and folk tales; literary renderings of historical events connected to his life and romantic adventures, his relationship to Flanders, and his abdication; and products marketed in his name.

[ 220 ] Charles V as a ruler has been commemorated over time in many parts of Europe. An imperial resolution of Franz Joseph I of Austria , dated 28 February 1863, included Charles V in the list of the " most famous Austrian rulers and generals worthy of everlasting emulation ", and honored him with a life-size statue, made by the Bohemian sculptor Emanuel Max , located at the Museum of Military History, Vienna .

[ 221 ] The 400th anniversary of his death, celebrated in 1958 in Francoist Spain , brought together the local national catholic intelligentsia and a number of European (Catholic) conservative figures, underpinning an imperial nostalgia for Charles V's Europe and the Universitas Christiana , also propelling a peculiar brand of europeanism .

[ 222 ] In 2000, celebrations for the 500th anniversary of Charles's birth took place in Belgium.

[ 223 ] Public monuments [ edit ] A statue of Charles V in Granada , Spain Escutcheon of Charles V , a 1912 watercolour portrait John Singer Sargent , now housed at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City Unusually among major European monarchs, Charles V discouraged monumental depictions of himself during his lifetime.

The Charles V Monument in Palermo was erected in 1631 and depicts him triumphant following the Conquest of Tunis .

Among other posthumous depictions, there are statues of Charles on the façade of the Ghent City Hall and the Royal Palace of Caserta .

A statue of Charles, donated by the city of Toledo , was erected in 1966 in the Prinsenhof in Ghent where he was born.

[ 224 ] The Plaza del Emperador Carlos V is a square in the city of Madrid that is named after Charles V.

A bust of Charles V is located at the Walhalla (memorial) in Germany.

Literature [ edit ] In De heerelycke ende vrolycke daeden van Keyser Carel den V , published by Joan de Grieck in 1674, the short stories, anecdotes, citations attributed to the emperor, and legends about his encounters with famous and ordinary people, depict a noble Christian monarch with a perfect cosmopolitan personality and a strong sense of humour. Conversely, in Charles De Coster 's masterpiece Thyl Ulenspiegel (1867), after his death Charles V is consigned to Hell as punishment for the acts of the Inquisition under his rule, his punishment being that he would feel the pain of anyone tortured by the Inquisition. De Coster's book also mentions the story on the spectacles in the coat of arms of Oudenaarde , the one about a paysant of Berchem in Het geuzenboek (1979) by Louis Paul Boon , while Abraham Hans [ nl ] (1882–1939) included both tales in De liefdesavonturen van keizer Karel in Vlaanderen .

Lord Byron 's Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte refers to Charles as "The Spaniard".

Charles V is a notable character in Simone de Beauvoir 's All Men Are Mortal .

Plays [ edit ] Charles V appears as a character in the play Doctor Faustus by the Elizabethan playwright Christopher Marlowe . In Act 4 Scene 1 of the A Text, Faustus attends Court by the Emperor's request and with the assistance of Mephistopheles conjures up spirits representing Alexander the Great and his paramour as a demonstration of his magical powers.

Opera [ edit ] Ernst Krenek 's opera Karl V (opus 73, 1930) examines the title character's career via flashbacks.

In the third act of Giuseppe Verdi 's opera Ernani , the election of Charles as Holy Roman Emperor is presented. Charles (Don Carlo in the opera) prays before the tomb of Charlemagne . With the announcement that he is elected as Carlo Quinto he declares an amnesty including the eponymous bandit Ernani who had followed him there to murder him as a rival for the love of Elvira. The opera, based on the Victor Hugo play Hernani , portrays Charles as a callous and cynical adventurer whose character is transformed by the election into a responsible and clement ruler.

In another Verdi opera, Don Carlo , the final scene implies that it is Charles V, now living the last years of his life as a hermit, who rescues his grandson, Don Carlo, from his father Philip II and the Inquisition, by taking Carlo with him to his hermitage at the monastery in Yuste.

Television and film [ edit ] Charles V is portrayed by Hans Lefebre and is figured prominently in the 1953 film Martin Luther , covering Luther's years from 1505 to 1530.

Charles V is portrayed by Torben Liebrecht and is figured prominently in the 2003 film Luther covering the life of Martin Luther up until the Diet of Augsburg .

Charles V is portrayed by Sebastian Armesto in one episode of the Showtime series The Tudors .

Charles V is the main subject of the TVE series Carlos, Rey Emperador and is portrayed by Álvaro Cervantes .

Charles V is played by Adrien Brody in the upcoming movie Emperor .

[ 225 ] Charles V is portrayed by Rupert Everett in The Serpent Queen .

Male-line family tree [ edit ] v t e House of Habsburg [ n 1 ] Original line Albert Count of Habsburg c.

1188 –1239 Rudolf I of Germany c.

1218 –1291 Albert I of Germany 1255–1308 Hartmann 1263–1281 Rudolf II Duke of Austria 1270–1290 Rudolf I of Bohemia 1281–1307 Frederick the Fair c.

1289 –1330 Leopold I Duke of Austria 1290–1326 Albert II Duke of Austria 1298–1358 Henry the Friendly 1299–1327 Otto Duke of Austria 1301–1339 John Parricida c.

1290 –1312/1313 Albertinian line Leopoldian line Rudolf IV Duke of Austria 1339–1365 Frederick III 1347–1362 Albert III Duke of Austria 1349–1395 Leopold III Duke of Austria 1351–1386 Frederick II Duke of Austria 1327–1344 Leopold II Duke of Austria 1328–1344 Albert IV Duke of Austria 1377–1404 William Duke of Austria c.

1370 –1406 Leopold IV Duke of Austria 1371–1411 Ernest Duke of Austria 1377–1424 Frederick IV Duke of Austria 1382–1439 Albert II of Germany 1397–1439 Frederick III HRE 1415–1493 Albert VI Archduke of Austria 1418–1463 Sigismund Archduke of Austria 1427–1496 Ladislaus the Posthumous 1440–1457 Maximilian I HRE 1459–1519 Philip I of Castile 1478–1506 Spanish / Iberian line Austrian / HRE line Charles V HRE 1500–1558 Ferdinand I HRE 1503–1564 Philip II of Spain 1527–1598 Maximilian II HRE 1527–1576 Ferdinand II Archduke of Austria 1529–1595 Charles II Archduke of Austria 1540–1590 Carlos Prince of Asturias 1545–1568 Philip III of Spain 1578–1621 Rudolf II HRE 1552–1612 Ernest of Austria 1553–1595 Matthias HRE 1557–1619 Maximilian III Archduke of Austria 1558–1618 Albert VII Archduke of Austria 1559–1621 Wenceslaus Archduke of Austria 1561–1578 Andrew Margrave of Burgau 1558–1600 Charles Margrave of Burgau 1560–1618 Ferdinand II HRE 1578–1637 Maximilian Ernest of Austria 1583–1616 Leopold V Archduke of Austria 1586–1632 Charles of Austria 1590–1624 Philip IV of Spain 1605–1665 Charles of Austria 1607–1632 Ferdinand of Austria 1609–1641 John-Charles of Austria 1605–1619 Ferdinand III HRE 1608–1657 Leopold Wilhelm of Austria 1614–1662 Ferdinand Charles Archduke of Austria 1628–1662 Sigismund Francis Archduke of Austria 1630–1665 Balthasar Charles Prince of Asturias 1629–1646 Charles II of Spain 1661–1700 Ferdinand IV King of the Romans 1633–1654 Leopold I HRE 1640–1705 Charles Joseph of Austria 1649–1664 Joseph I HRE 1678–1711 Charles VI HRE 1685–1740 Lorraine Maria Theresa HRE 1740–1780 Francis I HRE 1745–1765 Habsburg-Lorraine Joseph II HRE 1765–1790 Leopold II HRE 1790–1792 Francis II HRE 1792–1806 Notes: ^ "Habsburg family tree" .

Habsburg family website . 28 October 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2001 .

See also [ edit ] Royal Armoury of Madrid Museum of Military History, Vienna Notes [ edit ] ^ The chronology of his abdications has been disputed since early scholarship.

[ 1 ] His public abdication to the States General of the Netherlands certainly took place on 25 October 1555.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] His abdication as Spanish king is generally dated to 16 January 1556, although some give other dates.

[ 1 ] This was ratified in a document dated 17 February.

[ 1 ] On 3 August, he announced his abdication as emperor and instructed his commissioners to negotiate with Ferdinand and the electors the formal transfer of power.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] On 27 August, Charles wrote a document to the Imperial court in Speyer (referred to as a Constitutio or Rescriptum ) renouncing the Empire in favour of Ferdinand.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Then, on 7 September, he sent an edict to all States of the Empire urging them to recognize Ferdinand as their new ruler.

[ 5 ] [ 7 ] The abdication was not recognized by the electors until 24 [ 14 ] (or 28) [ 20 ] February 1558. Ferdinand was finally proclaimed and crowned Emperor-elect on 14 March, [ 12 ] after sworing the Electoral capitulation .

[ 21 ] ^ German : Karl V.

Spanish : Carlos V French : Charles Quint Italian : Carlo V Dutch : Karel V Catalan : Carles V Latin : Carolus V ^ Charles V as Holy Roman Emperor; Charles I as King of Spain and Archduke of Austria; Charles II as Duke of Burgundy.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d Robertson, William (1829).

Histoire de Charles-Quint (in French). Haumann. pp. 262–263 (note 1), 452– 454.

^ The Abdication of Emperor Charles V (1555/56).

German History in Documents and Images .

^ The Abdication of Emperor Charles V / Kaiserliche Instruktion für die Abdikationsgesandtschaft zu Ferdinand I. und zu den Kurfürsten .

German History in Documents and Images .

^ Archiv für österreichische Geschichte (in German). Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 1901. pp.

314– 316.

Instruktion für die Abdikationsgesandtschaft (Instruction for the Abdication Mission) ^ a b Bernard, Jacques (1700).

Recueil Des Traitez De Paix, De Treve, De Neutralite, etc (in French). Henry Et La Veuve De T. Boom. p. 276.

^ Lünig, Johann Christian (1720).

Das deutsche Reichs-Archivs (in German). Vol. 4. pp.

355– 356.

Rescriptum to the Chamber-Judges and Assessors of the Holy Imperial Chamber Court in Speyer, in which he refers them to the Roman King Ferdinandum I as their future ruler.

^ Lünig, Johann Christian (1711).

Das deutsche Reichs-Archiv (in German). Vol. 6. pp.

288– 289.

Edictum to all Electors and States of the Holy Roman Empire, that he entrusted his lord brother, the Roman King Ferdinand I, with the rule of the German Reich.

^ Clémencet, Charles (1784).

L'art de verifier les dates des faits historiques (in French). Al. Jombert Jeune. p. 41.

^ Herbermann, Charles George (1836).

Histoire politique du règne de l'empereur Charles Quint (in French). H. Tarlier. p. 738.

^ Chillany, F. Wilhelm (1865).

Europaeische Chronik von 1492 bis Ende April 1865 . pp. 16, 78.

^ Patxot, Fernando (1856).

Los héroes y las grandezas de la tierra 6 . p. 399 ^ a b Setton 1984 , p. 716.

^ Ruiz, Enrique Martínez (2020).

Felipe II: El hombre, el rey, el mito . La Esfera de los Libros. p. vii.

^ [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] ^ William H. Prescott (1856).

Historia del reinado de Felipe Segundo, Rey de España.

p. 321.

^ Mignet, François Auguste Alexis (1878).

Carlos Quinto: su abdicación, su estancia y muerte en el Monasterio de Yuste (in Spanish). Biblioteca Perojo. p. 307.

^ Bruno Gebhardt (1890).

Gebhardts Handbuch der deutschen geschichte . p. 92.

^ de Cadenas y Vicent, Vicente (1999).

Caminos y derroteros que recorrió el emperador Carlos V . Ediciones Hidalguia. p. 10.

^ Herbermann, Charles George (1908).

The Catholic Encyclopedia: An International Work of Reference on the Constitution, Doctrine, Discipline, and History of the Catholic Church . Robert Appleton Company. p. 629.

^ [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] ^ Wahlkapitulation Ferdinands I., Frankfurt am Main, 14. März 1558 .

V&R eLibrary ^ a b Carlos V: La coronación del Emperador Archived 25 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

National Geographic ^ Emperor Charles V: The Growth and Destiny of a Man and of a World-empire , Karl Brandi ^ a b Emperor, a new life of Charles V , Geoffrey Parker ^ Haemers, Jelle (2014).

De strijd om het regentschap over Filips de Schone : opstand, facties en geweld in Brugge, Gent en Ieper (1482–1488) (PDF) . Gent. pp. 203, 204.

ISBN 978-9038224008 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 7 January 2022 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Erasmus, Desiderius (1997).

Erasmus: The Education of a Christian Prince with the Panegyric for Archduke Philip of Austria . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-58811-9 .

^ Hare, Christopher (1907).

The high and puissant princess Marguerite of Austria, princess dowager of Spain, duchess dowager of Savoy, regent of the Netherlands . Harper & Brothers. p.

48 .

^ Ingrao, Charles W. (2019).

The Habsburg Monarchy, 1618–1815 . Cambridge University Press. p. 4.

ISBN 978-1108499255 . Retrieved 10 November 2021 .

^ Baumann, Anette; Schmidt-von Rhein, Georg (2002).

Kaiser Maximilian I. : Bewahrer und Reformer; [Katalog zur gleichnamigen Ausstellung vom 2.8. bis 31.10.2002 im Reichskammergerichtsmuseum Wetzlar] . Ramstein: Paqué. p. 117.

ISBN 978-3935279338 .

^ a b Skjelver, Danielle Mead; Wiesflecker, Hermann (18 March 2021).

"Maximilian I" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 28 December 2018 . Retrieved 7 January 2022 .

^ From Pax Mongolica to Pax Ottomanica: War, Religion and Trade in the Northwestern Black Sea Region (14th–16th Centuries) . Brill. 2020. p. 197.

ISBN 978-9004422445 . Retrieved 7 January 2022 .

^ Haemers 2014 , p. 204.

^ Fleming, Gillian B. (2018).

Juana I: Legitimacy and Conflict in Sixteenth-Century Castile . Springer. p. 21.

ISBN 978-3319743479 . Retrieved 7 January 2022 .

^ Mortimer, Geoff (2015).

The Origins of the Thirty Years War and the Revolt in Bohemia, 1618 . Springer. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1137543851 . Retrieved 7 January 2022 .

^ The Habsburgs: The Rise and Fall of a World Power, Martyn Rady ^ Charles V and the end of the Respublica Christiana , José Hernando Sanchez ^ Colmeiro, Manuel (1884).

" Cortes de los antiguos reinos de León y de Castilla ; Manuel Colmeiro (1883)" .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 August 2012 .

, Colmeiro, Manuel (1884).

"XXIII" .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 August 2012 .

^ Parker 2019 , pp. 9, 10.

^ Charles was made honorific Archduke by Maximilian in 1508, and was recognized Prince of Asturias by the Castilian cortes in 1504 and 1510.

Colmeiro, Manuel (1884).

" Cortes de los antiguos reinos de León y de Castilla ; Manuel Colmeiro (1883)" .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 August 2012 .

, Colmeiro, Manuel (1884).

"XXIII" .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 August 2012 .

^ Heath, Richard (2018).

Charles V: Duty and Dynasty – The Emperor and his Changing World 1500–1558 . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. p. 23.

ISBN 978-1725852785 .

^ Heath, Richard (2018).

Charles V: Duty and Dynasty – The Emperor and his Changing World 1500–1558 . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. p. 23.

ISBN 978-1725852785 .

^ a b c History of Spain, Joseph Perez ^ a b Charles V , Pierre Chaunu ^ a b Germany in the Holy Roman Empire , Whaley ^ Papadopoulos, Alex G. (1996).

Urban Regimes and Strategies: Building Europe's Central Executive District in Brussels . University of Chicago Press. p.

72 .

ISBN 978-0226645599 – via Internet Archive.

Brussels was the imperial capital of Charles V.

^ Maitland, Robert; Ritchie, Brent W. (2019).

City Tourism: National Capital Perspectives . CABI.

ISBN 978-1845935467 – via Google Books.

^ a b Kamen, Henry (2005).

Spain, 1469–1714: a society of conflict (3rd ed.). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education.

ISBN 0582784646 .

^ "Gentenaars Stropdragers" . Archived from the original on 4 January 2014 . Retrieved 7 November 2015 .

^ "Gilde van de Stroppendragers" . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 November 2015 .

^ Martínez Gil, Fernando (2007). "Corte renacentista".

La invención de Toledo. Imágenes históricas de una identidad urbana . Almud, ediciones de Castilla-La Mancha. pp.

113– 121.

ISBN 978-8493414078 .

^ Martínez Gil, Fernando (1999). "Toledo es Corte (1480–1561)".

Historia de Toledo . Azacanes. pp.

259– 308.

ISBN 8488480199 .

^ Colmeiro, Manuel (1884).

" 'Cortes de los antiguos reinos de León y de Castilla'; Manuel Colmeiro (1883)" .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 August 2012 .

, Colmeiro, Manuel (1884).

"XXIII" .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2008 . Retrieved 23 August 2012 .

^ Estudio documental de la moneda castellana de Carlos I fabricada en los Países Bajos (1517); José María de Francisco Olmos Archived 5 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Revista General de Información y Documentación 2003, vol 13, núm.2 (Universidad complutense de Madrid) , p. 137 ^ Estudio documental de la moneda castellana de Juana la Loca fabricada en los Países Bajos (1505–1506); José María de Francisco Olmos Archived 14 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Revista General de Información y Documentación 2002, vol 12, núm.2 (Universidad complutense de Madrid) , p. 299 ^ Estudio documental de la moneda castellana de Carlos I fabricada en los Países Bajos (1517); José María de Francisco Olmos Archived 5 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Revista General de Información y Documentación 2003, vol 13, núm.2 (Universidad complutense de Madrid) p. 138 ^ Estudio documental de la moneda castellana de Carlos I fabricada en los Países Bajos (1517); José María de Francisco Olmos , p. 138 Archived 2012-02-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ Historia general de España ; Modesto Lafuente (1861) , pp. 51–52.

^ Fueros, observancias y actos de corte del Reino de Aragón ; Santiago Penén y Debesa, Pascual Savall y Dronda, Miguel Clemente (1866) Archived 10 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine , p. 64 Archived 10 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Estudio documental de la moneda castellana de Carlos I fabricada en los Países Bajos (1517); José María de Francisco Olmos , pp. 139–140 Archived 5 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Jimenes de Cisneros, Francisco" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 15 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 416.

^ "Cortes de los antiguos reinos de León y de Castilla" . Archived from the original on 24 February 2013 . Retrieved 1 June 2016 .

; Manuel Colmeiro (1883), chapter XXIV ^ a b Fueros, observancias y actos de corte del Reino de Aragón ; Santiago Penén y Debesa, Pascual Savall y Dronda, Miguel Clemente (1866) Archived 2008-06-10 at the Wayback Machine , page 64 Archived 10 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Historia general de España ; Modesto Lafuente (1861) Archived 4 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 51–52.

^ Monreal, Gregorio; Jimeno, Roldan (2012).

Conquista e Incorporación de Navarra a Castilla . Pamplona-Iruña: Pamiela. pp.

37– 43.

ISBN 978-8476817360 .

^ The Albany Law Journal: A Monthly Record of the Law and the Lawyers . Weed, Parsons. 1899.

^ Aurelio Espinosa, "The grand strategy of Charles V (1500–1558): Castile, war, and dynastic priority in the Mediterranean." Journal of Early Modern History 9.3 (2005): 239–283.

Online [ dead link ] ^ Elliot, J.H.

Imperial Spain 1469–1716.

Penguin Books (New York: 2002), p. 208.

^ Litta, Count Pompeo.

Famous Italian Families, Stampa di Milano .

^ Brinckmeier, Eduard (1882).

Praktisches Handbuch der historischen Chronologie aller Zeiten und Völker, besonders des Mittelalters . p. 311.

^ Claims that he gained the imperial crown through bribery have been questioned. H.J. Cohn, "Did Bribes Induce the German Electors to Choose Charles V as Emperor in 1519?" German History (2001) 19#1 pp 1–27 ^ Cohn, H.J. (1 January 2001). "Did Bribes Induce the German Electors to Choose Charles V as Emperor in 1519?".

German History .

19 (1): 1– 27.

doi : 10.1191/026635501672200203 .

^ Holborn, Hajo (1982).

A History of Modern Germany: The Reformation . Princeton University Press. p. 47.

ISBN 978-0691007953 . Retrieved 9 December 2021 .

^ Justi, Ferdinand; Stevenson, Sara Yorke; Jastrow, Morris (1905).

A History of All Nations . Lea Brothers. p. 56 . Retrieved 9 December 2021 .

^ Mahan, J. Alexander (2011).

Maria Theresa of Austria . Read Books Ltd. p. 59.

ISBN 978-1446545553 . Retrieved 9 December 2021 .

^ Beard, Joseph (2010).

The Administration of Spain Under Charles V, Spain's New Charlemagne . LAP Lambert Acad. Publ. pp.

20– 40.

ISBN 978-3838339641 . Retrieved 9 December 2021 .

^ Whaley, Joachim (2011).

Germany and the Holy Roman Empire: Volume I: Maximilian I to the Peace of Westphalia, 1493–1648 . Oxford University Press. pp. 239, 284.

ISBN 978-0191617218 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Simms, Brendan (2013).

Europe: The Struggle for Supremacy, from 1453 to the Present . Basic Books. p. 1737.

ISBN 978-0465065950 . Retrieved 30 August 2022 .

^ Hendrix, Scott H. (2004).

Recultivating the Vineyard: The Reformation Agendas of Christianization . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 165.

ISBN 978-0664227135 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Potter, Philip J. (2014).

Monarchs of the Renaissance: The Lives and Reigns of 42 European Kings and Queens . McFarland. p. 334.

ISBN 978-0786491032 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ "Royal Collection – The Knights of the Garter under Henry VIII" .

royalcollection.org.uk . Archived from the original on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 16 December 2015 .

^ Angus Konstam, Pavia 1525: the climax of the Italian Wars (Osprey, 1996).

^ Holmes (1993), p. 192 ^ Froude (1891), pp. 35, 90–91, 96–97 [ permanent dead link ] Note: the link goes to p. 480, then click the View All option ^ Parker 2019 , p. 252-260.

^ Quoted from: Bryan W. Ball .

A Great Expectation . Brill Publishers, 1975.

ISBN 9004043152 . p. 142.

^ Sandra Arlinghaus.

"Life Span of Suleiman The Magnificent, 1494–1566" . Personal.umich.edu.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2010 . Retrieved 8 June 2012 .

^ Bruce Ware Allen, "Emperor vs. Pirate Tunis, 1535." MHQ: Quarterly Journal of Military History (Winter 2014) 26#2 pp 58–63.

^ In particular, in this Truce of Adrianople (1547) Charles was only referred to as "King of Spain" instead of by his extensive titulature. (see Crowley, p. 89) ^ Stanley Sandler, ed. (2002).

Ground Warfare: An International Encyclopedia, Volume 1 . Abc-Clio.

ISBN 1576077330 .

^ "A Habsburg–Persian alliance against the Ottomans finally brought a respite from the Turkish threat in the 1540s. This entanglement kept Suleiman tied down on his eastern border, relieving the pressure on Carlos V" in The Indian Ocean in world history?

Milo Kearney – 2004 – p. 112 ^ "The Story of the Barbary Corsairs, by Stanley Lane-Poole" .

www.gutenberg.org . Retrieved 18 April 2024 .

^ Garcés, María Antonia (2005).

Cervantes in Algiers: A Captive's Tale (2nd ed.). Vanderbilt University Press. p. 24.

ISBN 0826514707 .

^ "Théâtre de tous les peuples et nations de la terre avec leurs habits et ornemens divers, tant anciens que modernes, diligemment depeints au naturel par Luc Dheere peintre et sculpteur Gantois [manuscript]" .

lib.ugent.be .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ Parker, Emperor , 245–246 ^ Gottfried G. Krodel, "Law, Order, and the Almighty Taler: The Empire in Action at the 1530 Diet of Augsburg." Sixteenth Century Journal (1982): 75–106 online Archived 7 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Christopher W. Close, "Estate Solidarity and Empire: Charles V's Failed Attempt to Revive the Swabian League." Archiv für Reformationsgeschichte (2013 104#1 pp. 134–157), in English.

^ Paula Sutter Fichtner, "When Brothers Agree: Bohemia, The Habsburgs, and the Schmalkaldic Wars, 1546–1547." Austrian History Yearbook (1975), Vol. 11, pp. 67–78.

^ Tracy 2002 , pp. 229–248.

^ a b Fernand Braudel (1995).

The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II . University of California Press. pp.

935– 936.

ISBN 978-0520203303 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ Alfred Kohler, ed., Quellen zur Geschichte Karls V. Darmstadt: WBG, 1990, pp. 466–468, 480–482 ^ Setton, K.

(1984).

The Papacy and the Levant (1204–1571), Volume IV: The Sixteenth Century from Julius III to Pius V . Memoirs. Vol. 162. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society . p. 716.

ISBN 978-0871691620 .

ISSN 0065-9738 .

^ Robinson, H., ed. (1846).

Zurich Letters . Cambridge University Press. p.

182 .

^ Joachim Whaley (2012).

Germany and the Holy Roman Empire: Volume I: Maximilian I to the Peace of Westphalia, 1493–1648 . OUP Oxford. p. 343.

ISBN 978-0198731016 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ a b c Kanski, Jack J. (2019).

History of the German speaking nations . Troubador Publishing.

ISBN 978-1789017182 .

^ Alonso, Jordi; J. de Zulueta; et al. (August 2006). "The severe gout of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V".

N. Engl. J. Med .

355 (5): 516– 520.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMon060780 .

PMID 16885558 .

^ de Zulueta, J. (June 2007). "The cause of death of Emperor Charles V".

Parassitologia .

49 ( 1– 2): 107– 109.

PMID 18412053 .

^ Kamen 1997 , p. 65.

^ Parker, Emperor , 490–494 ^ "El Escorial History – El Escorial" . el-escorial.com.

Archived from the original on 16 July 2017 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ "A-Panteo.Pdf" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 January 2012 . Retrieved 10 June 2019 .

^ "A-Panteo.Pdf" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 January 2012 . Retrieved 10 June 2019 .

^ Rady, Martyn (2014).

The Emperor Charles V .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1317880820 – via Google Books.

^ Including Austria ^ including his last voyage after the abdication ^ Including one visit to Sicily and Sardinia ^ a b Jenkins, Everett Jr. (2015).

The Muslim Diaspora (Volume 2, 1500–1799): A Comprehensive Chronology of the Spread of Islam in Asia, Africa, Europe and the Americas . McFarland.

ISBN 978-1476608891 – via Google Books.

^ Emperor, a new life of Charles V, by Geoffrey Parker, p. 8.

^ "Royal Writ of the Foundation of the City of Tlaxcala" .

Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA . Retrieved 18 May 2024 .

^ McEnroe, Sean F., ed. (2012), "Tlaxcalan Vassals of the North" , From Colony to Nationhood in Mexico: Laying the Foundations, 1560–1840 , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

21– 56, doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139026253.002 , ISBN 978-1-107-00630-0 , retrieved 18 May 2024 ^ Paredes, Cecilia (28 December 2014).

'The Confusion of the Battlefield: A New Perspective on the Tapestries of the Battle of Pavia (c. 1525–1528)', RIHA Journal 0102 . p. 6.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Loades, Mike (2011).

Swords and Swordsmen . Casemate Publishers. p. 260.

ISBN 978-1848847033 .

^ Puype, Jan Piet (2018). "Wilfried Tittmann, Die Nürnberger Handfeuerwaffen vom Spätmittelalter bis zum Frühbarock: Der Beitrag Nürnbergs zur Militärischen Revolution der frühen Neuzeit (= The Portable Firearms of Nuremberg from the Late Middle Ages to the Early Modern Age)".

Arms & Armour . Graz: Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt: 4.

doi : 10.1080/17416124.2020.1791406 .

S2CID 227060405 .

^ Springer, Carolyn (2010).

Armour and Masculinity in the Italian Renaissance . University of Toronto Press. p. 17.

ISBN 978-1442699021 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Jaeger, Friedrich (2017).

Enzyklopädie der Neuzeit: Band 11: Renaissance–Signatur (in German). Springer-Verlag. p. 480.

ISBN 978-3476000606 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Zunckel, Julia (1997).

Rüstungsgeschäfte im dreissigjährigen Krieg: Unternehmerkräfte, Militärgüter und Marktstrategien im Handel zwischen Genua, Amsterdam und Hamburg (in German). Duncker & Humblot. p. 79.

ISBN 978-3428088072 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Tucker, Spencer; Arnold, James R.; Wiener, Roberta (2011).

The Encyclopedia of North American Indian Wars, 1607–1890: A Political, Social, and Military History . ABC-CLIO. p. 526.

ISBN 978-1851096978 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ "Famous Makers of Arms and Armors and European Centers of Production" .

www.metmuseum.org . October 2002.

Archived from the original on 5 September 2022 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Jean-Marie Le Gall, « Les Combattants de Pavie. Octobre 1524 – 24 février 1525 », Revue historique, Paris, Presses universitaires de France, no 671, juillet 2014, pp. 567–596 ^ Major, Ralph Hermon (1941).

Fatal Partners, War and Disease . Doubleday, Doran, Incorporated. p. 80 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Kortüm, Hans-Henning (2010).

Transcultural Wars: from the Middle Ages to the 21st Century . Walter de Gruyter. p. 65.

ISBN 978-3050049953 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Singer, P. W. (2011).

Corporate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry . Cornell University Press. p. 27.

ISBN 978-0801459603 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ "H-German Roundtable on Smith, Germany: A Nation in Its Time Before, During, and After Nationalism, 1500–2000 H-German H-Net" .

networks.h-net.org .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 5 February 2022 .

^ Tracy, James (2008).

The Founding of the Dutch Republic: War, Finance, and Politics in Holland, 1572–1588 . OUP Oxford. p. 27.

ISBN 978-0191607288 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ López, Ignacio J. N. (2012).

The Spanish Tercios 1536–1704 . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

7– 15.

ISBN 978-1780968735 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ a b Mesa, Eduardo de (2014).

The Irish in the Spanish Armies in the Seventeenth Century . Boydell & Brewer Ltd. p. 9.

ISBN 978-1843839514 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Sandberg, Brian (2016).

War and Conflict in the Early Modern World: 1500–1700 . John Wiley & Sons. p. 178.

ISBN 978-1509503025 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Kamen, Henry (1969).

The War of Succession in Spain, 1700–15 . Indiana University Press. p. 61.

ISBN 978-0253190253 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Maltby, William (2017).

The Reign of Charles V . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 83.

ISBN 978-0230629080 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Fuentes, Carlos (1999).

The Buried Mirror: Reflections on Spain and the New World . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 168.

ISBN 978-0395924990 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Phillips, Andrew (2010).

War, Religion and Empire: The Transformation of International Orders . Cambridge University Press. p. 95.

ISBN 978-1139494014 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Ágoston, Gábor (2021).

The Last Muslim Conquest: The Ottoman Empire and Its Wars in Europe . Princeton University Press. pp.

273– 275.

ISBN 978-0691205380 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Sherer, Idan (2017).

Warriors for a Living: The Experience of the Spanish Infantry during the Italian Wars, 1494–1559 . Brill. p. 42.

ISBN 978-9004337725 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Häberlein, Mark (2012).

The Fuggers of Augsburg: Pursuing Wealth and Honor in Renaissance Germany . University of Virginia Press. p. 67.

ISBN 978-0813932446 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ a b Behringer 2011 , p. 349.

^ Meinel, Christoph; Sack, Harald (2014).

Digital Communication: Communication, Multimedia, Security . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 31.

ISBN 978-3642543319 .

Archived from the original on 26 September 2021 . Retrieved 20 September 2021 .

^ Pavlac, Brian A.; Lott, Elizabeth S. (2019).

The Holy Roman Empire: A Historical Encyclopedia [2 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. p. 255.

ISBN 978-1440848568 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 .

^ Brisman, Shira (2017).

Albrecht Dürer and the Epistolary Mode of Address . University of Chicago Press. p. 48.

ISBN 978-0226354897 . Retrieved 16 December 2021 .

^ Behringer, Wolfgang (2011). "Core and Periphery: The Holy Roman Empire as a Communication(s) Universe".

The Holy Roman Empire, 1495–1806 (PDF) . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 350, 351.

ISBN 978-0199602971 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ Cauchies, Jean-Marie (5 September 2020).

"Bibliographie Maximilien d'Autriche, cinq cents ans après. Diplomatie et propagande" .

Le Moyen Âge (in French) (1): 99– 105.

doi : 10.3917/rma.261.0099 .

ISSN 0027-2841 .

S2CID 242643244 .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2022 . Retrieved 3 June 2022 .

^ a b Mainka, Peter Johann (April 2022).

"Diplomacia e Estado na primeira modernidade" .

Revista Brasileira de História .

42 (89): 39– 60.

doi : 10.1590/1806-93472022v42n89-04 .

S2CID 247214976 .

^ Metzig, Gregor (2016).

Kommunikation und Konfrontation: Diplomatie und Gesandtschaftswesen Kaiser Maximilians I. (1486–1519) (in German). Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG. pp. 48, 53, 98, 99.

ISBN 978-3110454574 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Yurdusev, A. Nuri (2016).

Ottoman Diplomacy: Conventional or Unconventional?

. Springer. p. 22.

ISBN 978-0230554436 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Knutsen, Torbjørn L. (1999).

The Rise and Fall of World Orders . Manchester University Press. p. 33.

ISBN 978-0719040580 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Varri̇ale, Gennaro (2021).

"The Power of the Quill: Espionage under Charles V during the Tunisian Campaign" .

Osmanlı Araştırmaları .

58 (58): 1– 27.

doi : 10.18589/oa.1041507 .

ISSN 0255-0636 .

S2CID 245485372 .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Goodwin, Robert, Spain, the Center of the World .

^ "The Alhambra in Granada: Carlos V Palace" .

granadainfo.com .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2016 . Retrieved 22 February 2018 .

^ SL, Alhambra Valparaiso Ocio y Cultura.

"La Alhambra de Granada - alhambra.org" .

La Alhambra de Granada (in European Spanish). Archived from the original on 19 October 2016 . Retrieved 22 February 2018 .

^ Simms, Brendan, Europe, the Struggle for Supremacy, 1453 to the Present , p. 87 ^ Prescott, William Hickling (1873).

History of the Conquest of Mexico, with a Preliminary View of Ancient Mexican Civilization, and the Life of the Conqueror, Hernando Cortes (3rd ed.). Electronic Text Center, University of Virginia Library.

ISBN 1152295705 .

Archived from the original on 29 August 2012 . Retrieved 11 December 2008 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Parker, Emperor: A New Life of Charles V , 361.

^ Parker, Emperor: A New Life of Charles V , 361.

^ Parker, Emperor: A New Life of Charles V , pp. 364–367 ^ Burkholder, Mark A. "New Laws of 1542" in Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture , v. 4, p. 177 ^ Cook David Noble, "Gonzalo Pizarro" in Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture , v. 4, 417–418 ^ Keys, David (17 August 2018).

"Details of horrific first voyages in transatlantic slave trade revealed" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 21 August 2018 . Retrieved 21 August 2018 .

^ a b admin (7 August 2018).

"La Efeméride : 3 de Julio de 1549" .

Centro Diego de Covarrubias (in Spanish) . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ Hernandez, Bonar Ludwig.

"The Las Casas-Sepúlveda Controversy: 1550–1551" .

Ex Post Facto .

10 .

San Francisco State University : 95– 104 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 .

^ Hanke, Lewis (1974).

All Mankind is One: A study of the Disputation Between Bartolomé de Las Casas and Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda in 1550 on the Intellectual and Religious Capacity of the American Indian . Illinois: Northern Illinois University Press. p. 67.

^ a b "Indígenas sin explotación, esclavitud y exclusión" (in European Spanish) . Retrieved 3 June 2023 .

^ a b Salmoral, Manuel Lucena (9 November 2017), Lavou Zoungbo, Victorien (ed.), "Planteamiento de la 'duda indiana' (1534–1549). Crisis de la conciencia nacional: las dudas de Carlos V" , Bartolomé de Las Casas : Face à l'esclavage des Noir-e-s en Amériques/Caraïbes. L'aberration du Onzième Remède (1516) , Études (in Spanish), Perpignan: Presses universitaires de Perpignan, pp.

159– 183, ISBN 978-2-35412-284-3 , retrieved 3 June 2023 ^ Heath, Richard (2018).

Charles V: Duty and Dynasty – The Emperor and his Changing World 1500–1558 . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. pp.

269– 272.

ISBN 978-1725852785 .

^ a b Wurzbach, Constantin von , ed. (1861).

"Habsburg, Philipp I. der Schöne von Oesterreich" .

Biographisches Lexikon des Kaiserthums Oesterreich [ Biographical Encyclopedia of the Austrian Empire ] (in German). Vol. 7. p. 112 – via Wikisource .

^ a b Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Joanna" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 15 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 421.

^ a b Holland, Arthur William (1911).

"Maximilian I." . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 17 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

922– 932.

^ a b Poupardin, René (1911).

"Charles, called The Bold, duke of Burgundy" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

932– 933.

^ a b Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Ferdinand V. of Castile and Leon and II. of Aragon" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 10 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

266– 267.

^ a b Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Isabella of Castile" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 14 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 859.

^ Thomas, The Golden Empire , 26 ^ Thomas, The Golden Empire , 26–27 ^ Thomas, The Golden Empire , 28 ^ Madariaga Orbea, Juan (2014).

Sociedad y lengua vasca en los siglos XVII y XVIII . Euskaltzaindia. p. 712.

^ Charles V , Pierre Chaunu and Michèle Escamilla ^ Parker, Emperor: A New Life of Charles V , p. 377 ^ Cornelius August Wilkens (1897).

"VIII. Juan de Valdés" .

Spanish Protestants in the Sixteenth Century . William Heinemann. p. 66 . Retrieved 24 July 2015 .

^ Burke, "Languages and communities in early modern Europe" p. 28; Holzberger, "The letters of George Santayana" p. 299 ^ Francisco C. Ceballos, and G. Álvarez, "Royal dynasties as human inbreeding laboratories: the Habsburgs." Heredity 111.2 (2013): 114–121 online Archived 4 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Parker, Emperor , 67 ^ H. Schneble.

"German Epilepsy Museum Kork" . Epilepsiemuseum.de.

Archived from the original on 28 November 2009 . Retrieved 8 June 2012 .

^ "Tests confirm old emperor's gout diagnosis." His The Record. 4 August 2006, Nation.

^ "Henry VIII: June 1518, 1–15 pp. 1302–1311 Letters and Papers, Foreign and Domestic, Henry VIII, Volume 2, 1515–1518. Originally published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1864" .

British History Online .

Archived from the original on 11 June 2020 . Retrieved 11 June 2020 .

^ Thomas, The Golden Empire , 84, 88 ^ Thomas, The Golden Empire , 84, 88 ^ Palace of Charles V Archived 24 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Alhambra.org ^ Kamen, H.

(1997).

Philip of Spain . Yale University Press. p.

2 .

ISBN 978-0300070811 .

^ Kamen 1997 , pp. 6–7.

^ "The Glory – The Collection" .

Museo Nacional del Prado .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2018 . Retrieved 28 July 2017 .

^ "Empress Isabella of Portugal – The Collection" .

Museo Nacional del Prado .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2019 .

^ "Thomas Crecquillon: Missa 'Mort m'a privé', motets and chansons" .

The Brabant Ensemble .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2019 . Retrieved 10 June 2019 .

^ a b Thomas, The Golden Empire , 38 ^ Parker, Emperor , pp. 400–401 ^ Parker, Emperor , 545–546 ^ a b Thomas, The Golden Empire , 37 ^ Fletcher 2016 , p. 50.

^ "La hija secreta de Carlos V" .

hoy.es (in Spanish). 12 January 2020.

Archived from the original on 21 February 2021 . Retrieved 31 May 2021 .

^ Thomas, The Golden Empire , 37–38 ^ Parker, Geoffrey.

Emperor , pp. 400–401, 483–484, 560 ^ Ferdinand I.

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie ^ Thomas A Brady JR (2009).

German Histories in the Age of Reformations, 1400–1650 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1139481151 .

^ Foulke, Roland Roberts (1920).

"A Treatise on International Law: With an Introductory Essay on the Definition and Nature of the Laws of Human Conduct" .

^ Vehse, Carl Eduard (1856).

"Memoirs of the Court, Aristocracy, and Diplomacy of Austria" .

^ Relazione di Germania 1526 in Relazioni degli ambasciatori Veneti al Senato: Germania ^ Rady, Martyn (2014).

The Emperor Charles V . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1317880820 .

^ Setton 1978 , p. 463.

^ Enepekides 1960 , pp. 138–143.

^ Freiberg 2014 , p. 152.

^ Dixon, C. Scott (2005).

The Histories of Emperor Charles V: Nationale Perspektiven Von Persönlichkeit und Herrschaft . Aschendorff. p. 10.

ISBN 978-3402065747 . Retrieved 10 February 2022 .

^ Boone 2021 .

^ Ferdinandy 2021 .

^ Kohler, Alfred.

"Kohler on Tracy, 'Emperor Charles V, Impresario of War: Campaign Strategy, International Finance, and Domestic Politics' " .

Habsburg – H-Net reviews .

Archived from the original on 10 February 2022 . Retrieved 10 February 2022 .

^ Heymans, Frans (4 June 2007).

"Keizer Karel in de literatuur" .

Overzichten (in Dutch). Literair Gent, an initiative by the Municipal Public Library of Ghent and 'Gent Cultuurstad'. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved 20 July 2007 .

^ Johann Christoph Allmayer-Beck : The Museum of Military History in Vienna. The museum and its representative rooms. Kiesel Verlag, Salzburg 1981, ISBN 3702301135 , p. 30.

^ Alares, Gustavo (2020).

"Nostalgias de Europa. La conmemoración del IV Centenario de la muerte de Carlos V en 1958" .

Mélanges de la Casa de Velázquez .

50 (2). Madrid: Casa de Velázquez : 117– 140.

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 March 2021 .

^ Dixon, C. Scott (1 January 2003). "Charles V and the Historians: Some Recent German Works on the Emperor and his Reign". German History. 21 (1): 104–124.

doi : 10.1191/0266355403gh277xx . Retrieved 11 February 2022.

^ "Prinsenhof: Medieval gem in the city centre" .

VisitGent .

Archived from the original on 30 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ "Every Upcoming Adrien Brody Movie & TV Show" .

ScreenRant . 23 August 2021.

Archived from the original on 8 February 2022 . Retrieved 8 February 2022 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Boone, Rebecca Ard (2021).

"Charles V, Emperor" .

Oxford Bibliographies Online (obo) .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2022 . Retrieved 8 February 2022 .

Enepekides, P. K. (1960). "Das Wiener Testament des Andreas Palaiologos vom 7. April 1502" [The Vienna Testament of Andreas Palaiologos from 7 April 1502].

Akten des 11. Internat. Byzantinisten-Kongresses 1958 (in German). Munich: C.H. Beck. pp.

138– 143.

OCLC 761003148 .

Ferdinandy, Michael de (2021).

Charles V: Holy Roman emperor .

Archived from the original on 9 May 2015 . Retrieved 14 October 2022 .

Fletcher, Catherine (2016).

The Black Prince of Florence: The Spectacular Life and Treacherous World of Alessandro de' Medici . Oxford University Press.

Freiberg, Jack (2014).

Bramante's Tempietto, the Roman Renaissance, and the Spanish Crown . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1107042971 .

Setton, Kenneth M.

(1978).

The Papacy and the Levant (1204–1571), Volume II: The Fifteenth Century . Philadelphia: The American Philosophical Society.

ISBN 0-87169-127-2 .

Parker, Geoffrey (2019).

Emperor: A New Life of Charles V . New Haven and London: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-19652-8 .

Tracy, James D. (2002).

Emperor Charles V, Impresario of War: Campaign Strategy, International Finance, and Domestic Politics . Cambridge UP.

Further reading [ edit ] English [ edit ] Atkins, Sinclair. "Charles V and the Turks", History Today (Dec 1980) 30#12 pp. 13–18 Blockmans, W. P., and Nicolette Mout.

The World of Emperor Charles V (2005) Blockmans, Wim .

Emperor Charles V, 1500–1558.

(Oxford University Press, 2002).

online Brandi, Karl .

The Emperor Charles V: The growth and destiny of a man and of a world-empire (1939) online Espinosa, Aurelio. "The Grand Strategy of Charles V (1500–1558): Castile, War, and Dynastic Priority in the Mediterranean", Journal of Early Modern History (2005) 9#3 pp. 239–283.

online Espinosa, Aurelio. "The Spanish Reformation: Institutional Reform, Taxation, and the Secularization of Ecclesiastical Properties under Charles V", Sixteenth Century Journal (2006) 37#1 pp 3–24.

JSTOR 20477694 .

Espinosa, Aurelio.

The Empire of the Cities: Emperor Charles V, the Comunero Revolt, and the Transformation of the Spanish System (2008) Ferer, Mary Tiffany.

Music and Ceremony at the Court of Charles V: The Capilla Flamenca and the Art of Political Promotion (Boydell & Brewer, 2012).

ISBN 978-1843836995 Froude, James Anthony (1891).

The Divorce of Catherine of Aragon . Kessinger, reprint 2005.

ISBN 1417971096 .

Archived from the original on 20 November 2022 . Retrieved 20 November 2022 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Grant, Neil.

Charles V: Holy Roman Emperor . London: Franklin Watts (1970) Headley, John M. (1983).

The Emperor and His Chancellor: A Study of the Imperial Chancellery Under Gattinara . New York: Cambridge University Press.

Heath, Richard.

Charles V: Duty and Dynasty: The Emperor and his Changing World 1500–1558.

(2018) ISBN 978-1725852785 Holmes, David L.

(1993).

A Brief History of the Episcopal Church . Continuum International Publishing Group.

ISBN 1563380609 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

Kleinschmidt, Harald.

Charles V: The World Emperor ISBN 978-0750924047 MacDonald, Stewart.

Charles V: Ruler, Dynast and Defender of the Faith 1500–58 Access to History series (1992; 2nd ed. 2000) ISBN 978-0340749227 Merriman, Roger Bigelow .

The Rise of the Spanish Empire in the Old World and the New: Volume 3 The Emperor (1925) online Norwich, John Julius .

Four Princes: Henry VIII, Francis I, Charles V, Suleiman the Magnificent and the Obsessions that Forged Modern Europe (2017), popular history; Reston Jr., James .

Defenders of the Faith: Charles V, Suleyman the Magnificent, and the Battle for Europe, 1520–1536 (2009), popular history.

Richardson, Glenn.

Renaissance Monarchy: The Reigns of Henry VIII, Francis I and Charles V (2002) 246 pp., covers 1497 to 1558.

Robertson, William .

History of the Reign of the Emperor Charles V, with a View of the Progress of Society in Europe (1769).

Rodriguez-Salgado, Mia.

Changing Face of Empire: Charles V, Philip II and Habsburg Authority, 1551–1559 (1988), 375 pp.

Rosenthal, Earl E.

Palace of Charles V in Granada (1986) 383 pp.

Saint-Saëns, Alain, ed.

Young Charles V . (New Orleans: University Press of the South, 2000).

Thomas, Hugh .

The Golden Empire: Spain, Charles V, and the Creation of America . New York: Random House 2010.

ISBN 978-1400061259 Other languages [ edit ] Salvatore Agati (2009).

Carlo V e la Sicilia. Tra guerre, rivolte, fede e ragion di Stato , Giuseppe Maimone Editore, Catania 2009, ISBN 978-8877512871 (in Italian) D'Amico, Juan Carlos.

Charles Quint, Maître du Monde: Entre Mythe et Realite 2004, 290p.

(in French) Norbert Conrads: Die Abdankung Kaiser Karls V.

Abschiedsvorlesung, Universität Stuttgart, 2003 ( text Archived 17 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ) (in German) Stephan Diller, Joachim Andraschke, Martin Brecht: Kaiser Karl V. und seine Zeit . Ausstellungskatalog. Universitäts-Verlag, Bamberg 2000, ISBN 3933463068 (in German) Alfred Kohler: Karl V. 1500–1558. Eine Biographie . C. H. Beck, München 2001, ISBN 3406453597 (in German) Alfred Kohler: Quellen zur Geschichte Karls V.

Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt 1990, ISBN 3534048202 (in German) Alfred Kohler, Barbara Haider. Christine Ortner (Hrsg): Karl V. 1500–1558. Neue Perspektiven seiner Herrschaft in Europa und Übersee . Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Wien 2002, ISBN 3700130546 (in German) Ernst Schulin: Kaiser Karl V. Geschichte eines übergroßen Wirkungsbereichs .

Kohlhammer Verlag , Stuttgart 1999, ISBN 3170156950 (in German) Ferdinant Seibt: Karl V.

Goldmann, München 1999, ISBN 3442755115 (in German) Manuel Fernández Álvarez : Imperator mundi: Karl V. – Kaiser des Heiligen Römischen Reiches Deutscher Nation.

. Stuttgart 1977, ISBN 3763011781 (in German) External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor .

Armstrong, Edward (1911).

"Charles V." . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

899– 905.

Beach, Chandler B.

, ed. (1914).

"Charles V" .

The New Student's Reference Work . Vol. 1. Chicago: F. E. Compton and Co.

Genealogy history of Charles V and his ancestors The Life and Times of Emperor Charles V 1500–1558 The Library of Charles V preserved in the National Library of France Luminarium Encyclopedia biography of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor New Advent Catholic Encyclopedia biography of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor Charles V the Habsburg emperor, video Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor House of Habsburg Born: 24 February 1500 Died: 21 September 1558 Regnal titles Preceded by Philip I Duke of Brabant , Limburg , Lothier and Luxembourg ; Margrave of Namur ; Count of Artois , Flanders , Hainaut , Holland , and Zeeland ; Count Palatine of Burgundy 1506–1555 Succeeded by Philip II Preceded by Ferdinand II King of Naples 1516–1554 with Joanna III (1516–1554) King of Aragon , Majorca , Valencia , Sardinia , Sicily ; Count of Barcelona , Roussillon , and Cerdagne 1516–1556 with Joanna (1516–1555) King of Upper Navarre 1516–1556 with Joanna (1516–1555) Preceded by Joanna I & Ferdinand V King of Castile and León 1516–1556 with Joanna (1516–1555) Preceded by William I and V Duke of Guelders Count of Zutphen 1543–1555 Preceded by Maximilian I Archduke of Austria Duke of Styria , Carinthia and Carniola Count of Tyrol 1519–1521 Succeeded by Ferdinand I King of Germany 1519–1556 Holy Roman Emperor 1530–1556 King of Italy 1530–1556 Vacant Title next held by Napoleon Preceded by Ferdinand I King of Lower Navarre with Joanna III (1516–1530) disputed by Henry II (1521–1530) Succeeded by Henry II Spanish royalty Preceded by Joanna Prince of Asturias 1504–1516 Vacant Title next held by Philip (II) Prince of Girona 1516 v t e Holy Roman emperors Charlemagne Louis I Lothair I Louis II Charles II Charles III Guy Lambert Arnulf Louis III Berengar Otto I Otto II Otto III Henry II Conrad II Henry III Henry IV Henry V Lothair III Frederick I Henry VI Otto IV Frederick II Henry VII Louis IV Charles IV Sigismund Frederick III Maximilian I Charles V Ferdinand I Maximilian II Rudolph II Matthias Ferdinand II Ferdinand III Leopold I Joseph I Charles VI Charles VII Francis I Joseph II Leopold II Francis II Category v t e Monarchs of Spain List of monarchs | Monarchs' family tree Dynastic union Isabella I & Ferdinand V Joanna & Philip I Personal union Charles I Philip II Philip III Philip IV Charles II Political union Philip V Louis I Philip V Ferdinand VI Charles III Charles IV Joseph Ferdinand VII Isabella II Amadeo Alfonso XII Alfonso XIII Juan Carlos I Felipe VI v t e Monarchs of Aragon House of Jiménez Ramiro I Sancho Peter I Alfonso I Ramiro II Petronilla House of Barcelona Alfonso II Peter II James I Peter III Alfonso III James II Alfonso IV Peter IV John I Martin House of Trastámara Ferdinand I Alfonso V John II Ferdinand II Joanna House of Habsburg Charles I Philip I Philip II Philip III Charles II Charles III House of Bourbon Philip IV v t e Counts of Barcelona House of Barcelona Wilfred the Hairy Wifred II Sunyer I Miro Borrell II Ramon Borrell Berenguer Ramon I Ermesinde of Carcassonne Ramon Berenguer I Ramon Berenguer II Berenguer Ramon II Ramon Berenguer III Ramon Berenguer IV Alfons I Peter I James I Peter II Alfons II James II Alfons III Peter III John I Martin House of Trastámara Ferdinand I Alfons IV John II Henry Ferdinand II Joanna House of Avis Peter IV House of Anjou René House of Habsburg Charles I Philip I Philip II Philip III Charles II Charles III House of Bourbon Louis I Louis II Philip IV v t e Monarchs of Castile House of Jiménez Ferdinand I Sancho II Alfonso VI Urraca House of Burgundy Alfonso VII Sancho III Alfonso VIII Henry I Berengaria Ferdinand III Alfonso X Sancho IV Ferdinand IV Alfonso XI Peter House of Trastámara Henry II John I Henry III John II Henry IV Isabella I & Ferdinand V Joanna & Philip I House of Habsburg Charles I Philip II Philip III Philip IV Charles II House of Bourbon Philip V v t e Monarchs of Galicia Suebian kings Hermeric Rechila Rechiar Aioulf Maldras Framta Richimund Frumar Remismund Hermeneric Veremund Theodemund Chararic Ariamir Theodemar Miro Eboric Audeca Malaric Astur-Leonese dynasty Ordoño II Sancho I Bermudo II Alfonso V Bermudo III House of Jiménez García II Sancho II Alfonso VI Urraca House of Burgundy Alfonso VII Ferdinand II Alfonso IX Sancha & Dulce Ferdinand III Alfonso X Sancho IV Prince John Ferdinand IV Alfonso XI Peter Portuguese House of Burgundy Ferdinand I of Portugal House of Lancaster John of Gaunt House of Trastámara Henry II John I Henry III John II Henry IV Isabella I & Ferdinand V Joanna & Philip I House of Habsburg Charles I v t e Monarchs of León Astur-Leonese house Alfonso III García I Ordoño II Fruela II Alfonso Fróilaz Alfonso IV Ramiro II Ordoño III Sancho I Ordoño IV Sancho I Ramiro III Bermudo II Alfonso V Bermudo III House of Jiménez Ferdinand I Sancho II Alfonso VI Urraca House of Burgundy Alfonso VII Ferdinand II Alfonso IX Sancha & Dulce Ferdinand III Alfonso X Sancho IV Ferdinand IV Alfonso XI Peter House of Trastámara Henry II John I Henry III John II Henry IV Isabella I & Ferdinand V Joanna & Philip I House of Habsburg Charles I v t e Monarchs of Navarre House of Íñiguez Íñigo Arista García Íñiguez Fortún Garcés House of Jiménez Sancho I Jimeno Garcés García Sánchez I Sancho II García Sánchez II Sancho III García Sánchez III Sancho IV Sancho V A Peter I A Alfonso I A García Ramírez Sancho VI Sancho VII House of Champagne Theobald I Theobald II Henry I Joan I House of Capet Philip I F Louis I F John I F Philip II F Charles I F Joan II House of Évreux Philip III Charles II Charles III Blanche I House of Trastámara John II A Charles IV Blanche II Eleanor House of Foix Francis Phoebus Catherine House of Albret John III House of Albret - Lower Navarre Henry II Joan III House of Bourbon - Lower Navarre Antoine Henry III F Louis II F Louis III F Louis IV F Louis V F Louis VI F Charles V F House of Trastámara - Upper Navarre Ferdinand I A Joan III S House of Habsburg - Upper Navarre Charles IV S Philip IV S Philip V S Philip VI S Charles V S House of Bourbon - Upper Navarre Philip VII S Louis II S Ferdinand II S Charles VI S Charles VII S Ferdinand III S Isabella I S A Also King of Aragon .

F Also King of France .

S Also King/Queen of Spain .

v t e Spanish Empire Timeline–immersed Catholic Monarchs Conquest of the Americas , Asia and the Pacific Treaty of Tordesillas Italian Wars Habsburgs Golden Age War of the League of Cognac Encomiendas New Laws in favour of the indigenous Expulsion of the Moriscos Ottoman–Habsburg wars French Wars of Religion Bruneian–Spanish conflict Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604) Piracy in the Caribbean Eighty Years' War Spanish–Moro conflict Thirty Years' War Franco-Spanish War (1635–1659) Portuguese Restoration War War of the Spanish Succession Queen Anne's War Bourbons Bourbon Reforms War of Jenkins' Ear Treaty of Madrid (1750) Seven Years' War Nootka Convention Napoleonic invasion Third Treaty of San Ildefonso Independence of Spanish continental Americas Adams–Onís Treaty Liberal constitution Carlist Wars Spanish–American War German–Spanish Treaty (1899) Spanish Civil War Independence of Morocco Independence of Equatorial Guinea Western Sahara conflict Territories Europe Spain Crown of Castille Crown of Aragon Union with Portugal Gibraltar Southern Italy (Kingdoms of Naples , Sicily and Sardinia ) Milan Union with Holy Roman Empire Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, northernmost France Franche-Comté Pyrénées-Orientales Americas ( Spanish America ) North America New Spain ( Coastal Alaska , Central United States ( Spanish Louisiana ), Western United States ( Spanish Texas ), Florida , Mexico , Central America ( Captaincy General of Yucatan ), Spanish Caribbean ) Central America Captaincy General of Guatemala Spanish West Indies ( Cuba , Dominican Republic , Puerto Rico ) Trinidad Jamaica Haiti Aruba Curazao Bonaire Belize South America New Granada ( Colombia , Ecuador , Panama , Venezuela, part of Guyana , a northernmost portion of Brazilian Amazon) Peru (Peru, Acre , Chile ) Río de la Plata ( Argentina , Paraguay , Charcas (Bolivia), Banda Oriental (Uruguay), Misiones Orientales , Malvinas ) Asia and Oceania ( Spanish East Indies ) Philippines Micronesia ( Caroline , Guam , Mariana , Micronesia , Palau ) Northern Taiwan Tidore Africa Equatorial Guinea Northern Africa ( Western Sahara , Spanish Morocco , Tripoli , Tunis , Peñón of Algiers , Oran , Béjaïa , Ifni and Cape Juby ) Antarctica Terra Australis Administration Organization Ayuntamiento Cabildo Council of the Indies Germania Santa Hermandad Law Exequatur Laws of the Indies Papal bull Royal Decree of Graces School of Salamanca Trial of residence Titles and positions Alcalde Corregidor Municipal president Regidor Syndic Vecino Administrative subdivisions Viceroyalties Columbian New Spain New Granada Perú Río de la Plata Captaincies General Chile Cuba Guatemala Philippines Provincias Internas Puerto Rico Santo Domingo Venezuela Yucatán Governorates Castilla de Oro Cuba La Florida Louisiana New Andalusia (1501–1513) New Andalusia New Castile New Navarre New Spain Tierra Firme New Toledo New León Paraguay Río de la Plata Terra Australis Audiencias Bogotá Buenos Aires Caracas Charcas Concepción Cusco Guadalajara Guatemala Lima Manila Mexico Panamá Quito Santiago Santo Domingo Economy Currencies Dollar (Peso) Real Maravedí Escudo Columnario Doubloon Trade Manila galleon Spanish treasure fleet Casa de Contratación Spanish Road Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas Barcelona Trading Company Consulate of the Sea Camino Real de Tierra Adentro Commerce Consulate of Buenos Aires Military Armies Tercio Army of Flanders Free Company of Volunteers of Catalonia Indian auxiliaries Spanish Armada Ships of the line Royalists Legión Army of Africa Strategists Duke of Alba Antonio de Leyva Martín de Goiti Alfonso d'Avalos García de Toledo Osorio Duke of Savoy Álvaro de Bazán the Elder John of Austria Charles Bonaventure de Longueval Pedro de Zubiaur Ambrosio Spinola Blas de Lezo Bernardo de Gálvez Mariners Christopher Columbus Pinzón brothers Ferdinand Magellan Juan Sebastián Elcano Juan de la Cosa Juan Ponce de León Miguel López de Legazpi Pedro Menéndez de Avilés Sebastián de Ocampo Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca Alonso de Ojeda Vasco Núñez de Balboa Alonso de Salazar Andrés de Urdaneta Antonio de Ulloa Ruy López de Villalobos Diego Columbus Alonso de Ercilla Nicolás de Ovando Juan de Ayala Sebastián Vizcaíno Juan Fernández Luis Fajardo Felipe González de Ahedo Francisco de Camargo Alonso de Camargo Conquistadors Hernán Cortés Francisco Pizarro Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada Hernán Pérez de Quesada Francisco Vázquez de Coronado Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar Pedro de Valdivia Gaspar de Portolà Pere Fages i Beleta Joan Orpí Pedro de Alvarado Martín de Ursúa Diego de Almagro Pánfilo de Narváez Diego de Mazariegos Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera Pere d'Alberní i Teixidor García López de Cárdenas Notable battles Old World Won Comuneros Bicocca Rome (1527) Landriano Pavia Tunis Mühlberg St. Quentin Gravelines Malta Lepanto Antwerp Azores Mons Gembloux Ostend English Armada Cape Celidonia White Mountain Breda Nördlingen Valenciennes Ceuta Bitonto Bailén Vitoria Tetouan Alhucemas Lost Capo d'Orso Vienna (1529) Preveza Siege of Castelnuovo Algiers Ceresole Balearic Islands (1558) Djerba Tunis Spanish Armada Leiden Rocroi Downs Montes Claros Passaro Manila Bay Trafalgar Somosierra Annual Mactan New World Won Tenochtitlan Cajamarca Cusco Bogotá savanna Penco Mataquito Guadalupe Island Recife San Juan (1595) Bahia Colonia del Sacramento Comuneros (Paraguay) Cartagena de Indias Cuerno Verde Túpac Amaru II Túpac Katari Pensacola Newfoundland San Juan (1797) Lost La Noche Triste Iguape Tucapel Guiana Curalaba Comuneros (New Granada) Trinidad (1797) Chacabuco Boyacá Carabobo Pichincha Ayacucho Guam Santiago de Cuba Asomante Spanish conquests Canary Islands The Americas Aztec Maya Chiapas Yucatán Guatemala Petén El Salvador Honduras Nicaragua Chibchan Nations Colombia Chile Inca Philippines Other civil topics Spanish missions in the Americas Architecture Mesoamerican Codices Cusco painting tradition Indochristian painting in New Spain Quito painting tradition Africanist Tapada limeña Academia Antártica Colonial universities in Hispanic America Colonial universities in the Philippines General Archive of the Indies Colonial Spanish Horse Mustang Castas Criollos in the colonial society Old inquisition Slavery in Spanish Empire Asiento Law of coartación (which allowed slaves to buy their freedom, and that of others) Great Potosí Mint Fraud of 1649 Cartography Cartographers Juan de la Cruz Cano y Olmedilla Agustín Ibáñez y Bojons v t e Monarchs of Germany East Francia during the Carolingian dynasty (843–911) Louis the German Carloman Louis the Younger Charles the Fat Arnulf Louis the Child East Francia (911–919) Kingdom of Germany (919–962) Conrad I Henry I Arnulf Otto I Kingdom of Germany within the Holy Roman Empire (962–1806) Otto I Otto II Otto III Henry II Conrad II Henry III Henry IV Rudolf Hermann Conrad (III) Henry V Lothair II/III Conrad III Henry (VI) Frederick I Henry VI Philip Otto IV Frederick II Henry (VII) Conrad IV Henry (VIII) William Richard Alfonso Rudolf I Adolf Albert I Henry VII Louis IV Frederick (III) Charles IV Günther Wenceslaus Rupert Jobst Sigismund Albert II Frederick III Maximilian I Charles V Ferdinand I Maximilian II Rudolf II Matthias Ferdinand II Ferdinand III Ferdinand IV Leopold I Joseph I Charles VI Charles VII Francis I Joseph II Leopold II Francis II Confederation of the Rhine (1806–1813) Napoleon I German Confederation (1815–1848) Francis I Ferdinand I German Empire (1848/1849) Archduke John of Austria (Imperial Regent) German Confederation (1850–1866) Franz Joseph I North German Confederation (1867–1871) William I German Empire (1871–1918) William I Frederick III William II v t e Kings of Italy between 476 and 1556 Non-dynastic Odoacer (476–493) Ostrogoths Theodoric (493–526) Athalaric (526–534) Theodahad (534–536) Vitiges (536–540) Ildibad (540–541) Eraric (541) Totila (541–552) Teia (552–553) Lombards Alboin (568–572) Cleph (572–574) Interregnum (574–584) Authari (584–590) Agilulf (590–616) Adaloald (616–626) Arioald (626–636) Rothari (636-652) Rodoald (652–653) Aripert I (653–661) Godepert (661–662) Perctarit (661–662) Grimoald (662–671) Garibald (671) Perctarit (671–688) Cunipert (688–689) Alahis (689) Cunipert (689–700) Liutpert (700–702) Raginpert (701) Aripert II (702–712) Ansprand (712) Liutprand (712–744) Hildeprand (744) Ratchis (744–749) Aistulf (749–756) Desiderius (756–774) Carolingians Charlemagne (774–814) Pepin (781–810) Bernard (810–818) Lothair I (818–855) Louis I (855–875) Charles II (875–877) Carloman (877–879) Charles III (879–887) Arnulf (896–899) Ratold (896) Non-dynastic (title disputed 887–933) Unruochings : Berengar I (887–924) Guideschi : Guy (889–894) Lambert (891–897) Welfs : Rudolph (922–933) Bosonids : Louis II (900–905) Hugh (926–947) Lothair II (945–950) Anscarids : Berengar II (950–963) Adalbert (950–963) Kingdom of Italy within the Holy Roman Empire (962–1556) Otto I (962–973) Otto II (980–983) Otto III (996–1002) Arduin I (1002–1014) Henry II (1004–1024) Conrad I (1026–1039) Henry III (1039–1056) Henry IV (1056–1105) Conrad II (1093–1101) Henry V (1106–1125) Lothair III (or II) (1125–1137) Conrad III (1138–1152) Frederick I (1154–1186) Henry VI (1186–1197) Otto IV (1209–1212) Frederick II (1212–1250) Henry VII (1311–1313) Louis IV (1327–1347) Charles IV (1355–1378) Sigismund (1431–1437) Frederick III (1452–1493) Charles V (1530–1556) v t e Monarchs of Naples Charles I * Charles II Robert Joanna I with Louis I Charles III Ladislaus (1st reign) Louis II Ladislaus (2nd reign) Joanna II René I Alfonso I * Ferdinand I Alfonso II Ferdinand II Frederick Louis III Ferdinand III * Joanna III * Charles IV * Philip I * Philip II * Philip III * Charles V * Charles VI * Charles VII * Ferdinand IV * (1st reign) Parthenopean Republic Ferdinand IV * (2nd reign) Joseph I Joachim I Ferdinand IV * (3rd reign) *Also Monarch of Sicily v t e Monarchs of Sicily County of Sicily (1071–1130) Roger I Simon Roger II Kingdom of Sicily (1130–1816) Roger II William I William II Tancred Roger III William III Constance I Henry I Frederick I Henry II Conrad I Conrad II Manfred Charles I Constance II Peter I James I Frederick II Peter II Louis Frederick III Maria Martin I Martin II Ferdinand I Alfonso I John Ferdinand II Joanna Charles II Philip I Philip II Philip III Charles III Philip IV Victor Amadeus Charles IV Charles V Ferdinand III v t e Monarchs of Luxembourg County of Luxemburg (963–1354) Elder House of Luxembourg (963–1136) Siegfried (963–998) Henry I (998–1026) Henry II (1026–1047) Giselbert (1047–1059) Conrad I (1059–1086) Henry III (1086–1096) William I (1096–1131) Conrad II (1131–1136) House of Namur (1136–1189) Henry IV (1136–1189) House of Hohenstaufen (1196–1197) Otto (1196–1197) House of Namur (1197–1247) Ermesinde (1197–1247), with Theobald (1197–1214), and then Waleran (1214–1226) House of Limburg (1247–1354) Henry V (1247–1281) Henry VI (1281–1288) Henry VII (1288–1313) John I (1313–1346) Charles I (1346–1353) Wenceslaus I (1353–1354) Duchy of Luxemburg (1354–1794) House of Limburg (1354–1443) Wenceslaus I (1354–1383) Wenceslaus II (1383–1388) Jobst (1388–1411) Elisabeth (1411–1443) with Anthony (1411–1415), and then John II (1418–1425) House of Valois-Burgundy (1443–1482) Philip I (1443–1467) Charles II (1467–1477) Mary I (1477–1482) and Maximilian I (1477–1482) House of Habsburg (1482–1700) Philip II (1482–1506) Charles III (1506–1556) Philip III (1556–1598) Isabella Clara Eugenia (1598–1621) and Albert (1598–1621) Philip IV (1621–1665) Charles IV (1665–1700) House of Bourbon (1700–1712) Philip V (1700–1712) House of Wittelsbach (1712–1713) Maximilian II (1712–1713) House of Habsburg (1713–1780) Charles V (1713–1740) Mary II (1740–1780) House of Habsburg-Lorraine (1780–1794) Joseph (1780–1790) Leopold (1790–1792) Francis (1792–1794) Grand Duchy of Luxembourg (since 1815) House of Orange-Nassau (1815–1890) William I (1815–1840) William II (1840–1849) William III (1849–1890) House of Nassau-Weilburg (1890–present) Adolphe (1890–1905) William IV (1905–1912) Marie-Adélaïde (1912–1919) Charlotte (1919–1964) Jean (1964–2000) Henri (since 2000) Guillaume ( planned abdication 3 October 2025) v t e Monarchs of Austria House of Babenberg Leopold I the Illustrious (976–994) Henry I the Strong (994–1018) Adalbert the Victorious (1018–1055) Ernest the Brave (1055–1075) Leopold II the Fair (1075–1095) Leopold III the Good (1095–1136) Leopold the Generous (1137–1141) Henry II Jasomirgott (1141–1177) Leopold V the Virtuous (1177–1194) Frederick I the Catholic (1195–1198) Leopold VI the Glorious (1198–1230) Frederick II the Quarrelsome (1230–1246) Interregnum Vladislaus of Moravia (claimant 1246–1247) Herman VI of Baden (claimant 1248–1250) Frederick I of Baden (claimant 1250–1268) Ottokar II of Bohemia (claimant 1251–1278) House of Habsburg Austria Rudolf I (1278–1282) Albert I (1282–1308) Rudolf II the Debonair (1282–1283) Rudolf III the Good (1298–1307) Frederick I the Fair (1308–1330) Leopold I the Glorious (1308–1326) Albert II the Wise (1330–1358) Otto I the Merry (1330–1339) Frederick II (1339–1344) Leopold II (1339–1344) Rudolf IV the Founder (1358–1365) Leopold III the Just (1365-1379) Albert III the Pigtail (1365-1395) Albert IV the Patient (1395-1404) Albert V (1404–1439) Ladislaus I the Posthumous (1440–1457) Frederick V the Peaceful (1457–1493) Maximilian I the Last Knight (1493–1519) Charles I (1519–1521) Ferdinand I (1521–1564) Maximilian II (1564–1576) Rudolf V (1576–1608) Matthias (1608–1619) Albert VII (1619) Ferdinand III (1590, 1619–1637) Ferdinand IV (1637–1657) Leopold V (1623–1632) Ferdinand Charles (1632–1662) Sigismund Francis (1662–1665) Leopold VI (1657, 1665–1705) Joseph I (1705–1711) Charles III (1711–1740) Maria Theresa (1740–1780) Francis I Stephen (1740–1765) Joseph II (1765–1790) Leopold VII (1790–1792) Francis II (1792–1835) Ferdinand I (1835–1848) Francis Joseph I (1848–1916) Charles I (1916–1918) House of Habsburg Styria, Carinthia, Carniola Leopold III the Just (1365–1386) William the Courteous (1386–1406) Leopold IV the Fat (1386–1411) Ernest the Iron (1402–1424) Frederick V the Peaceful (1424–1493) Albert VI the Prodigal (1457–1463) Maximilian I the Last Knight (1493–1519) Charles I (1519–1521) Ferdinand I (1521–1564) Charles II (1564–1590) Ferdinand III (1590–1637) House of Habsburg Tyrol Rudolf IV the Founder (1363–1365) Leopold III the Just (1365–1386) William the Courteous (1386–1406) Frederick IV of the Empty Pockets (1406–1439) Sigismund the Rich (1439–1490) Maximilian I the Last Knight (1490–1519) Charles I (1519–1521) Ferdinand I (1521–1564) Ferdinand II (1564–1595) Matthias (1595–1619) Albert VII (1619) Ferdinand III (1619–1623) Leopold V (1623–1632) Ferdinand Charles (1632–1662) Sigismund Francis (1662–1665) Leopold VI (1665–1705) v t e Princes and Princesses of Asturias Henry (1388–90) Maria (1402–05) John (1405–06) Catherine (1423–24) Eleanor (1424–25) Henry (1425–54) Joanna (1462–64) Alfonso (1464–68) Isabella (1468–70) Isabella (1470–78) John (1478–97) Isabella (1497–98) Michael (1498–1500) Joanna (1502–04) Charles (1504–16) Philip (1527–56) Charles (1556–68) Ferdinand (1571–78) Diego (1578–82) Philip (1582–98) Philip (1605–21) Balthasar Charles (1629–1646) Philip Prospero (1657–1661) Charles (1661–1665) Louis (1709–24) Ferdinand (1724–46) Charles (1759–88) Ferdinand (1788–1808) Isabella (1830–33) Isabella (1851–57) Alfonso (1857–68) Emanuele Filiberto (1871–73) Isabella (1875–80) Mercedes (1881–1904) Alfonso (1907–38) Felipe (1977–2014) Leonor (2014– ) v t e Princes and Princesses of Girona Leonor (2014-present) Felipe (1977-2014) Alfonso (1907–1931) Charles (1661-1665) Philip Prospero (1657-1661) Balthasar Charles (1629–1646) Philip (1605-1621) Philip (1582-1598) Diego (1578-1582) Ferdinand (1571–1578) Charles (1556-1568) Philip (1527-1556) Charles (1504-1516) Joanna (1509-1516) John (1509) Joanna (1502-1509) Michael (1498-1500) John (1479-1497) Ferdinand (1461-1479) Charles (1458-1461) Alfonso (1416) v t e Austrian archdukes Generations are numbered by male-line descent from the first archdukes. Later generations are included although Austrian titles of nobility were abolished in 1919.

1st generation Frederick V Albert VI Sigismund 2nd generation Maximilian I 3rd generation Philip I of Castile 4th generation Charles I Ferdinand I 5th generation Philip II of Spain S Maximilian II Ferdinand II Charles II 6th generation Charles, Prince of Asturias S Ferdinand, Prince of Asturias S Diego, Prince of Asturias S P Philip III of Spain S P Rudolf V Ernest Matthias Maximilian III Albert VII Wenceslaus Ferdinand III Maximilian Ernest Leopold V Charles, Bishop of Wroclaw 7th generation Philip IV of Spain S P Charles S P Ferdinand S P Alonso S P Ferdinand IV Leopold Wilhelm Ferdinand Charles Sigismund Francis 8th generation Balthasar Charles, Prince of Asturias S P Philip Prospero, Prince of Asturias S Charles II of Spain S Ferdinand IV of Hungary Leopold VI Charles Joseph 9th generation Joseph I Charles III 11th generation Joseph II T Charles Joseph T Leopold VII T Ferdinand T Maximilian Franz, Archbishop-Elector of Cologne T 12th generation Emperor Francis I T Ferdinand III, Grand Duke of Tuscany T Charles T Alexander Leopold T Joseph T Anton Victor T John T Rainer Joseph T Louis T Cardinal Rudolf T Francis IV, Duke of Modena M Ferdinand Karl Joseph M Maximilian M Karl Ambrosius, Primate of Hungary M 13th generation Emperor Ferdinand I Joseph Franz Franz Karl Leopold II, Grand Duke of Tuscany T Albrecht Karl Ferdinand Frederick Ferdinand Wilhelm Franz Stephen Joseph Karl Leopold Ludwig Ernest Sigismund Rainer Ferdinand Heinrich Anton Francis V, Duke of Modena M Ferdinand Karl Viktor M 14th generation Emperor Franz Joseph I Maximilian I of Mexico Karl Ludwig Ludwig Viktor Ferdinand IV, Grand Duke of Tuscany T Karl Salvator T Ludwig Salvator T John Salvator T Friedrich Charles Stephen Eugen Joseph August Ladislaus Philipp 15th generation Crown Prince Rudolf Franz Ferdinand Otto Ferdinand Karl Leopold Ferdinand T Josef Ferdinand T Peter Ferdinand T Leopold Salvator T Franz Salvator T Albrecht Franz Karl Albrecht Leo Karl Wilhelm Joseph Francis 16th generation Emperor Charles I Maximilian Habsburg Tuscany Gottfried T Rainer T Leopold Maria T Anton T Franz Joseph T Karl Pius T Franz Karl Salvator T Hubert Salvator T Palatines of Hungary Géza 17th generation Descent of Charles I Crown Prince Otto Robert Felix Carl Ludwig Rudolf Tuscany Dominic T Palatines Eduard 18th generation Charles Karl Georg Lorenz B Simeon 19th generation Charles Ferdinand Zvonimir Amedeo B S: also an infante of Spain P: also an infante of Portugal T: also a prince of Tuscany M: also a prince of Modena B: also a prince of Belgium v t e Infantes of Aragon 1st generation Sancho I 2nd generation Peter I Alfonso I Ramiro II 4th generation Ramon/ Alfonso II Peter, Count of Cerdanya/ Ramon Berenguer III, Count of Provence Sancho, Count of Provence 5th generation Peter II Alfonso II, Count of Provence 6th generation James I 7th generation Peter III James II of Majorca Sancho 8th generation Alfonso III James II Frederick III of Sicily Sancho of Majorca 1 Ferdinand, Viscount of Aumelas 1 9th generation Alfonso IV Peter II of Sicily 2 Manfred, Duke of Athens and Neopatria 2 William II, Duke of Athens and Neopatria 2 John, Duke of Randazzo 2 James III of Majorca 1 10th generation Peter IV James I, Count of Urgell Louis of Sicily 2 Frederick IV of Sicily 2 Frederick I, Duke of Athens and Neopatria 2 James IV of Majorca 1 11th generation John I Martin Peter II, Count of Urgell 12th generation Martin I of Sicily James II, Count of Urgell 13th generation Peter Martin 14th generation Alfonso V John II Henry, Duke of Villena Peter, Count of Alburquerque 15th generation Charles, Prince of Viana Ferdinand II 16th generation John, Prince of Asturias 17th generation Charles I of Spain Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor 1 also a prince of Majorca 2 also a prince of Sicily Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium 2 Artists ULAN RKD Artists FID People Netherlands Trove 2 Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐56p2m
Cached time: 20250818073256
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.770 seconds
Real time usage: 4.369 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 34526/1000000
Revision size: 197202/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1347137/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 56587/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 801255/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.991/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24852045/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3223.427      1 -total
 33.91% 1092.921      3 Template:Reflist
 17.63%  568.427     89 Template:Cite_book
 11.61%  374.255      1 Template:Infobox_royalty
 11.14%  358.934      1 Template:Infobox
 10.96%  353.397      1 Template:Habsburg_family_tree
  9.23%  297.409     37 Template:Cite_web
  8.84%  285.048     34 Template:Navbox
  8.84%  284.945      3 Template:Efn
  6.36%  205.027     39 Template:Tree_chart Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:70716:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818073256 and revision id 1306401573. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_V,_Holy_Roman_Emperor&oldid=1306401573 " Categories : Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor 1500 births 1558 deaths 16th-century Holy Roman Emperors 16th-century Aragonese monarchs 16th-century Castilian monarchs 16th-century kings of Sicily 16th-century Roman Catholics 16th-century archdukes of Austria 16th-century Spanish monarchs 16th-century monarchs of Naples 16th-century Navarrese monarchs 16th-century dukes of Brabant 16th-century dukes of Limburg 16th-century monarchs of Luxembourg 16th-century counts of Flanders 16th-century counts of Hainaut 16th-century margraves of Namur Aragonese infantes Burials in the Pantheon of Kings at El Escorial Castilian infantes Counts of Barcelona Counts of Burgundy Counts of Charolais Deaths from malaria Dukes of Burgundy Dukes of Montblanc Grand masters of the Order of the Golden Fleece Infectious disease deaths in Spain Knights of Santiago Knights of the Garter Knights of the Golden Fleece Child monarchs from Europe Monarchs who abdicated Nobility from Ghent Princes of Asturias Spanish exploration in the Age of Discovery Spanish infantes Spanish Roman Catholics Counts of Malta Royal reburials Sons of kings Sons of queens regnant Children of Joanna of Castile Rulers of the Habsburg Netherlands Hidden categories: Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1: unfit URL Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2022 Articles with dead external links from February 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2007 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with German-language sources (de) Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 14:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor 99 languages Add topic

