Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mathematical representations Toggle Mathematical representations subsection 1.1 Three dimensions 1.2 Two dimensions 1.3 Multiple dimensions 2 Rigid body in three dimensions Toggle Rigid body in three dimensions subsection 2.1 Euler angles 2.1.1 Tait–Bryan angles 2.2 Orientation vector 2.3 Orientation matrix 2.4 Orientation quaternion 3 Usage examples Toggle Usage examples subsection 3.1 Rigid body 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Orientation (geometry) 16 languages Català Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Kreyòl ayisyen Nederlands Polski Română Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Attitude (geometry) ) This article is about the orientation or attitude of an object or a shape in a space. For the orientation of a space, see Orientability .

Notion of pointing in a direction Changing orientation of a rigid body is the same as rotating the axes of a reference frame attached to it.

In geometry , the orientation , attitude , bearing , direction , or angular position of an object – such as a line , plane or rigid body – is part of the description of how it is placed in the space it occupies.

[ 1 ] More specifically, it refers to the imaginary rotation that is needed to move the object from a reference placement to its current placement. A rotation may not be enough to reach the current placement, in which case it may be necessary to add an imaginary translation to change the object's position (or linear position). The position and orientation together fully describe how the object is placed in space. The above-mentioned imaginary rotation and translation may be thought to occur in any order, as the orientation of an object does not change when it translates, and its position does not change when it rotates.

Euler's rotation theorem shows that in three dimensions any orientation can be reached with a single rotation around a fixed axis . This gives one common way of representing the orientation using an axis–angle representation . Other widely used methods include rotation quaternions , rotors , Euler angles , or rotation matrices . More specialist uses include Miller indices in crystallography, strike and dip in geology and grade on maps and signs.
A unit vector may also be used to represent an object's normal vector direction or the relative direction between two points.

Typically, the orientation is given relative to a frame of reference , usually specified by a Cartesian coordinate system .

Mathematical representations [ edit ] Three dimensions [ edit ] In general the position and orientation in space of a rigid body are defined as the position and orientation, relative to the main reference frame, of another reference frame, which is fixed relative to the body, and hence translates and rotates with it (the body's local reference frame , or local coordinate system ). At least three independent values are needed to describe the orientation of this local frame. Three other values describe the position of a point on the object.
All the points of the body change their position during a rotation except for those lying on the rotation axis. If the rigid body has rotational symmetry not all orientations are distinguishable, except by observing how the orientation evolves in time from a known starting orientation.  For example, the orientation in space of a line , line segment , or vector can be specified with only two values, for example two direction cosines . Another example is the position of a point on the Earth, often described using the orientation of a line joining it with the Earth's center, measured using the two angles of longitude and latitude .  Likewise, the orientation of a plane can be described with two values as well, for instance by specifying the orientation of a line normal to that plane, or by using the strike and dip angles.

Further details about the mathematical methods to represent the orientation of rigid bodies and planes in three dimensions are given in the following sections.

Two dimensions [ edit ] In two dimensions the orientation of any object (line, vector, or plane figure ) is given by a single value: the angle through which it has rotated. There is only one degree of freedom and only one fixed point about which the rotation takes place.

Multiple dimensions [ edit ] When there are d dimensions, specification of an orientation of an object that does not have any rotational symmetry requires d ( d − 1) / 2 independent values.

Rigid body in three dimensions [ edit ] Main article: Rotation formalisms in three dimensions Several methods to describe orientations of a rigid body in three dimensions have been developed. They are summarized in the following sections.

Euler angles [ edit ] Main article: Euler angles Euler angles, one of the possible ways to describe an orientation The first attempt to represent an orientation is attributed to Leonhard Euler . He imagined three reference frames that could rotate one around the other, and realized that by starting with a fixed reference frame and performing three rotations, he could get any other reference frame in the space (using two rotations to fix the vertical axis and another to fix the other two axes). The values of these three rotations are called Euler angles .

Tait–Bryan angles [ edit ] Main article: Euler angles § Tait–Bryan angles Tait–Bryan angles. Other way for describing orientation These are three angles, also known as yaw, pitch and roll, Navigation angles and Cardan angles. Mathematically they constitute a set of six possibilities inside the twelve possible sets of Euler angles, the ordering being the one best used for describing the orientation of a vehicle such as an airplane. In aerospace engineering they are usually referred to as Euler angles.

A rotation represented by an Euler axis and angle.

Orientation vector [ edit ] Main article: Axis–angle representation Euler also realized that the composition of two rotations is equivalent to a single rotation about a different fixed axis ( Euler's rotation theorem ). Therefore, the composition of the former three angles has to be equal to only one rotation, whose axis was complicated to calculate until matrices were developed.

Based on this fact he introduced a vectorial way to describe any rotation, with a vector on the rotation axis and module equal to the value of the angle. Therefore, any orientation can be represented by a rotation vector (also called Euler vector) that leads to it from the reference frame. When used to represent an orientation, the rotation vector is commonly called orientation vector, or attitude vector.

A similar method, called axis–angle representation , describes a rotation or orientation using a unit vector aligned with the rotation axis, and a separate value to indicate the angle (see figure).

Orientation matrix [ edit ] Main article: Rotation matrix With the introduction of matrices, the Euler theorems were rewritten. The rotations were described by orthogonal matrices referred to as rotation matrices or direction cosine matrices. When used to represent an orientation, a rotation matrix is commonly called orientation matrix, or attitude matrix.

The above-mentioned Euler vector is the eigenvector of a rotation matrix (a rotation matrix has a unique real eigenvalue ).
The product of two rotation matrices is the composition of rotations. Therefore, as before, the orientation can be given as the rotation from the initial frame to achieve the frame that we want to describe.

The configuration space of a non- symmetrical object in n -dimensional space is SO( n ) × R n . Orientation may be visualized by attaching a basis of tangent vectors to an object. The direction in which each vector points determines its orientation.

Orientation quaternion [ edit ] Main article: Quaternions and spatial rotation Another way to describe rotations is using rotation quaternions , also called versors. They are equivalent to rotation matrices and rotation vectors. With respect to rotation vectors, they can be more easily converted to and from matrices. When used to represent orientations, rotation quaternions are typically called orientation quaternions or attitude quaternions.

Usage examples [ edit ] Rigid body [ edit ] Main article: Rigid body The orientation of a rigid body is determined by three angles The attitude of a rigid body is its orientation as described, for example, by the orientation of a frame fixed in the body relative to a fixed reference frame. The attitude is described by attitude coordinates , and consists of at least three coordinates.

[ 2 ] One scheme for orienting a rigid body is based upon body-axes rotation; successive rotations three times about the axes of the body's fixed reference frame, thereby establishing the body's Euler angles .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Another is based upon roll, pitch and yaw , [ 5 ] although these terms also refer to incremental deviations from the nominal attitude See also [ edit ] Angular displacement Attitude control Body relative direction Directional statistics Oriented area Plane of rotation Rotation formalisms in three dimensions Signed direction Terms of orientation Triad method References [ edit ] ^ Robert J. Twiss; Eldridge M. Moores (1992).

"§2.1 The orientation of structures" .

Structural Geology (2nd ed.). Macmillan. p. 11.

ISBN 0-7167-2252-6 .

...the attitude of a plane or a line — that is, its orientation in space — is fundamental to the description of structures.

^ Hanspeter Schaub ; John L. Junkins (2003).

"Rigid body kinematics" .

Analytical Mechanics of Space Systems . American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. p. 71.

ISBN 1-56347-563-4 .

^ Jack B. Kuipers (2002).

"Figure 4.7: Aircraft Euler angle sequence" .

Quaternions and Rotation Sequences: A Primer with Applications to Orbits, Aerospace, and Virtual Reality . Princeton University Press. p. 85.

ISBN 0-691-10298-8 .

^ Bong Wie (1998). "§5.2 Euler angles".

Space Vehicle Dynamics and Control . American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. p.

310 .

ISBN 1-56347-261-9 .

Euler angle rigid body attitude.

^ Lorenzo Sciavicco; Bruno Siciliano (2000).

"§2.4.2 Roll–pitch–yaw angles" .

Modelling and Control of Robot Manipulators (2nd ed.). Springer. p. 32.

ISBN 1-85233-221-2 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Orientation (mathematics) at Wikimedia Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐r99fl
Cached time: 20250812001952
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.173 seconds
Real time usage: 0.241 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 786/1000000
Revision size: 11971/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 15749/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 754/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 22837/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.102/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5118081/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  202.457      1 -total
 46.39%   93.921      1 Template:Reflist
 40.44%   81.866      5 Template:Cite_book
 21.81%   44.147      1 Template:About
 12.20%   24.703      1 Template:Short_description
 10.52%   21.291      1 Template:Commons_category-inline
  9.92%   20.090      1 Template:Sister-inline
  6.42%   12.996      4 Template:Main_other
  5.97%   12.080      7 Template:Main
  5.60%   11.335      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2544098:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001952 and revision id 1276088279. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Orientation_(geometry)&oldid=1276088279 " Categories : Orientation (geometry) Euclidean geometry Rotation in three dimensions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 February 2025, at 20:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Orientation (geometry) 16 languages Add topic

