Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Provisions 3 Article 7 controversy 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses 6 languages العربية Deutsch Español Polski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from United Nations Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses ) UN treaty on the use of transboundary rivers and groundwater The Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses , commonly referred to as the UN Watercourses Convention , is an international treaty, adopted by the United Nations on 21 May 1997, pertaining to the uses and conservation of all waters that cross international boundaries, including both surface and groundwater . "Mindful of increasing demands for water and the impact of human behavior", the UN drafted the document to help conserve and manage water resources for present and future generations. From the time of its drafting, the Convention took more than 17 years to enter into force on 17 August 2014.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] With the treaty having been ratified by just 36 states, the majority of countries, especially the key ones, remain outside its scope. The convention, however, is regarded as an important step in establishing international law governing water.

[ 3 ] In northern hemisphere autumn of 2008, the UN began reviewing a law proposed by the International Law Commission to serve similar purpose to the unratified document, but was considering adopting the proposal as guideline rather than immediately attempting to draft it into law.

[ 4 ] Background [ edit ] The International Law Commission (ILC) was requested by the United Nations in 1970 to prepare viable international guidelines for water use comparable to The Helsinki Rules on the Uses of the Waters of International Rivers , which had been approved by the International Law Association in 1966 but which failed to address aquifers that were not connected to a drainage basin .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] After the ILC completed its project in 1994, the UN Sixth Committee drafted the Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses based on their proposal.

[ 7 ] The General Assembly adopted the document on 21 May 1997 with only three dissenting in a vote of 106.

[ 6 ] Provisions [ edit ] The document sought to impose upon UN member states an obligation to consider the impact of their actions on other states with an interest in a water resource and to equitably share the resource, mindful of variant factors such as population size and availability of other resources.

Each member state that shares in a resource is required to provide information to other sharing states about the condition of the watercourse and about their planned uses for it, allowing sufficient time for other sharing states to study the use and object if the use is perceived to be harmful. The document permits a state with urgent need to immediately utilize a watercourse, providing that it notifies sharing states both of the use and the urgency. In the event that a use is perceived to be harmful, it requires member states to negotiate a mutually acceptable solution, appealing for arbitration as necessary to uninvolved states or international organizations such as the International Court of Justice .

The treaty also requires states to take reasonable steps to control damage, such as caused by pollution or the introduction of species not native to the watercourse, and imposes an obligation on states that damage a shared water resource to take steps to remedy the damage or to compensate sharing states for the loss. It includes provisions for managing natural damage to waterways, such as caused by drought or erosion , and mandated that sharing states notify others immediately of emergency conditions related to the watercourse that may affect them, such as flooding or waterborne diseases .

Article 7 controversy [ edit ] Article 7 of the document, entitled, "Obligation not to cause significant harm," requires that member states "in utilizing an international watercourse in their territories ... take all appropriate measures to prevent the causing of significant harm to other watercourse states" and compensate sharing states for any such harm.

[ 8 ] According to Stephen McCaffrey of the McGeorge School of Law , this is "the most controversial provision" of the Convention, with conflict stemming from the fact that a state may have legitimate uses for a watercourse in its nation that can negatively impact other nations.

[ 9 ] He offers the following example: Suppose ... upstream State A has not significantly developed its water resources because of its mountainous terrain. The topography of the downstream states on the watercourse, B and C, is flatter, and they have used the watercourse extensively for irrigation for centuries, if not millennia. State A now wishes to develop its water resources for hydroelectric and agricultural purposes. States B and C cry foul, on the ground that this would significantly harm their established uses.

[ 9 ] McCaffrey indicates that controversy here stemmed from the UN's adaptation of text by the ILC with the intention of strengthening the obligation to do no harm, as the ILC's language more heavily emphasized the "equitable utilization", or balance of the various needs of the states.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Current Status of Convention , United Nations ^ "Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses: Entry into Force" , 19 May 2014. treaties.un.org ^ Raj, Krishna; Salman, Salman M.A. (1999). "International Groundwater Law and the World Bank Policy for Projects on Transboundary Groundwater". In Salman, Salman M. A. (ed.).

Groundwater: Legal and Policy Perspectives : Proceedings of a World Bank Seminar . World Bank Publications. p. 173.

ISBN 978-0-8213-4613-6 .

^ Brahic, Catherine (8 November 2008).

"Can legislation stop the wells running dry?" .

New Scientist (2681).

doi : 10.1016/S0262-4079(08)62793-1 . Retrieved 12 February 2009 .

^ McCaffrey, Stephen M. (1999). "International Groundwater Law: Evolution and Context". In Salman, Salman M. A. (ed.).

Groundwater: Legal and Policy Perspectives : Proceedings of a World Bank Seminar . World Bank Publications. p. 152.

ISBN 978-0-8213-4613-6 .

^ a b Dellapenna, Joseph W.

"The Berlin rules on water resources: the new paradigm for international water law" .

Universidade do Algarve . Archived from the original on 1 March 2008.

^ McCaffrey, Stephen.

"Chapter 2: The UN Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses" (PDF) . United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. p. 17 . Retrieved 12 February 2009 .

^ "Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses" (PDF) . United Nations. 1997 . Retrieved 12 February 2009 .

^ a b McCaffrey, "Chapter 2: The UN Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses",  20-21.

^ McCaffrey, "Chapter 2: The UN Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses", 21.

Further reading [ edit ] McCaffrey, Stephen C. (2001).

The Law of International Watercourses: Non-navigational Uses . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-825787-5 .

Rahaman, Muhammad Mizanur (2009). "Principles of international water law: Creating effective transboundary water resources management".

International Journal of Sustainable Society .

1 (3): 207.

doi : 10.1504/IJSSOC.2009.027620 .

External links [ edit ] Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses , United Nations International Water Law,  Research Guide International Law , Peace Palace Library .

Introductory note by Stephen McCaffrey, procedural history and audiovisual material on the Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses in the Historic Archives of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law Lecture by Stephen McCaffrey entitled The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses in the Lecture Series of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law v t e United Nations Secretary-General : António Guterres Deputy Secretary-General : Amina J. Mohammed General Assembly President : Philemon Yang UN System Charter Preamble Principal organs Secretariat Secretary-General selections Deputy Secretary-General Under-Secretary-General General Assembly President International Court of Justice Statute Security Council Elections Members President Reform Veto power Economic and Social Council President Trusteeship Council Funds, programmes, and other bodies Culture of Peace IAEA IPCC ITC MINURSO OHCHR SCSL UNAIDS UNCDF UNCITRAL UNCTAD UNDGC UNDP UNDPO peacekeeping UNEP OzonAction UNEP/GRID-Arendal UNEP-WCMC UNFPA UN-HABITAT UNHCR UNHRC UNICEF UNICRI UNIDIR UNITAR UN-Oceans UNODC UNOPS UNOSAT UNRISD UNRWA UNSDG UNSSC UNU UNU-CRIS UNU-OP UNV UN Women WFP Specialized agencies FAO ICAO IFAD ILO IMF IMO IOM ITU UN Tourism UNESCO UNIDO UPU WFEO WHO WIPO WMO World Bank Group IBRD IDA IFC Secretariat offices and departments Headquarters Conference Building General Assembly Building Secretariat Building Department of Economic and Social Affairs Department of Peace Operations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Dag Hammarskjöld Library Department for Safety and Security Division for Palestinian Rights Office at Geneva Palace of Nations Office at Nairobi Office at Vienna Office for Disarmament Affairs Office for Outer Space Affairs Office for Partnerships Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Office of Internal Oversight Services Office of Legal Affairs Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States Office of Counter-Terrorism Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General Office on Sport for Development and Peace UN organizations by location Members and observers Founding members Full members Security Council Permanent members Permanent representatives to the UN list General Assembly Observers European Union History Preceding years International Telegraph Union Universal Postal Union Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 Permanent Court of Arbitration International Office of Public Hygiene League of Nations archives covenant organization member states Preparatory years Declaration of St James's Palace (1941) Atlantic Charter (1941) Declaration by United Nations (1942) Moscow Conference (1943) Tehran Conference (1943) Bretton Woods Conference (1944) Dumbarton Oaks Conference (1944) Yalta Conference (1945) Conference on International Organization (1945) Genocide Convention (1948) Activities Enlargement Peacekeeping missions timeline governed territories UNPOL Universal Declaration of Human Rights drafting Human Rights Day World Heritage Convention Convention on the Rights of the Child committee Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Indigenous Caucus Sustainable Development Goals Declaration on the Rights of Peasants Resolutions Security Council vetoes General Assembly 66th 67th Security Council Cyprus Iran Iraq Israel Lebanon Nagorno-Karabakh North Korea Palestine Syria Western Sahara Yemen Elections Secretary-General 2021 2016 International Court of Justice 2023 2022 2021 2020 2017 2014 2011 General Assembly President (2016) Security Council (2016) Related Outline Advisory Committee of Local Authorities Art Collection Security Council mural Block By Block Bretton Woods system Celestial Sphere Woodrow Wilson Memorial CCISUA Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Criticism Delivering as One Drug control treaties Expulsion from the United Nations Ex Tempore Federal Credit Union FICSA Flag Honour Flag Four Nations Initiative Global Compact International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons International Day of Peace International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World International Narcotics Control Board International School Hanoi Interpretation Service Laissez-passer Memorial Cemetery Korea Military Staff Committee Millennium Declaration Millennium Summit Model United Nations Official languages Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Postal Administration Ralph Bunche Park Reform SDG Publishers Compact Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners Treaty Series Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons UN Mandate UN Sacco UN Special UNICEF club United Nations Day United Nations in popular culture United Nations Medal United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights United Nations Radio United Nations television film series University for Peace Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge Withdrawal from the United Nations Women in peacekeeping World Federation of United Nations Associations World portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Convention_on_the_Law_of_the_Non-Navigational_Uses_of_International_Watercourses&oldid=1292095207 " Categories : Water treaties Environmental issues with water Treaties drafted by the International Law Commission Treaties concluded in 1997 Treaties entered into force in 2014 Treaties of Benin Treaties of Burkina Faso Treaties of Chad Treaties of Denmark Treaties of Finland Treaties of France Treaties of Germany Treaties of Greece Treaties of Guinea-Bissau Treaties of Hungary Treaties of Ba'athist Iraq Treaties of Ireland Treaties of Italy Treaties of Ivory Coast Treaties of Jordan Treaties of Lebanon Treaties of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Treaties of Mexico Treaties of Montenegro Treaties of Morocco Treaties of Namibia Treaties of the Netherlands Treaties of Niger Treaties of Nigeria Treaties of Norway Treaties of Palestine Treaties of Paraguay Treaties of Qatar Treaties of South Africa Treaties of Spain Treaties of Sweden Treaties of Syria Treaties of Tunisia Treaties of the United Kingdom Treaties of Uzbekistan Treaties of Vietnam Treaties of Zimbabwe International lakes International rivers United Nations treaties Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 05:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses 6 languages Add topic

