Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Italian Toggle Italian subsection 1.1 Rome 1.2 Naples 1.3 Northern Italy 1.4 Central Italy 1.5 Sicily 2 Flemish 3 Dutch 4 French 5 Spanish 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Caravaggisti 28 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Čeština Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano ქართული Lietuvių Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artists who were stylistic followers of the late 16th-century Italian Baroque painter Caravaggio Mars Chastising Cupid (ca. 1605–1610) by Bartolomeo Manfredi The Caravaggisti (or the "Caravagesques"; singular: "Caravaggista") were stylistic followers of the late 16th-century Italian Baroque painter Caravaggio . His influence on the new Baroque style that eventually emerged from Mannerism was profound. Caravaggio never established a workshop as most other painters did, and thus had no school to spread his techniques. Nor did he ever set out his underlying philosophical approach to art, the psychological realism which can only be deduced from his surviving work. But it can be seen directly or indirectly in the work of Rubens , Jusepe de Ribera , Bernini , and Rembrandt . Famous while he lived, Caravaggio himself was forgotten almost immediately after his death. Many of his paintings were re-ascribed to his followers, such as The Taking of Christ , which was attributed to the Dutch painter Gerrit van Honthorst until 1990.

[ 1 ] Only in the 20th century was Caravaggio's importance to the development of Western art rediscovered. In the 1920s Roberto Longhi once more placed him in the European tradition: "Ribera, Vermeer , La Tour and Rembrandt could never have existed without him. And the art of Delacroix , Courbet and Manet would have been utterly different".

[ 2 ] The influential Bernard Berenson stated: "With the exception of Michelangelo , no other Italian painter exercised so great an influence." [ 3 ] Italian [ edit ] Rome [ edit ] At the height of his popularity in Rome during the late 1590s and early 1600s, Caravaggio's dramatic new style influenced many of his peers in the Roman art world. The first Caravaggisti included Mario Minniti , Giovanni Baglione (although his Caravaggio phase was short-lived), Leonello Spada and Orazio Gentileschi . In the next generation, there were Carlo Saraceni , Bartolomeo Manfredi and Orazio Borgianni as well as anonymous masters such as the Master of the Gamblers . Gentileschi, despite being considerably older, was the only one of these artists to live much beyond 1620, and ended up as court painter to Charles I of England . His daughter Artemisia Gentileschi was also close to Caravaggio, and one of the most gifted of the movement, including the work Judith Slaying Holofernes . Yet, in Rome and in Italy, it was not Caravaggio, but the influence of Annibale Carracci , blending elements from the High Renaissance and Lombard realism, which ultimately triumphed. Other artists active in Rome, worth mentioning, include Angelo Caroselli , Pier Francesco Mola , Tommaso Salini and Francesco Buoneri .

Giacinto Brandi was active mainly in Rome and Naples. Dutch painter David de Haen was active in Rome between 1615 and 1622.

Bartolomeo Cavarozzi was active in Rome, but worked in Madrid from 1617 to 1618-19, and is believed to have played a role in spreading Caravaggism in Spain.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Selected works Baglione – The Divine Eros Defeats the Earthly Eros , ca. 1602, Gemäldegalerie Borgianni – Christ amongst the Doctors , ca. 1605–1610 Saraceni – Judith with the Head of Holophernes , 1610–1615, Kunsthistorisches Museum Artemisia Gentileschi – Self-Portrait as a Lute Player , 1615–1617, Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art Bartolomeo Cavarozzi – The Holy Family with Saint Catherine of Alexandria , 1618, Prado Museum Naples [ edit ] In May 1606 after the killing of Ranuccio Tomassoni, Caravaggio fled to Naples with a death sentence on his head .

[ 6 ] While there he completed several commissions, two major ones being the Madonna of the Rosary , and The Seven Works of Mercy .

[ 6 ] His work had a profound effect on the local artists and his brief stay in Naples produced a notable school of Neapolitan Caravaggisti, including Battistello Caracciolo , Bernardo Cavallino , Carlo Sellitto , Massimo Stanzione , Francesco Guarino , Mattia Preti , Andrea Vaccaro , Cesare Fracanzano and Antonio de Bellis .

Giacinto Brandi was active mainly in Rome and Naples. The Caravaggisti movement there ended with a terrible outbreak of plague in 1656, but at the time Naples was a possession of Spain and the influence of Caravaggism had already spread there.

Selected works Caracciolo – Two youths with grapes , 1605–1610 Cavallino – Hercules and Omphale ,  c. 1640 Sellitto – Salome with the Head of St John the Baptist Stanzione – Judith with the Head of Holofernes , c. 1640 Cesare Fracanzano – Drunken Silenus , c. 1630–1635 Northern Italy [ edit ] Marco Antonio Bassetti is known to have been in Rome in 1616, and may have arrived there two years earlier. In Rome he came under the influence of the paintings of Caravaggio and Orazio Borgianni. On his return to Verona he painted a St. Peter and Saints for the church of San Tomaso and a Coronation of the Virgin for Sant' Anastasia. He died from the plague in Verona in 1630.

Bernardo Strozzi , born and mainly active in Genoa and later Venice , is considered a principal founder of the Venetian Baroque style.  In the 1620s Strozzi gradually abandoned his early Mannerist style in favor of a more personal style characterized by a new naturalism derived from the work of Caravaggio and his followers. The Caravaggist style of painting had been brought to Genoa both by Domenico Fiasella , after his return from Rome in 1617–18, and by followers of Caravaggio who spent time working in the city.

Italian painter Biagio Manzoni was active in Faenza . Italian painter Bartolomeo Schedoni from Reggio Emilia , Daniele Crespi from Milan and Luca Cambiasi , also known as Luca Cambiaso and Luca Cangiagio, the leading artist in Genoa in the 16th century, often depicted  brilliantly lit figures set against a dark background.

Felice Boselli , active in Piacenza , used contrast Caravaggisti lighting for his still-lifes.

Tanzio da Varallo (or simply il Tanzio) was active mainly in Lombardy and Piedmont , including the Sacro Monte at Varallo Sesia , where he worked contemporaneously with Pier Francesco Mazzucchelli (il Morazzone). The Italian painter and engraver Bernardino Mei worked in his native Siena and in Rome, finding patronage above all in the Chigi family.

Central Italy [ edit ] Pietro Ricchi (or il Lucchesino), born in Lucca , also often depicted  brilliantly lit figures set against a dark background (see St. Sebastian).

Sicily [ edit ] Mario Minniti was an Italian artist active in Sicily after 1606. He, at the age of 16, even posed for Caravaggio's painting Boy with a Basket of Fruit .

Flemish [ edit ] Cain slaying Abel , Rubens, 1608–09 Rubens was likely one of the first Flemish artists to be influenced by Caravaggio .  During the period 1600–1608, Rubens resided in Italy.  He settled in Mantua at the court of Duke Vincenzo I Gonzaga but also spent time in Rome. During his stay in Rome in 1601 he became acquainted with Caravaggio’s work.  He later made a copy of Caravaggio's Entombment of Christ and recommended his patron, the Duke of Mantua, to purchase The Death of the Virgin ( Louvre ).  Rubens was after his return to Antwerp instrumental in the acquisition of Caravaggio's Madonna of the Rosary ( Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna ) for the St. Paul's Church in Antwerp.

[ 7 ] During his stay in Italy Rubens broadened his interest in Caravaggio’s work to include the 1606 Supper at Emmaus in Milan ( Pinacoteca di Brera ) and the 1600 The Calling of St Matthew as well as the more recent work in the Santa Maria in Vallicella and the Basilica of Sant'Agostino . Although some of this interest in Caravaggio is reflected in his drawings during his Italian residence, it was only after his return to Antwerp in 1608 that his works show openly Caravaggesque traits such as in the Cain slaying Abel (1608–1609) ( Courtauld Institute of Art ).  However, the influence of Caravaggio on Rubens’ work would be less important than that of Raphael , Correggio , Barocci and the Venetians.

[ 8 ] Artists, who were influenced by Rubens, such as Pieter van Mol , Gaspar de Crayer and Willem Jacob Herreyns , also used certain stark realism and strong contrasts of light and shadow, common to Caravaggisti style.

Rubens' contemporary Abraham Janssens was another Flemish painter who travelled to Italy (from 1597 to 1602) where he became acquainted with the work of Caravaggio.  His work after his return to Antwerp shows the influence of Caravaggio.  The composition Scaldis and Antwerpia of 1609 derives its expressive power from the use of strong contrasts of light and shadow ( chiaroscuro ) as was pioneered by Caravaggio.

[ 9 ] It is mainly the Flemish artists from the generation after Rubens coming on the art scene in the 1620s who were most influenced by Caravaggio.  It can even be said that there was a Caravaggist craze in Flanders from about 1620 to 1640.

[ 10 ] The artists are often referred to as the Ghent Caravaggisti and the Antwerp Caravaggisti after the city in which they were principally active. There is, however, no discernible stylistic distinction between these two movements other than individual ones.  Among the Ghent Caravaggisti can be listed Jan Janssens , Melchior de la Mars and Antoon van den Heuvel .  The list of Antwerp Caravaggisti is significantly longer reflecting the importance of this city as the pre-eminent artistic centre of Flanders.  They include Theodoor Rombouts , Gerard Seghers , Jan Cossiers , Adam de Coster , Jacques de l'Ange and Jan van Dalen .  In Bruges , Jacob van Oost painted genre and history paintings showing the influence of the work of Caravaggio and Manfredi whose work he had studied in Rome.

[ 11 ] Some Flemish Caravaggisti left their homeland for Italy where they were influenced by the work of Caravaggio and his followers and never returned home.  This is the case of Louis Finson of Bruges who after stays in Naples and Rome spent most of his career in France.

[ 12 ] Another example of an expatriate Flemish Caravaggist is Hendrick de Somer of Lokeren or Lochristi who spent most of his life and career in Naples where he painted in a Caraviggist style influenced by the Spanish painter Jusepe de Ribera .

[ 13 ] What most of these artists shared in common is that they likely visited Italy where they had first-hand contact with the work of Caravaggio or his Italian and Dutch followers.  The influence of Caravaggio and his followers on their work can be seen in the use of dramatic light effects and expressive gestures as well as the new subject matter such as card sharps, fortune tellers, the denial of St Peter, etc.

[ 10 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Some of the artists focused on certain aspects of Caravaggio's oeuvre.  For instance, Adam de Coster was referred to as the Pictor Noctium (painter of the nights) because of his preference for the use of stark chiaroscuro and the repeated motif of half-length figures illuminated by a candle which is covered.

[ 16 ] Many of these artists such as Rombouts, Cossiers and Seghers later abandoned their strict adherence to the Caravaggist style and subject matter and struck out in different directions often under the influence of the older generation of Flemish artists who had such a dominant influence on Flemish art in the 17th century, i.e. Rubens and van Dyck .

[ 10 ] [ 15 ] Selected works De Coster – A Man Singing by Candlelight , 1620 Rombouts – The Lute player , 1620 Seghers – The Denial of St. Peter , c. 1623 Jan Janssens – The Crowning with Thorns , c. 1648–1650 Van Oost, The calling of St. Matthew , 1641 Dutch [ edit ] Main article: Utrecht Caravaggism In the first three decades of the 17th century, some Catholic artists from the city of Utrecht in the Dutch Republic travelled to Rome where they were profoundly influenced by the work of Caravaggio and his followers. The first of these artists to arrive was Hendrick ter Brugghen (first recorded in Italy in 1607) followed later by Gerrit van Honthorst , Dirck van Baburen and Jan van Bijlert . On their return to Utrecht, their Caravaggesque works inspired a short-lived but influential flowering of artworks inspired indirectly in style and subject matter by the works of Caravaggio and the Italian followers of Caravaggio.  This style or school of painting was later referred to as Utrecht Caravaggism .

[ 17 ] The brief flourishing of Utrecht Caravaggism ended around 1630, when major artists had either died, as in the case of van Baburen and Terbrugghen, or had changed style, like van Honthorst's shift to portraiture and history scenes informed by the Flemish tendencies popularized by Rubens and his followers. In the following generation the effects of Caravaggio, although attenuated, are to be seen in the work of Vermeer , Rembrandt , and Gerrit Dou 's "niche paintings".

Selected works Van Baburen – Christ with the crown of thorns , 1623 Van Honthorst – Merry Company , 1623 Van Bijlert – The calling of St. Matthew , 1625-1630 Ter Brugghen – The Duet , 1628 French [ edit ] One of the first French artists to studio in Rome during the Caravaggio Years was Jean LeClerc , who studied under Saraceni during the early 17th century.

Simon Vouet spent an extensive period of time in Italy, from 1613 to 1627. His patrons included the Barberini family , Cassiano dal Pozzo , Paolo Giordano Orsini and Vincenzo Giustiniani .

[ 18 ] He also visited other parts of Italy: Venice ; Bologna , (where the Carracci family had their academy); Genoa , (where from 1620 to 1622, he worked for the Doria princes ); and Naples. He absorbed what he saw and distilled it in his painting: Caravaggio's dramatic lighting; Italian Mannerism; Paolo Veronese 's color and di sotto in su or foreshortened perspective; and the art of Carracci , Guercino , Lanfranco and Guido Reni . Vouet's success in Rome led to his election as president of the Accademia di San Luca in 1624. Despite his success in Rome, Vouet returned to France in 1627. Vouet's new style was distinctly Italian, importing the Italian Baroque style into France. Other French artists enamored by the new style included Valentin de Boulogne , who was living in Rome by 1620, and studied under Vouet and later Boulognes pupil Nicolas Tournier .

Georges de La Tour is assumed to have travelled either to Italy or the Netherlands early in his career. His paintings reflect the influence of Caravaggio, but this probably reached him through the Dutch Caravaggisti and other Northern ( French and Dutch ) contemporaries. In particular, La Tour is often compared to the Dutchman Hendrick Terbrugghen .

[ 19 ] Louis Finson , also known as Ludovicus Finsonius, was a Flemish Baroque painter, who also worked in France.

Selected works Bigot – Judith and Holofernes Boulogne – The Cheats , 1618–1620 La Tour – The Fortune Teller , 1630 Vouet – The Fortune Teller , 1617 de Boulogne – Lute Player , 1626 Spanish [ edit ] Francisco Ribalta became among the first followers in Spain of the tenebrist style. It is unclear if he directly visited either Rome or Naples , where Caravaggio's style had many adherents, although through its Naples connection Spain was probably already exposed to Caravaggisim by the early 17th century. His son Juan Ribalta , Vicente Castelló and Jusepe de Ribera are said to have been his pupils, although it is entirely possible that Ribera acquired his tenebrism when he moved to Italy. The style garnered a number of adherents in Spain, and was to influence the Baroque or Golden Age Spanish painters, especially Zurbarán , Velázquez and Murillo . Even the art of still life in Spain, the bodegón was often painted in a similar stark and austere style.

Orazio Borgianni signed a petition to begin an Italianate academy of painting in Spain and executed a series of nine paintings for the Convento de Portacoeli, Valladolid, where they remain.

Giovanni Battista Crescenzi was an Italian painter and architect of the early-Baroque period, active in Rome and Spain, where he helped decorate the pantheon of the Spanish kings at El Escorial. He rose to prominence as an artist during the reign of Pope Paul V, but by 1617 had moved to Madrid, and from 1620 on, he was active in El Escorial. Philip III of Spain awarded him the title of Marchese de la Torre, Knight of Santiago. His pupil Bartolomeo Cavarozzi was active in Spain 1617–19.

Selected works Ribalta – Christ with the Cross , 1612 Velázquez – Old Woman Frying Eggs (The Old Cook) , 1618 Zurbarán – The Martyrdom of Saint Serapion , 1628 Ribera - Apollo and Marsyas , 1637 Murillo - The Virgin of the Rosary , c. 1650–1655 See also [ edit ] Caravaggio Paintings from the Contarelli chapel References [ edit ] ^ Harr, Jonathan (2005).

The Lost Painting: The Quest for a Caravaggio Masterpiece . Random House.

ISBN 0-375-50801-5 .

^ Roberto Longhi, quoted in Lambert, op. cit., p.15 ^ Bernard Berenson, in Lambert, op. cit., p.8 ^ Museo del Prado, Enciclopedia - Voz: Cavarozzi, Bartolomeo . Accessed 3 December 2022 ^ J. Paul Getty Museum: Bartolomeo Cavarozzi . Accessed 3 December 2022 ^ a b Catherine Puglisi (1998).

Caravaggio . Phaidon.

ISBN 0-7148-3966-3 .

^ Sirjacobs, Raymond.

Antwerpen Sint-Pauluskerk: Rubens En De Mysteries Van De Rozenkrans = Rubens Et Les Mystères Du Rosaire = Rubens and the Mysteries of the Rosary , Antwerpen: Sint-Paulusvrienden, 2004 ^ Gregori, Mina, Luigi Salerno, and Richard E. Spear, The Age of Caravaggio , Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1985 ^ Roger A. d'Hulst, Abraham Janssens - Scaldis en Antwerpia Archived 2020-10-23 at the Wayback Machine at Openbaar Kunstbezit Vlaanderen (in Dutch) ^ a b c "Matthias Depoorter, Theodoor Rombouts on Baroque in the Southern Netherlands" . Retrieved 2019-07-31 .

^ Hans Vlieghe. "Oost, Jacob van, I." Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online. Oxford University Press. Web. 3 August 2019 ^ Louis Finson at the Netherlands Institute for Art History (in Dutch) ^ Damian, Veronique et Chiara Naldi, Massimo Stanzione, Guercino, Hendrick de Somer et Fra' Galgario , Paris: Galerie Canesso, 2016, p. 20-25 ^ "Matthias Depoorter, Jan Janssens on Baroque in the Southern Netherlands" . Retrieved 2019-07-31 .

^ a b "Matthias Depoorter, Gerard Seghers on Baroque in the Southern Netherlands" . Retrieved 2019-07-31 .

^ Adam de Coster, The Denial of Saint Peter at Sotheby's ^ [ https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/rijksstudio/styles/caravaggism Caravaggism at the Rijksmuseum ^ Brejon de Lavergnée, Barbara. 'Simon Vouet', Oxford Art Online .

^ Anthony Blunt, "Art and Architecture in France, 1500–1700", 1953, Penguin External links [ edit ] Figures of reality. French Caravaggisti, Georges de La Tour, the Le Nain brothers Archived 2020-09-27 at the Wayback Machine Orazio and Artemisia Gentileschi , a fully digitized exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries, which contains material on Caravaggisti (see index) Zurbarán , an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on Caravaggisti (see index) Jusepe de Ribera, 1591-1652 , an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on Caravaggisti (see index) v t e Caravaggisti Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio Artists in biographies by Giovanni Baglione Baroque Chiaroscuro Tenebrism Paintings attributed to Caravaggio Dutch Caravaggisti Dirck van Baburen Jan van Bijlert Paulus Bor Andries Both Hendrick Bloemaert Jan Gerritsz van Bronckhorst Hendrick ter Brugghen Wouter Crabeth II Gerard van Honthorst Matthias Stom Flemish Caravaggisti Flemish Baroque painting Adam de Coster Nicolas Régnier Theodoor Rombouts Gerard Seghers French Caravaggisti Trophime Bigot Valentin de Boulogne Georges de La Tour Jean LeClerc Nicolas Tournier Claude Vignon Simon Vouet Italian Caravaggisti Giovanni Baglione Marco Antonio Bassetti Orazio Borgianni Battistello Caracciolo Cecco del Caravaggio Bernardo Cavallino Bartolomeo Cavarozzi Domenico Fetti Paolo Domenico Finoglia Giovanni Antonio Galli Artemisia Gentileschi Orazio Gentileschi Giovanni Francesco Guerrieri Ottavio Leoni Bartolomeo Manfredi Mario Minniti Pietro Paolino Mattia Preti Orazio Riminaldi Carlo Saraceni Bartolomeo Schedoni Giovanni Serodine Carlo Sellitto Leonello Spada Massimo Stanzione Giuseppe Vermiglio Spanish Caravaggisti Bartolomé Esteban Murillo Francisco Ribalta Juan Ribalta Jusepe de Ribera Francisco de Zurbarán Related topics Rembrandt Gerrit Dou Peter Paul Rubens Diego Velázquez v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Caravaggio List of paintings 1593–1594 Boy Peeling Fruit (c. 1592) Young Sick Bacchus (c. 1593) Boy with a Basket of Fruit (c. 1593) Boy Bitten by a Crayfish (c. 1593; lost) The Fortune Teller (c. 1594) The Cardsharps (c. 1594) 1595–1599 Del Monte paintings The Musicians (c. 1595) Saint Francis of Assisi in Ecstasy (c. 1595) Boy Bitten by a Lizard (c. 1596) The Lute Player (c. 1596) Bacchus (c. 1596) Penitent Magdalene (c. 1597) Rest on the Flight into Egypt (c. 1597) Medusa (c. 1597) Portrait of a Courtesan (Fillide Melandroni) (c. 1597) Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto (c. 1597) Saint Catherine of Alexandria (c. 1598) The Sacrifice of Isaac (Princeton; c. 1598) John the Baptist (c. 1598) Martha and Mary Magdalene (c. 1598) Portrait of Maffeo Barberini (1598) Basket of Fruit (c. 1599) Judith Beheading Holofernes (c. 1599) David and Goliath (c. 1599) Narcissus (c. 1599) 1600–1606 Most famous painter in Rome The Calling of Saint Matthew (1599–1600) The Martyrdom of Saint Matthew (1599–1600) The Conversion of Saint Paul (1600) The Crucifixion of Saint Peter (1601) The Conversion of Saint Paul on the Road to Damascus (1601) Supper at Emmaus (London; 1601) Amor Victorious (1602) Saint Matthew and the Angel (1602; destroyed) The Inspiration of Saint Matthew (1602) The Incredulity of Saint Thomas (c. 1602) The Taking of Christ (1602) The Entombment of Christ (c. 1603) Saint Francis in Prayer (c. 1603) The Calling of Saints Peter and Andrew (c. 1603–1606) Madonna of Loreto (Madonna dei Pellegrini, Pilgrims' Madonna) (c. 1604) The Crowning with Thorns (Prato; 1604) The Death of the Virgin (1604) Christ on the Mount of Olives (1605) Ecce Homo (Genoa; c. 1605) Saint Jerome in Meditation (c. 1605) Saint Jerome Writing (Rome; c. 1605) Portrait of Pope Paul V (1605) Still Life with Fruit (1605) Madonna and Child with Saint Anne (Dei Palafrenieri) (1606) 1606–1608 Naples and Malta Ecce Homo (Madrid; c. 1605–1609) Mary Magdalen in Ecstasy (1606) Saint Francis in Meditation (1606) Supper at Emmaus (Milan; 1606) The Seven Works of Mercy (1606) The Crucifixion of Saint Andrew (1607) David with the Head of Goliath (Vienna; 1607) Madonna of the Rosary (1607) The Crowning with Thorns (Vienna; 1607) The Flagellation of Christ (c. 1607) Christ at the Column (c. 1607) Salome with the Head of John the Baptist (London; c. 1607) Saint Jerome Writing (Valletta; 1607) Portrait of Alof de Wignacourt and his Page (1607–1608) Portrait of Fra Antonio Martelli (1608) The Beheading of Saint John the Baptist (1608) Sleeping Cupid (1608) 1608–1610 Sicily and Naples The Annunciation (1608) The Burial of Saint Lucy (1608) The Raising of Lazarus (1609) Adoration of the Shepherds (1609) Nativity with Saint Francis and Saint Lawrence (1609; lost) Salome with the Head of John the Baptist (Madrid; 1609) Denial of Saint Peter (1610) The Martyrdom of Saint Ursula (1610) David with the Head of Goliath (Rome; 1610) Related Paintings attributed to Caravaggio Utrecht Caravaggism Caravaggisti Caravaggio, il pittore maledetto Caravaggio (1986 film) Caravaggio (2007 film) Caravaggio's Shadow Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Caravaggisti&oldid=1305276204 " Categories : Caravaggisti Caravaggio Art movements Italian Baroque Art movements in Dutch painting Italian Baroque painters Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 03:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Caravaggisti 28 languages Add topic

