Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Description and interpretation 3 Components Toggle Components subsection 3.1 Ground 3.2 Borders, dividing lines, and feature blocks 3.3 Figurative designs 3.4 Geometric or figurative designs 3.5 Clan designs 3.6 Cross-hatching (rarrk) 3.7 Subject material 4 Regional variations in style and form 5 Manufacture 6 Notable Aboriginal bark painters 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Bark painting 6 languages Español Français Gaeilge Galego Magyar Norsk nynorsk Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian Aboriginal art form Bark painting is an Australian Aboriginal art form, involving painting on the interior of a strip of tree bark . While examples of painted bark shelters were found in the south-eastern states (then colonies) of Tasmania , Victoria , and New South Wales in the 19th century, as well as later on bark shelters in northern Australia, it is now typically only found as a continuing form of artistic expression in Arnhem Land and other regions in the Top End of Australia, including parts of the Kimberley region of Western Australia .

Bark paintings were traditionally produced (especially among the Yolngu peoples ) for instructional and ceremonial purposes and were transient objects. Today, they are keenly sought after by collectors and public arts institutions.

Kangaroo totemic ancestor - Bark painting, Arnhem Land , c. 1915 History [ edit ] Painting on the dried bark stripped off trees, using ochres , is an old tradition. The earliest European find was in a bark shelter over a grave in Tasmania around 1800, recorded by French artist Nicolas-Martin Petit [ fr ] , who travelled with Nicolas Baudin to Tasmania between 1800 and 1804. Other painted bark shelters were later found in Victoria and New South Wales. These were drawn with charcoal , and then painted or scratched onto bark which had been blackened by smoke.

[ 1 ] The earliest surviving bark paintings date from the 19th century, an example of which is a bark etching of a kangaroo hunt now in the British Museum , which was collected near Boort in northern Victoria by the British explorer John Hunter Kerr .

[ 2 ] Another example, painted before 1876, is held by the Museum of Victoria .

[ 1 ] In the Kimberley and Arnhem Land, the paintings on bark shelters were similar in style to those done in rock shelters , which illustrated various stories told to young people when people were confined to the shelters for long periods during the wet season .

[ 1 ] Bark coffins and belts were painted in northeast Arnhem Land, and painted bark baskets were also used in death rituals on the Tiwi Islands .

[ 1 ] The modern form of bark paintings began when works were commissioned from Yolngu artists. In 1912 Baldwin Spencer commissioned bark paintings at Gunbalanya (Oenpelli) , and soon collectors were wanting to purchase more like these.

[ 1 ] Spencer looked for paintings on the basis of artistic and aesthetic merit, and provided examples to the Museum of Victoria . Many of these early artists' names are no longer known.

[ 3 ] Missionaries started encouraging the production of these paintings for sale, to help fund the missions, as well as to educate white Australians about Yolngu culture: [ 4 ] from the late 1920s, Reverend Thomas Theodor Webb at Milingimbi , and, from 1935, Reverend W. Chaseling at Yirrkala .

[ 1 ] The Sea and the Sky (1948), by Mungurrawuy Yunupingu From the 1930s through to the 1950s, the main collectors of bark paintings were anthropologists and missionaries, including Norman Tindale at Groote in 1922, W. Lloyd Warner , Charles P. Mountford , Ronald and Catherine Berndt , W. E. H. Stanner , and Karel Kupka.

[ 1 ] Demand for the paintings increased during the 1960s, mostly sold through mission shops.

[ 1 ] In 1963, the Yirrkala bark petitions , which were documents written on bark, were presented to the Australian Parliament , becoming the first documentary recognition of Indigenous Australians in Australian law. The petitions asserted that the Yolngu people owned land over which the federal government had granted mining rights to a private company, Nabalco ., [ 5 ] In 1971, the federal government established a centralised marketing company in 1971, and from 1973 the Aboriginal Arts Board of the Australia Council gave funding to communities to establish community arts centres and to employ arts advisers. From the 1970s, Maningrida , Ramingining , and Katherine developed as centres for marketing bark paintings.

[ 1 ] Today, most bark paintings are produced for the art market, although some artists still produce traditional designs.

[ 6 ] Description and interpretation [ edit ] U.S. President George W. Bush examines a Yirrkala bark painting at the Australian National Maritime Museum in Sydney in September 2007 Bark paintings are based on sacred designs that include abstract patterns and designs (such as cross-hatching in particular colours) that identify a clan, and also often contain elements of the eternal Dreamtime . Sometimes the elements of a story are obvious—such as men or animals—but sometimes the elements are symbolic. What appears to the tourist as a series of wavy lines punctuated by dots may actually be telling a complex Dreaming story describing the path of a creator spirit and events that happened along the way.

An uninitiated man or woman is only allowed to paint "outside" stories, the sort of story that might be told to a child. An initiated man can paint an "inside" story, which is restricted knowledge. Thus, a painting may be displayed in an exhibition, or put up for sale, but the artist, although having the right to paint the story, does not have the right to tell the story to another person. Alternatively, the story behind the painting may be one that may not be told to an uninitiated person.

[ 4 ] Non-Indigenous people who, like Howard Morphy , [ 4 ] have spent years studying the subject, still have an outsider's view and rely on analogies. The Yolngu language and culture has words and concepts that are unfamiliar to non-indigenous cultures, which makes understanding the art form difficult. The following explanation only describes the physical aspects.

Components [ edit ] A bark painting consists of several components, not all of which may be present in an individual painting, and that are generally applied in the following order: Ground Border Dividing lines Feature blocks Figurative designs Geometric designs Clan designs Cross-hatching Ground [ edit ] In all cases, the bark is first covered with a layer of ochre, which is usually red or white, occasionally yellow or black.

[ 6 ] Borders, dividing lines, and feature blocks [ edit ] The border, if present, is usually yellow (which originated from a Yirrkala clan design). The paintings are sometimes divided into sections known as feature blocks, which feature either separate stories, or scenes in a story.

[ 6 ] Figurative designs [ edit ] Figurative designs resemble a real (or mythological) object or being. Thus, a figurative design of a possum resembles a possum, as opposed to being an abstract symbol for a possum, which is recognisable only to someone familiar with this symbolism. Most commercially available bark paintings contain recognisable figurative designs that often tells a traditional story.

[ 7 ] Geometric or figurative designs [ edit ] Geometric are representational symbols, and their meaning often depends on context and on who painted the painting. The same symbol can also have different meanings. For example, a circle might represent a water hole, a campsite, a mat, a campfire, a nut, or an egg, depending on context.

[ 6 ] Yolngu culture takes a holistic view of the world, in which these meanings may not be so very different after all. Morphy gives the example of a circle and a line, which a non-initiate is told represents a "kangaroo water hole", and depicts a water hole with a creek running into it. At a later ceremony, when he says he knows it's a kangaroo water hole, he is told "That water hole was made by the old man kangaroo digging in the ground with his tail to make a well for water, using his tail as a digging stick". Later, he is told an even more complex story involving a female kangaroo. (See Morphy for the detailed story.

[ 4 ] ) Clan designs [ edit ] Unlike the previous components of the painting, clan designs are sacred and initially did not appear on public paintings, although nowadays they can be seen on commercial paintings. A clan design may consist of a combination of symbols, geometric designs, and cross hatching, One clan symbol, for example, consists of a series of interlocking diamonds painted in particular colours, whilst another includes symbols of a “sugar-bag” (wild honey). A Yolngu person can immediately identify the clan and moiety of the painter from that design, which then also provides further context for interpreting the symbolism of the geometric designs.

Cross-hatching (rarrk) [ edit ] Cross-hatching, or rarrk , is perhaps one of the most distinctive features of Yolngu art of north-eastern Arnhem Land . Closely spaced parallel fine lines are drawn, intersecting each other. Traditionally it is done on bark, using grass, although artists also use the technique on modern art materials and brushes are almost always used.

[ 8 ] Artists using the rarrk technique often blend traditional themes or influences, using the traditional colours, restricted to black and white and red ochre and yellow ochre .

[ 9 ] Many Kunwinjku artists also employ rarrk, [ 10 ] including John Mawurndjul [ 11 ] and Peter Marralwanga .

[ 12 ] A sub-style of rarrk, known as x-ray art , shows part of the internal organs of the animals in the painting.

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] [ 6 ] Subject material [ edit ] The content depicted by the painting is often either a traditional Dreaming story or a map. Sometimes it will be both, because the ancestral stories and songs often refer to the paths of creation ancestors as they travel across the land (see songlines ). Morphy gives an example of a painting that depicts a particular ancestral journey, but also shows where an airstrip was built.

Regional variations in style and form [ edit ] Bark paintings from the Kimberley in Western Australia are very similar to the rock art in that region: mainly, representations of the Wandjina creator-beings associated with wet season thunderstorms. These are large faces with rayed headdresses, with not much other body detail.

[ 1 ] Bark paintings from Port Keats/Wadeye in the north-west of the Northern Territory, combine figurative imagery (as found in eastern Kimberley and Arnhem Land), and geometric patterns, related to desert art styles.

[ 1 ] The Tiwi people of Bathurst and Melville Islands paint colourful crosshatched and dotted non-figurative designs. Similar designs are also painted on bark baskets ( tungas ), sculptures carved from ironwood, and various other items of material culture relating to mortuary ceremonies.

[ 1 ] Work from Groote Eylandt is distinctive, with figures painted against a black background, and also often depict representations of the boats known as prau used by Makassan trepangers .

[ 1 ] According to Wally Caruana, former senior curator of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander art collections at the National Gallery of Australia , the imagery in bark paintings is broadly similar across Arnhem Land, with some differences: [ 3 ] In western Arnhem Land, the connection to rock art has resulted in the predominance of figurative imagery, reliant on the artist's draughtsmanship.

In eastern Arnhem Land, bark painters prefer geometric compositional templates with an emphasis on patterned clan designs.

In central Arnhem Land, artists tend to combine both approaches. In fact, figurative, abstracted or geometric imagery exists in all areas.

Central and eastern Arnhem Land designs connect to their body painting and ceremonial designs.

[ 1 ] Manufacture [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Bark painting" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The barest necessities for bark artwork are paint, brushes, bark, fixative and a fire.

The material of choice is the bark from Stringybark ( Eucalyptus tetradonta ). The bark must be free of knots and other blemishes. It is best cut from the tree in the wet season when the sap is rising. Two horizontal slices and a single vertical slice are made into the tree, and the bark is carefully peeled off with the aid of a sharpened tool. Only the inner smooth bark is kept and placed in a fire. After heating in the fire, the bark is flattened under foot and weighted with stones or logs to dry flat. Once dry, it is ready to paint upon.

Earth pigments—or ochres —in red, yellow and black are used, also mineral oxides of iron and manganese and white pipeclay, or calcium carbonate. Ochres may be fixed with a binder such as PVA glue, or previously, with the sap or juice of plants such as orchid bulbs.

After the painting is completed, the bark is splinted at either end to keep the painting flat. A fixative, traditionally orchid juice, is added over the top.

Notable Aboriginal bark painters [ edit ] Notable bark painters include: Curly Bardkadubbu Djäwa Daygurrgurr Paddy Dhathangu Binyinyuwuy Djarrankuykuy Djambawa Marawilli Nonggirrnga Marawili Wandjuk Marika (also a noted didgeridoo player) John Mawurndjul Narritjin Maymuru George Milpurrurru Lofty Bardayal Nadjamerrek Paddy Compass Namadbara Bobby Barrdjaray Nganjmirra Mick Makani Wilingarr Jimmy Wululu Yirawala Gulumbu Yunupingu Mungurrawuy Yunupingu Nyapanyapa Yunupingu See also [ edit ] Buku-Larrnggay Mulka Centre Yirrkala bark petitions References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Taylor, Luke.

"Aboriginal bark painting" .

Aboriginal art online . Archived from the original on 30 November 2017 . Retrieved 16 October 2024 .

Text by Dr Luke Taylor, AIATSIS - reproduce with permission from the Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia .

^ "Bark etching of a kangaroo hunt" . Archived from the original on 29 October 2015 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ a b Caruana, Wally (15 August 2023).

"History of bark painting" . National Museum of Australia . Retrieved 17 October 2024 .

^ a b c d Morphy, Howard (1991).

Ancestral connections : art and an aboriginal system of knowledge . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226538655 .

^ "Yirrkala bark petitions 1963" .

Magna Carta .

^ a b c d e "Aboriginal Bark Paintings" .

Wentworth Galleries . 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 17 October 2024 .

^ "What is Diamond Painting? Your Intro Guide To This Cool Craft" .

Floating Styles . Archived from the original on 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ a b "What is Rarrk?" .

Explore Aboriginal Art, its history, culture and development . Archived from the original on 18 July 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2022 .

^ "Edward Blitner New Works - Rarrk Cross-hatching" .

Japingka Aboriginal Art Gallery . 2021 . Retrieved 18 July 2021 .

^ a b "Aboriginal Art Styles" .

www.aboriginal-art-australia.com . Retrieved 18 July 2021 .

^ "John Mawurndjul" .

Maningrida . Retrieved 18 July 2021 .

^ "Peter Marralwanga" .

National Museum of Australia . Archived from the original on 30 July 2021 . Retrieved 18 July 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Poll, Matt; Harris, Amanda (2021).

"Bark paintings as ambassadors, 1948–63, and the circle back to Aboriginal cultural agency" (PDF) .

Aboriginal History .

45 : 57– 82.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bark painting .

Bark paintings , by Dr Luke Taylor of AIATSIS, from Encyclopaedia of Aboriginal Australia Buku-Larrnggay Mulka Art Centre and Museum , Yirrkala Injalak Arts and Crafts Centre , Gunbalanya (Oenpelli) v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bark_painting&oldid=1304818618 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal art Painting techniques Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2021 Use Australian English from July 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 10:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bark painting 6 languages Add topic

