Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name origin 2 Formation 3 Risks 4 References Toggle the table of contents Boso triple junction 3 languages فارسی Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The meeting point of the Okhotsk Plate, the Pacific plate, and the Philippine Sea plate This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Boso triple junction" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Tectonic plates under Japan North American plate Pacific plate Philippine Sea plate Eurasian plate Boso triple junction The Boso triple junction (also known as off-Boso triple junction ) is a triple junction off the coast of Japan; it is one of two known examples of a trench -trench-trench triple junction on the Earth (the other being the Banda Sea triple junction ). It is the meeting point of the North American plate (represented by the Okhotsk plate ) to the north, the Pacific plate to the east and the Philippine Sea plate to the south.

[ 1 ] Name origin [ edit ] The Boso triple junction is named after the Bōsō Peninsula .

Formation [ edit ] It is formed from the junction of the Izu–Bonin–Mariana Arc where the Izu–Bonin Trench meets with the Japan Trench and the Sagami Trench .

Risks [ edit ] Located some 300 kilometres (190 mi) from the Boso triple junction, Tokyo is subject to quakes and tsunamis generated from slips along this junction. Furthermore, there is a large populated region along the coast of the main island that would also be subject to damage. This junction probably has the highest associated insurance risk in the world, due to its proximity to extensive urban development.

[ citation needed ] The Boso triple junction is only ~400 kilometers from the Mount Fuji triple junction.

The 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami were generated along the Japan trench well to the north of the junction and did not involve the other two trenches, although quakes that may have been aftershocks have been observed there [ clarification needed ] .

References [ edit ] ^ Renard, V.; et al. (1987).

"Trench triple junction off Central Japan—preliminary results of French-Japanese 1984 Kaiko cruise, Leg 2" (PDF) .

Earth and Planetary Science Letters .

83 ( 1– 4): 243– 256.

Bibcode : 1987E&PSL..83..243R .

doi : 10.1016/0012-821x(87)90069-0 .

v t e Triple junctions Triple trench Boso Banda Sea Triple ridge Aden–Owen–Carlsberg Afar Azores Fifteen-Twenty fracture zone Galápagos Bouvet Rivera Rodrigues South Greenland Tongareva Triple fault Karlıova Trench–trench–ridge Chile Fault–fault–trench Kamchatka–Aleutian Maraş Mendocino Ridge–fault–fault Macquarie Ridge–trench–fault Queen Charlotte See also Mount Fuji Category v t e Tectonic plates of East and North Asia ( Eurasian plate - Pacific plate Convergence Zone) Large Eurasian plate North American plate Philippine Sea plate Faults and rift zones Aomori Bay West Coast Fault Zone Baikal Rift Zone Haiyuan Fault Fukozu Fault Futagawa-Hinagu fault zone Idosawa Fault Itoigawa-Shizuoka Tectonic Line Izu–Bonin–Mariana Arc Japan Median Tectonic Line Longmenshan Fault Neodani Fault Nojima Fault Northeastern Japan Arc Philippine Fault System Senya Fault Tanna Fault Ulakhan Fault Urasoko fault Trenches and troughs Kuril Trench Mariana Trench Japan Eastern margin of the Sea of Japan Izu–Ogasawara Trench Japan Trench Nankai Trough Okinawa Trough Ryukyu Trench Sagami Trough Suruga Trough Philippines Manila Trench Philippine Trench Others Boso triple junction This tectonics article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boso_triple_junction&oldid=1289490385 " Categories : Plate tectonics Triple junctions Tectonics stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2018 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2017 All stub articles This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 00:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boso triple junction 3 languages Add topic

