Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Description 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Toxteth Unitarian Chapel 2 languages Deutsch مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 53°22′53″N 2°57′29″W ﻿ / ﻿ 53.3813°N 2.9580°W ﻿ / 53.3813; -2.9580 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Church in Merseyside, England Toxteth Unitarian Chapel View across Park Road Toxteth Unitarian Chapel Location in Merseyside 53°22′53″N 2°57′29″W ﻿ / ﻿ 53.3813°N 2.9580°W ﻿ / 53.3813; -2.9580 OS grid reference SJ 363 875 Location Dingle , Liverpool , Merseyside Country England Denomination Unitarian Architecture Functional status Active Heritage designation Grade I Designated 28 June 1952 Architectural type Chapel Groundbreaking 1618 Completed 1774 Specifications Materials Stone with slate roof Toxteth Unitarian Chapel is in Park Road, Dingle, Liverpool , Merseyside , England. Since the 1830s it has been known as The Ancient Chapel of Toxteth .

[ 1 ] It is recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade I listed building .

[ 2 ] and continues to be used as a Unitarian chapel.

[ 3 ] It is a member of the General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches , the umbrella organisation for British Unitarians.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] In 1611 a group of Puritan farmers built a school in Toxteth and appointed Richard Mather , at the age of 15, as its master.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] He then went to Brasenose College, Oxford to continue his education but he was asked to return to Toxteth.

[ 6 ] By this time the chapel had been built [ 2 ] and on 30 November 1618 he preached his first sermon.

[ 7 ] He subsequently became ordained in the Church of England .

[ 8 ] However he was suspended from the ministry in 1633 and again in 1634 because of his nonconformist preaching, [ 9 ] and in 1635 he emigrated to America.

[ 10 ] By 1662 the minister of the chapel was a Presbyterian named Thomas Crompton and he was joined by another Dissenter , Michael Briscoe.  In 1672 both ministers obtained licences under the Royal Declaration of Indulgence and the chapel was enlarged to accommodate Dissenters from central Liverpool.  However as more chapels were built, Toxteth chapel was neglected and fell into disrepair.

[ 1 ] In 1774 it was partly rebuilt.

[ 2 ] Around this time the majority of the congregation were Unitarian and the others left to form a new congregation.

[ 1 ] A porch was added in 1841.

[ 2 ] Unitarian services continue to be held in the chapel every fortnight.

[ 3 ] Description [ edit ] The chapel is built in stone with a slate roof.  It has two storeys and a western extension with a projecting bay .  The windows are round-headed with stone surrounds.  At the west end are paired round-headed entrances with a commemorative plaque and three windows above them.  At the south end is a small octagonal cupola with louvres and a button finial .  The interior has the pulpit at the east end, galleries on three sides, and box pews throughout.  The north and south galleries date from the 17th century and connecting gallery is from the 18th century. Two of the box pews are dated 1650 and 1700.

[ 2 ] The monuments include a brass dated 1656 and 18th and early 19th century wall tablets.  Outside the chapel is a graveyard with a mid-19th-century classical arcade .

[ 11 ] The organ was built in 1906 by Brindley & Foster .

[ 12 ] The chapel contains a memorial plaque dedicate to Jeremiah Horrocks , a 17th-century astronomer.

[ 13 ] Horrocks was the first person to accurately predict the transit of Venus and was a member of the chapel.

Plaque above the door of the Chapel The schoolhouse next to the chapel See also [ edit ] Grade I listed buildings in Liverpool Grade I listed churches in Merseyside Ullet Road Unitarian Church References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Garrard, Rev. L. A. (August 1948), "The Ancient Chapel of Toxteth", The Liverpolitan : 13.

^ a b c d e Historic England , "Toxteth Unitarian Chapel (1072991)" , National Heritage List for England , retrieved 2 April 2012 ^ a b Merseyside and the Isle of Man , The Unitarian Movement , retrieved 27 April 2008 ^ Find a Congregation: Liverpool , The General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches (Great Britain) , retrieved 23 January 2011 ^ Mather 1850 , pp. 44–45.

^ Mather 1850 , p. 47.

^ Mather 1850 , p. 48.

^ Mather 1850 , pp. 48–49.

^ Mather 1850 , pp. 52–53.

^ Mather 1850 , p. 67.

^ Sharples & Pollard 2004 , p. 274–275.

^ "NPOR [D07863]" , National Pipe Organ Register , British Institute of Organ Studies , retrieved 2 July 2020 ^ Rigg, Danny (26 March 2023).

"Liverpool man who change the way we see the universe" .

Liverpool Echo . Retrieved 1 April 2023 .

Bibliography Mather, Richard (1850), Journal of Richard Mather , Boston: David Clapp Sharples, Joseph; Pollard, Richard (2004), Liverpool , Pevsner Architectural Guides, New Haven and London: Yale University Press , ISBN 0-300-10258-5 External links [ edit ] The Historic Chapels Trust Emigrants from Liverpool, with reference to Richard Mather Mather family history v t e List of Unitarian, Universalist, and Unitarian Universalist churches Australia Unitarian Church of South Australia Canada First Unitarian Congregation of Toronto Ireland Unitarian Church in Ireland Romania Unitarian Church of Transylvania Unitarian church, Dârjiu United Kingdom Bank Street Unitarian Chapel Billingshurst Unitarian Chapel Brighton Unitarian Church Brook Street Chapel, Knutsford Brookfield Unitarian Church Chowbent Chapel Cross Street Chapel Dean Row Chapel, Wilmslow Essex Street Chapel Fulwood Old Chapel Gellionnen Chapel General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches Hastings Unitarian Church Horsham Unitarian Church King Edward Street Chapel, Macclesfield Meadrow Unitarian Chapel Mill Hill Chapel Unitarian Meeting House, Newcastle-under-Lyme Newington Green Unitarian Church Norcliffe Chapel Northiam Unitarian Chapel Nottage General Baptist & Unitarian Church Octagon Chapel, Norwich Richmond and Putney Unitarian Church Rivington Unitarian Chapel Rosslyn Hill Unitarian Chapel Shrewsbury Unitarian Church Taunton Unitarian Chapel Todmorden Unitarian Church Toxteth Unitarian Chapel Underbank Chapel Ullet Road Unitarian Church Unitarian Meeting House, Ipswich Upper Chapel York Unitarian Chapel United States Alaska Anchorage Unitarian Universalist Fellowship California First Unitarian Church of Los Angeles First Unitarian Church of Oakland First Unitarian Church of San Jose First Unitarian Universalist Church of San Diego Mount Diablo Unitarian Universalist Church Northwest Unitarian Universalist Congregation Pacific Unitarian Church Sepulveda Unitarian Universalist Society Unitarian Universalist Church of Berkeley Universalist Unitarian Church of Riverside Colorado Unitarian Universalist Church of Boulder Connecticut Unitarian Church in Westport Unitarian Universalist Church Universalist Church of West Hartford District of Columbia All Souls Church, Unitarian Universalist National Memorial Church Georgia First Universalist Church Hawaii First Unitarian Church of Honolulu Illinois Beverly Unitarian Church Channing-Murray Foundation First Unitarian Church of Chicago Third Unitarian Church Unity Temple Universalist Unitarian Church of Joliet Indiana Temple Israel Iowa First Unitarian Church First Universalist Church of Cedar Rapids Universalist Church Maine Dexter Universalist Church First Universalist Church Pittsfield Universalist Church Stockton Springs Community Church Universalist-Unitarian Church Maryland Cedar Lane Unitarian Universalist Church First Unitarian Church Massachusetts All Souls Church Arlington Street Church Bernardston Congregational Unitarian Church Brattle Street Church First Parish in Cambridge First Church in Boston First Church in Roxbury First Church in Salem First Church of Christ, Unitarian First Parish Church (Duxbury, Massachusetts) First Parish Church (Taunton, Massachusetts) First Parish Church (Waltham, Massachusetts) First Parish Church in Plymouth First Parish Church of Dorchester First Parish Church, Arlington Massachusetts First Parish in Malden First Parish of Sudbury First Parish Unitarian Church First Parish Unitarian Universalist Church of Scituate First Religious Society Church and Parish Hall First Unitarian Church (Peabody, Massachusetts) First Unitarian Church (Somerville, Massachusetts) First Unitarian Church (Stoneham, Massachusetts) First Unitarian Society in Newton First Universalist Church (Provincetown, Massachusetts) First Universalist Church (Salem, Massachusetts) First Universalist Church (Somerville, Massachusetts) Follen Church Society-Unitarian Universalist Housatonic Congregational Church King's Chapel North Parish Church Old Ship Church Second Unitarian Church Theodore Parker Unitarian Universalist Church Unitarian Church of Barnstable Unitarian Memorial Church Unitarian Society Unitarian Universalist Church of Medford and the Osgood House United First Parish Church Universalist Society Meetinghouse Wollaston Unitarian Church Michigan Barn Church First Unitarian Universalist Church of Detroit Unitarian Universalist Church Minnesota First Unitarian Society of Minneapolis Nebraska First Unitarian Church of Omaha New Hampshire First Universalist Church Peterborough Unitarian Church South Parish Unitarian Church New Jersey Beacon Unitarian Universalist Congregation in Summit Old Stone Church New York Chapin Memorial Church Christ Church First Unitarian Church of Rochester First Unitarian Church of Rochester (building) First Universalist Church First Universalist Church of Portageville First Unitarian Congregational Society First Unitarian Universalist Church of Niagara Fourth Universalist Society in the City of New York Pullman Memorial Universalist Church Second Unitarian Church Unitarian Church of All Souls Unitarian Universalist Church Unitarian Universalist Church of Buffalo North Carolina Eno River Unitarian Universalist Fellowship Long View Center The Unitarian Universalist Church of Charlotte Ohio All Souls Unitarian-Universalist Church Apostolic Bethlehem Temple Church First Unitarian Church First Unitarian Church of Marietta First Universalist Church of Lyons, Ohio First Universalist Church of Olmsted Unitarian Universalist Church of Kent Ohio Universalist Church of Westfield Center Oklahoma All Souls Unitarian Church Oregon First Congregational Church of Oregon City Philadelphia First Unitarian Church of Philadelphia First Universalist Church of Sharpsville Unitarian Universalist Church of Lancaster Rhode Island Bell Street Chapel First Unitarian Church of Providence First Universalist Church South Carolina Liberty Universalist Church and Feasterville Academy Historic District Unitarian Church in Charleston Tennessee Church of the River Vermont Cavendish Universalist Church Unitarian Church Virginia Mount Vernon Unitarian Church Unitarian Universalist Church of Arlington Washington University Unitarian Church Wisconsin Bradford Community Church First Unitarian Church First Unitarian Society of Madison First Universalist Church United Unitarian and Universalist Church Unity Chapel v t e Buildings and structures in Liverpool , England Skyscrapers and highrises 1 Princes Dock Alexandra Tower Beetham Tower The Lexington Municipal Buildings New Hall Place The Plaza Port of Liverpool Building Post & Echo Building Radio City Tower Royal Liver Building Unity Commercial Unity Residential West Tower Notable lowrises Albert Dock Traffic Office Alder Hey Children's Hospital Atlantic Tower Bank of England Bluecoat Chambers Britannia Adelphi Hotel Calderstones House Chinese Arch County Sessions House Crowne Plaza LJLA Cunard Building Empire Theatre Everton Water Tower Everyman Theatre, Liverpool Grand Central Hall Great North Western Hotel Hargreaves Building Homeopathic Hospital India Buildings International Slavery Museum James Parsons Building Liverpool Central Library Liverpool Cotton Exchange Building Liverpool Magistrates' Court Liverpool Playhouse Liverpool Town Hall Liverpool Women's Hospital The Lyceum Malmaison Mann Island Buildings Merseyside Maritime Museum Museum of Liverpool National Conservation Centre One Park West Oratory Oriel Chambers Philharmonic Dining Rooms Philharmonic Hall Prudential Assurance Building Queen Elizabeth II Law Courts Royal Court Theatre Royal Insurance Building Royal Liverpool University Hospital Speke Hall Stanley Dock Tobacco Warehouse St George's Hall Tate Liverpool Tower Buildings Victoria Building Walker Art Gallery Wheel of Liverpool White Star Building Woolton Hall World Museum Liverpool Places of worship All Saints' Church Al-Rahma Mosque Church of All Hallows Church of Our Lady and St Nicholas Church of St Agnes and St Pancras Church of St Clare German Church Greek Orthodox Church of St Nicholas Gustav Adolf Church Liverpool Cathedral Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral Norwegian Fishermans' Church Old Christ Church The Oratory Princes Road Synagogue St George's Church St John the Baptist's Church St Luke's Church St Luke's Church, Walton St Michael's Church St Peter's Church Toxteth Unitarian Chapel Ullet Road Unitarian Church Welsh Presbyterian Church Transportation James Street station Kingsway Tunnel Liverpool Central station Liverpool Coach Station Liverpool John Lennon Airport Liverpool Lime Street station Liverpool One bus station Liverpool South Parkway station Mersey Railway Tunnel Moorfields station Queensway Tunnel Shopping complexes Clayton Square Shopping Centre Lewis's Building Liverpool ONE Liverpool Shopping Park Metquarter New Mersey Shopping Park St Johns Shopping Centre Sports venues and arenas Aigburth Cricket Ground Anfield Goodison Park Liverpool Arena O2 Academy Liverpool Walton Hall Park Wavertree Athletics Centre Hill Dickinson Stadium Sculptures and monuments Liverpool Cenotaph Nelson Monument Steble Fountain Superlambanana Titanic Memorial Victoria Monument Wellington's Column Yellow Submarine Notable demolished Childwall Hall Concourse House Custom House The Futurist Cinema Liverpool Castle Liverpool Central High Level railway station Liverpool Sailors' Home Liverpool Overhead Railway Octagon Chapel St Peter's Church St John's Market Walton Hall Lists List of public art in Liverpool List of tallest buildings and structures in Liverpool Listed buildings in Liverpool Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Toxteth_Unitarian_Chapel&oldid=1239864974 " Categories : Churches in Liverpool Grade I listed buildings in Liverpool Unitarian chapels in England Grade I listed churches in Merseyside Churches completed in 1618 Churches completed in 1774 17th-century Protestant churches 1618 establishments in England Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas National Pipe Organ Register ID not in Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles with OS grid coordinates This page was last edited on 12 August 2024, at 01:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Toxteth Unitarian Chapel 2 languages Add topic

