Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Flora 3 Fauna 4 References Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Christmas Island 2 languages Español Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fauna of Christmas Island ) Christmas goshawks The wildlife of Christmas Island is composed of the flora and fauna of this isolated island in the tropical Indian Ocean.

Christmas Island is the summit plateau of an underwater volcano. It is mostly clad in tropical rainforest and has karst , cliffs, wetlands, coasts and sea. It is a small island with a land area of 135 km 2 (52 sq mi), 63% of which has been declared a National park.

[ 1 ] Most of the rainforest remains intact and supports a large range of endemic species of animals and plants.

Geography [ edit ] Topography of Christmas Island The island is about 19 kilometres (12 mi) long and 14.5 km (9.0 mi) wide. The total land area is 135 square kilometres (52 sq mi), with 138.9 km (86.3 mi) of coastline. The island is the flat summit of an underwater volcano more than 4,500 m (14,800 ft) high, [ 2 ] with about 4,200 m (13,800 ft) being submerged and only about 300 m (1,000 ft) above the surface.

[ 3 ] Some basalt is exposed in places but most of the surface rock is limestone accumulated from coral growth. The karst terrain supports numerous anchialine pools .

[ 4 ] Steep cliffs along much of the coast rise abruptly to a central plateau. The island is mainly covered by tropical rainforest , much of which remains intact. Two thirds of the island is included in the Christmas Island National Park which includes rainforests, wetlands, cliffs, shore and coral reefs.

[ 5 ] The climate is tropical and temperatures vary little throughout the year. The highest temperature of around 29 °C (84 °F) usually occurs  in March and April, while the lowest temperature is around 23 °C (73 °F) in August. There is a dry season from July to October with only occasional showers. The wet season is between November and June, and includes monsoons and occasional tropical cyclones .

[ 6 ] Flora [ edit ] Tahitian chestnut ( Inocarpus fagifer ) About 213 species of vascular plant are native to the island, with sixteen of them endemic . The rainforest on the upper slopes and central plateau consists of large evergreen trees with a canopy at 30 to 40 m (100 to 130 ft) and a scattering of emergent trees some 50 m (160 ft) high. The dominant trees are Planchonella duclitan , Syzygium nervosum , Tristiropsis acutangula , Inocarpus fagifer and Hernandia ovigera . Mid-storey species include two endemic trees, the Christmas Island palm, Arenga listeri and the screw pine Pandanus elatus . There are few shrubs, but the trunks and branches of the trees are swathed in a tangle of vines , orchids and ferns .

[ 7 ] On terraces lower down the cliffs the trees are shorter, reaching 20 to 30 m (70 to 100 ft). Here the dominant species are Pisonia grandis , Gyrocarpus americanus , Gyrocarpus americanus , Terminalia catappa and Erythrina variegata . Various shrubs grow at the foot of the cliffs and on the coastal flats, sometimes in dense thickets. These include the endemic Pandanus christmatensis and Abutilon listeri , as well as certain shrubs and trees whose buoyant seeds are dispersed across the sea such as Scaevola taccada , Cordia subcordata , Morinda citrifolia , Hibiscus tiliaceus and Guettarda speciosa .

[ 7 ] Fauna [ edit ] Main articles: List of mammals of Christmas Island and List of birds of Christmas Island Christmas Island was uninhabited until the end of the nineteenth century. The island possesses no large native, terrestrial mammals and the endemic mammal fauna of the island has been largely destroyed by the introduction of exotic species such as cats, dogs and black rats ( Rattus rattus ).

[ 7 ] The diurnal bulldog rat ( Rattus nativitatis ) and the nocturnal Maclear's rat ( Rattus macleari ) both became extinct after the accidental introduction of the black rat. The Christmas Island shrew ( Crocidura trichura ) may also be extinct, [ 8 ] and the Christmas Island pipistrelle ( Pipistrellus murrayi ) has not been seen since 2009.

[ 9 ] The Christmas Island flying fox ( Pteropus melanotus natalis ), the only other endemic mammal, is declining in numbers and is considered threatened .

[ 8 ] Christmas Island red crab Rather than mammals, it is crabs that dominate the fauna.

[ 10 ] There are at least 50 species on the island, some of them endemic, 30 of them terrestrial species whose only link with the ocean is the necessity to travel to the sea to breed. Several are small and inconspicuous, but others such as the coconut crab and Christmas Island red crab are large and present in enormous numbers. In the late twentieth century there were estimated to be about 120 million red crabs on the island, and the mass migration made by the mature individuals to the coast was spectacular.

[ 10 ] The red crabs are a keystone species , feeding on the forest floor on leaves, fallen fruits, flowers, seedlings and carrion and maintaining a lawn-like turf. In the twenty-first century the number of red crabs has reduced considerably because of the accidental introduction of the yellow crazy ant to the island; this invasive species has formed supercolonies , killed crabs and had a profound impact on the biodiversity of the island.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The karst limestone areas are riddled with caves and sink-holes, some of the underground water-filled cavities being saline. These underground habitats have been imperfectly sampled, but at least twelve endemic subterranean invertebrates are known including some such as ostracods , the cave shrimp Procaris noelensis and a blind cave scorpion Hormurus polisorum , that may be relicts from the Mesozoic fauna of the Tethys Ocean . The island is fringed by coral reefs and nearly seven hundred species of marine fish have been recorded in the surrounding waters as well as three species of marine turtle and about a dozen species of whales and dolphins.

[ 7 ] Christmas Island is recognised by BirdLife International as being an Important Bird Area , mostly because of the breeding populations of seabirds. These include the red-footed booby , which nests in colonies in bushes and trees, the brown booby , which nests on cliffs, and the endemic Abbott's booby which nests on tall, emergent trees. Another endemic bird, the Christmas frigatebird , nests on the shore terraces, and the great frigatebird nests in semi- deciduous trees nearby. The brown noddy and two species of tropicbird also nest on the island. Land birds include four endemic species, the Christmas thrush , the Christmas imperial pigeon , the Christmas white-eye and the Christmas Island hawk-owl , and several endemic sub-species. Over a hundred migrants and vagrant species of bird have been recorded on the island.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Tierney, Beth (2007).

The Essential Christmas Island Travel Guide . Christmas Island Tourism Association.

^ "Submission on Development Potential No. 37" (PDF) . Northern Australia Land and Water Taskforce. 16 August 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 May 2009 . Retrieved 9 December 2019 .

^ "Christmas island" .

World Factbook . CIA. 23 April 2009 . Retrieved 9 December 2019 .

^ Iliffe T, Humphreys W (2016).

"Christmas Islands Hidden Secret" .

Advanced Diver Magazine .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2016 . Retrieved 9 December 2019 .

^ "About Christmas Island" . Parks Australia . Retrieved 9 December 2019 .

^ "Climate statistics for Christmas Island" .

Bureau of Meteorology .

Archived from the original on 27 December 2011 . Retrieved 9 December 2019 .

^ a b c d e Woinarski, John (2018).

A Bat's End: The Christmas Island Pipistrelle and Extinction in Australia . Csiro Publishing. pp.

73– 80.

ISBN 978-1-4863-0865-1 .

^ a b Moro, Dorian; Ball, Derek; Bryant, Sally (2018).

Australian Island Arks: Conservation, Management and Opportunities . Csiro Publishing. p. 27.

ISBN 978-1-4863-0661-9 .

^ Flannery, Tim (17 November 2012).

"Unmourned death of a sole survivor" .

The Sydney Morning Herald - Environment . Fairfax . Retrieved 14 December 2012 .

^ a b c Csurhes, Steve; Hankamer, Clare (2012).

"Invasive Animal Risk Assessment Yellow Crazy Ant" (PDF) . Queensland Government of Australia . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Bittel, Jason (24 December 2015).

"The Christmas Crab Massacre" . NRDC . Retrieved 15 December 2019 .

v t e Wildlife of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildlife_of_Christmas_Island&oldid=1190769261 " Category : Fauna of Christmas Island Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description This page was last edited on 19 December 2023, at 18:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Christmas Island 2 languages Add topic

