Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Study of codices Toggle Study of codices subsection 1.1 Materials 1.2 Structure 1.3 Pages 1.4 The libraire 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins 2.2 Archaeological turn 2.3 Broader approach 2.4 Quantitative codicology 2.5 Comparative codicology 2.6 Structural codicology 2.7 Islamic codicology 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 5.1 General 5.2 Reference works 5.3 Historical 5.4 Western European codices 5.5 Byzantine codices 5.6 Slavic codices 5.7 Hebrew codices 5.8 Arabic codices 5.9 Ethiopian codices 5.10 Asian codices 5.11 Specific codex texts 5.12 Parchment 5.13 Ink 5.14 Illustration 5.15 Bookbinding 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Codicology 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Latina Magyar Nederlands ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of codices or manuscript books Reims gospel book Codicology ( / ˌ k oʊ d ɪ ˈ k ɒ l ə dʒ i / ; [ 1 ] from French codicologie; from Latin codex , genitive codicis , "notebook, book" and Greek -λογία , -logia ) is the study of codices or manuscript books. It is often referred to as "the archaeology of the book," [ 2 ] a term coined by François Masai.

[ 3 ] : 5 It concerns itself with the materials, tools and techniques used to make codices, along with their features.

[ 4 ] The demarcation of codicology is not clear-cut. Some view codicology as a discipline complete in itself, while others see it as auxiliary to textual criticism analysis and transmission, which is studied by philology .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] : 7 Codicologists may also study the history of libraries , manuscript collecting, book cataloguing , and scribes , which otherwise belongs to the history of the book.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] : 7 Some codicologists say that their field encompasses palaeography , the study of handwriting, while some palaeographers say that their field encompasses codicology. The study of written features such as marginalia , glosses , ownership inscriptions , etc. falls in both camps, as does the study of the physical aspects of decoration, which otherwise belongs to art history .

[ citation needed ] Unlike traditional palaeography, codicology places more emphasis on the cultural aspect of books .

[ 5 ] The focus on material is referred to as stricto sensu codicology, while a broader approach, incorporating palaeography, philology, art history, and the history of the book , is referred to as lato sensu codicology, and the exact meaning depends on the codicologist's view.

[ 3 ] : 7–8, 10 Palaeographic techniques are used along with codicological techniques. Analysis of the work of the scribe, script styles and their variations, may reveal the book's character, value, purpose, date, and the importance attached to its different parts.

[ 6 ] Many incunabula , books printed up to the year 1500, were finished wholly or partly by hand, so they belong to the domain of codicology.

[ 7 ] Study of codices [ edit ] Materials [ edit ] The materials codices are made with are their support, and include papyrus , parchment (sometimes referred to as membrane or vellum ), and paper . They are written and drawn on with metals, pigments and ink .

[ 5 ] The quality, size, and choice of support determine the status of a codex. Papyrus is found only in late antiquity and the early Middle Ages . Codices intended for display were bound with more durable materials than vellum.

[ 6 ] Parchment varied widely due to animal species and finish, and identification of animals used to make it has only begun to be studied in the 21st century. How manufacturing influenced the final products, technique, and style, is little understood. However, changes in style are underpinned more by variation in technique.

[ 7 ] Before the 14th and 15th century, paper was expensive, and its use may mark off the deluxe copy.

[ 6 ] Structure [ edit ] The structure of a codex includes its size, format/ ordinatio [ 6 ] (its quires or gatherings, [ 7 ] consisting of sheets folded a number of times, often twice- a bifolio [ 8 ] ), sewing, bookbinding and rebinding. A quire consisted of a number of folded sheets inserting into one another- at least three, but most commonly four bifolia, [ 5 ] that is eight sheets and sixteen pages: [ 7 ] Latin quaternio or Greek tetradion , which became a synonym for quires.

[ 5 ] Unless an exemplar (text to be copied) was copied exactly, format differed.

[ 6 ] In preparation for writing codices, ruling patterns were used that determined the layout of each page. Holes were prickled with a spiked lead wheel and a circle. Ruling was then applied separately on each page or once through the top folio.

[ 9 ] Ownership markings, decorations and illumination are also studied.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] As these features are dependent on time and place, codicology determines characteristics specific to the scriptoria , or any production center, and libraries of codices.

[ 5 ] Pages [ edit ] Watermarks may provide, although often approximate, dates for when the copying occurred. The layout – size of the margin and the number of lines – is determined. There may be textual articulations, running heads , openings, chapters and paragraphs . Space was reserved for illustrations and decorated guide letters. The apparatus of books for scholars became more elaborate during the 13th and 14th centuries when chapter, verse, page numbering , marginalia finding guides, indexes , glossaries and tables of contents were developed.

[ 6 ] The libraire [ edit ] By a close examination of the physical attributes of a codex, it is sometimes possible to match up long-separated elements originally from the same book. In 13th century book publishing , due to secularization, stationers or libraire s emerged. They would receive commissions for texts, which they would contract out to scribes, illustrators, and binders, to whom they supplied materials. Due to the systematic format used for assembly by the libraire , the structure can be used to reconstruct the original order of a manuscript. However, complications can arise in the study of a codex. Manuscripts were frequently rebound, and this resulted in a particular codex incorporating works of different dates and origins, thus different internal structures. Additionally, a binder could alter or unify these structures to ensure a better fit for the new binding.

[ 10 ] Completed quires or books of quires might constitute independent book units- booklets, which could be returned to the stationer, or combined with other texts to make anthologies or miscellanies. Exemplars were sometimes divided into quires for simultaneous copying and loaned out to students for study. To facilitate this, catchwords were used- a word at the end of a page providing the next page's first word.

[ 6 ] [ 11 ] History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] The study of manuscripts has a long tradition, but codicology has a short history.

[ 12 ] In the fifteenth century, two works published under the title De laude scriptorium , praised manuscripts and the works of copyists. One was written by Jean Gerson , a Parisian theologian, and the other by Johann Trithemius, the abbot of the Benedictine monastery of Sponheim .

[ 13 ] In the 16th and 17th centuries, as the study of manuscripts advanced, disputes between philologists and theologians occurred. In the 17th century, the Bollandists collected hagiographes and critically examined their contents and origins.

[ 13 ] The Maurists contributed to historical and critical analysis of texts, and Jean Mabilon is considered the father of palaeography and diplomatics .

[ 13 ] Basic principles of codicology were formulated in 1739 by Maurist monk Bernard de Montfaucon .

[ 14 ] [ better source needed ] In 1819, Heinrich Stein established the Gesellschaft für ältere deutsche Geschichtskunde, which published Monumenta Germaniae Historica and studies on medieval codices.

[ 13 ] In 1821, the École Nationale des Chartes was established, and one of the most active manuscript researchers was Leopold Delisle .

[ 15 ] In 1825, the librarian Adolph Ebert published a monograph on diplomatics, epigraphy and what he called Bücherhandschrifftenkunde - "the science of internal and external features of manuscripts". In 1909, the philologist Ludwig Traube makes a distinction between paleography and Handschrifftenkunde . To Traube, paleography deals with deciphering writing, interpreting abbreviations and finding textual errors, as well as dating and locating the manuscript.

Handschrifftenkunde studies the material elements of the codex, its preparation, and writings not part of the text itself, like annotations.

[ 16 ] However, the general tradition up until the 20th century viewed palaeography as not only encompassing the script, but everything used to date the manuscript.

[ 3 ] : 4 Victor Gardthausen in his "Greek Palaeography" divided palaeography into Buchwesen (the structure of the book) and Schriftwesen (the structure of writing).

[ 5 ] [ 17 ] Up to the early 1930s, the study of manuscripts had also been linked to literary history and philology.

[ 3 ] : 4 Codicology has been studied in a coherent fashion since the late 19th century.

[ 10 ] Charles Samaran proposed the term codicography in 1934, which he understood as parallel to bibliography, the study of printed books; making manuscript science separate from philology. The term codicology was coined by Alphonse Dain in his 1949 book Les manuscrits to mean the study of manuscripts' external features – history, collections, catalogs – as he also understood the study of material aspects and internal features to belong to palaeography.

[ 5 ] [ 3 ] : 5 Archaeological turn [ edit ] Over time, the meaning morphed to the study of the codex as an archeological object; equivalent to Buchwesen .

[ 5 ] [ 17 ] François Masai adopted the term codicology and published an article in Scriptorium in 1950 in which he advocates its independence from palaeography. He viewed codicology as related to diplomatics and within the sphere of archaeology . He did not consider codicology a historical discipline, so this separated it from the history of the book and cultural history.

[ 3 ] : 3–5 Léon Delaissé preferred to use Masai's "archaeology of the book".

[ 3 ] : 5 Léon Gilissen's "Prolegomènes à la codicologie" is considered by many to be the foundation of a genuine archaeology of the book. In the first two essays of the book, he studied a "site" of twenty parchment manuscripts, and by analysing the composition of quires, concluded that a quire is not an accidental grouping of bifolia cut separately, but the result of folding skin according to precise rules. The method paved the way for more detailed understanding of medieval book production, both preparation and execution.

[ 3 ] : 5 Marilena Maniaci in "Archeologia del manoscritto" conceptualises codicology in the same way.

[ 3 ] : 6 Broader approach [ edit ] Since the 1970s, various codicologists have claimed that codicology should be concerned with the history, usage and reception of a manuscript as a cultural and textual object.

[ 3 ] : 6 Maria Luisa Agati in "Il libro manoscritto da Oriente a Occidente" includes palaeographical features, decoration, and the history of libraries in her study.

[ 3 ] : 7 Quantitative codicology [ edit ] Carla Bozzolo and Ezio Ornato in their 1980 book "Pour une histoire du livre manuscript au Moyen Age" object to the then usual view of the study of manuscripts as a tool for accessing intellectual history or studying illuminated manuscripts as art objects . They advocate for the study of the plenty of ordinary manuscripts, by the archaeological method, with the objective of answering questions that go beyond a particular manuscript.

[ 3 ] : 8 Ornato articulates how the study of the inner features is inseparable from the exterior features of a manuscript. The quantitative method can therefore provide an idea of the economy and culture of manuscript production at a particular time or place or a longer period, relating it to the history of the book. Ornato and his school of followers thus consider codicology an independent and autonomous historical discipline, not subservient to any specialisation. However, his understanding of codicology is not lato sensu, but statistical- the selection of materials, fabrication of quires, number of volumes, prices, work invested, circulation - drawn from a group of manuscripts by time, place, type, etc. Malachi Beit-Arie first used databases in codicology for Hebrew codices.

[ 3 ] : 9–10 Comparative codicology [ edit ] The progress in quantitative analysis of Latin, Hebrew, Byzantine and Arabic codices prompted research into whether technological practices were shared. This led to comparative codicology, a concept that takes its methodology from the comparative method . It was particularly inspired by linguistics and the possibility of a universal 'grammar' of the codex. The method was used early on in Hebrew codicology, as Hebrew manuscripts are considered intercultural via reflecting the manuscript culture of the dominant culture in which Jewish communities lived. In the 21st century, along with quantitative codicology, it is the most widespread methodology.

[ 3 ] : 11–13 Structural codicology [ edit ] Starting in the late 1980s, some scholars borrowed ideas from structuralist linguistics and studied the codex as a structure with " morphological " and " syntactic " dimensions, treating its constituent components and their relationships respectively. A "genetic" aspect is also present as it tries to reconstruct the origin of the components and their production. Gumbert and other scholars formulated a syntax to identify codicological units and caesuras (discontinuities or boundaries) of a manuscript, formed by one or more quires, and their stages of production and interrelationships. This method faces difficulties due to manuscripts experiencing changes over their lifetime, due to losses, removals, and additions of text.

[ 3 ] : 13–14 Islamic codicology [ edit ] While medieval authors may have practised rudimentary codicology, interest in the study of Arabic manuscripts in the West started in the late 18th century. The greatest impetus was given with the first World of Islam Festival in London, in 1976, followed by a colloquium on Islamic codicology and palaeography in Istanbul in 1986. From then on, a number of conferences, exhibitions, catalogues, and specialized periodicals appeared.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Auxiliary sciences of history Fragmentology (manuscripts) Manuscriptology Textual scholarship Bodleian Library , Oxford, catalogue, collections similar to the British Library.

British Library , several huge collections, e.g.

Harleian Collection (also via Catalogue of medieval and Renaissance manuscripts). The known Anglo-Saxon works like Beowulf or Lindisfarne Gospel ( Book of Lindisfarne ).

Library of Congress , Washington D.C., huge catalogue of manuscript collections.

References [ edit ] ^ "codicology" .

Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ a b c Ward, Gerald (2008). "Codicology".

The Grove Encyclopedia of Materials and Techniques in Art .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195313918 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q del Barco, Javier (2017). "From the Archaeological Turn to 'Codicologie Structurale': The Concept of Codicology and the Material Description of Hebrew Manuscripts". In Wandrey, Irina (ed.).

Jewish Manuscript Cultures: New Perspectives .

^ a b Beal, Peter (2008). "codicology".

A Dictionary of English Manuscript Terminology 1450–2000 .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780199576128 .

^ a b c d e f g h i McCormick, Michael; Gamillscheg, Ernst (1991). "Codicology". In Kazhdan, Alexander P. (ed.).

The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195046526 .

^ a b c d e f g Pearsal, Derek (2010). "Codicology". In Suarez, Michael; Woudhuysen, H. R. (eds.).

The Oxford Companion to the Book .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780198606536 .

^ a b c d Hourihane, Colum P., ed. (2013). "Codicology".

The Grove Encyclopedia of Medieval Art and Architecture .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195395365 .

^ Gamillscheg, Ernst; Ševčenko, Ihor (1991). "Quire". In Kazhdan, Alexander P. (ed.).

The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195046526 .

^ Kazhdan, Alexander P., ed. (1991). "Ruling Patterns".

The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195046526 .

^ a b Hunter, Timothy (2001). "Codicology". In Brigstocke, Hugh (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Western Art .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780198662037 .

^ Smith, Margaret M. (2010). "Catchword". In Suarez, Michael; Woudhuysen, H. R. (eds.).

The Oxford Companion to the Book .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780198606536 .

^ Żbikowska-Migoń, Anna; Skalska-Zlat, Marta, eds. (2017).

Encyklopedia książki. T. 2, K-Z . p. 63.

ISBN 978-83-229-3543-9 .

^ a b c d Żbikowska-Migoń, Anna; Skalska-Zlat, Marta, eds. (2017).

Encyklopedia książki. T. 2, K-Z . p. 64.

ISBN 978-83-229-3543-9 .

^ "Понятие кодикологии. Die Handschriftenkunden, das Buchwesen, codigrafia, "archelogia dei libri". Альфонс Дэн и Шарль Самаран о предмете кодикологии. Дени Мюзерей и его «Словарь кодикологии». Хронологическая определенность кодикологии" .

myfilology.ru . Archived from the original on 12 November 2018.

^ Żbikowska-Migoń, Anna; Skalska-Zlat, Marta, eds. (2017).

Encyklopedia książki. T. 2, K-Z . pp.

64– 65.

ISBN 978-83-229-3543-9 .

^ Betancourt-Serna, Fernando (1996). "Historia y concepto del neologismo codicología".

El libro anónimo "DE INTERDICTIS" Codex Vaticanus Latinus número 5766 . Universidad de Sevilla.

ISBN 978-84-472-0369-7 .

^ a b Gamillscheg, Ernst; Ševčenko, Ihor (1991). "Palaeography". In Kazhdan, Alexander P. (ed.).

The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195046526 .

^ Gacek, Adam (2010). "codicology, Muslim". In Suarez, Michael; Woudhuysen, H. R. (eds.).

The Oxford Companion to the Book .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780198606536 .

Further reading [ edit ] General [ edit ] Devreesse, Robert (1954).

Introduction a l'etude des manuscrits grecs .

Dain, Alphonse (1964).

Les manuscrits (2nd ed.).

Delaissé, L. M. J. (1967). "Towards a History of the Medieval Book".

Divinitas .

11 : 423– 36.

Parkes, M. B. (1976). "The Influence of the Concepts of Ordinatio and Compilatio on the Development of the Book". In Alexander, J. J. G.; Gibson, M. T. (eds.).

Medieval Learning and Literature .

Gruys, A. (1976).

Codicologica . Vol. 1. E. J. Brill.

Gruys, A. (1976).

Codicologica . Vol. 2. E. J. Brill.

Gruys, A. (1980).

Codicologica . Vol. 3, 5. E. J. Brill.

Gilissen, Leon (1977).

Prolegomenes a la codicologie: recherches sur la construction des cahiers et la mise en page des manuscrits medievaux .

Harlfinger, Dieter (1980).

Griechische Kodikologie und Textueberlieferung .

Bezzolo, C.; Ornato, E. (1980).

Pour une histoire du livre manuscript au Moyen Age .

Boyle, L. E. (1984).

Medieval Latin Palaeography: A Bibliographical Introduction .

Shailor, B. (1988).

The Medieval Book .

Lemaire, J. (1989).

Introduction à la codicologie .

Owen, D. D. R.; Monks, P. R.; Sinclair, Keith Val (1994).

Medieval Codicology, Iconography, Literature and Translation: Studies for Keith Val Sinclair .

Robinson, P.; Zim, R. (1997).

Of the Making of Books: Medieval Manuscripts, their Scribes and Readers: Essays Presented to M. B. Parkes .

Палеография и кодикология. 300 лет после Монфокона: Мат-лы междунар. науч. конференции . Institute of General History of the Russian Academy of Sciences. 2000.

Maniaci, Marilena (2002).

Archeologia del manoscritto: metodi, problemi, bibliografia recente .

Clemens, R.; Graham, T. (2007).

Introduction to Manuscript Studies .

Bobichon, Phillipe (2008).

"Le lexicon : Mise en page et mise en texte des manuscrits hébreux, grecs, latins, romans et arabes" .

Paris, Aedilis .

Agati, Maria Luisa (2009).

Il libro manoscritto da Oriente a Occidente. Per una codicologia comparata .

Столярова, Л. В.; Каштанов, С. М. (2010). "Кодикология — наука о рукописных книгах".

Книга в Древней Руси (XI—XVI вв.) (PDF) . University of Dmitry Pozharsky.

Kluge, Mathias (2014).

Handschriften des Mittelalters: Grundwissen Kodikologie und Paläographie . Thorbecke.

ISBN 978-3-7995-0577-2 .

Kodikologie und Paläographie im digitalen Zeitalter . Writings of the Institut für Dokumentologie und Editorik . Vol. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2009–2017.

Reference works [ edit ] Loeffler, Karl; Kirchner, Joachim, eds. (1935–1937).

Lexikon des gesamten Buchwesens . Vol. 1, 2, 3.

Kirchner, Joachim, ed. (1952–1956).

Lexikon des Buchwesens . Vol. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Nordisk Leksikon for Bogvaesen . Vol. 1, 2. 1949–1962.

Milkau, Fritz; Leyh, Georg, eds. (1950–1965).

Handbuch der Bibliothekswissenschaft . Vol. 1, 2, 3.

Hunger, Herbert; Langosch, Karl, eds. (1961–1964).

Geschichte der Textueberlieferung der antiken und mittelalterlichen Literatur . Vol. 1, 2.

Muzerelle, Denis (1985).

Vocabulaire codicologique: repertoire methodique des termes francais relatifs aux manuscrits .

van Hook, John (1992). "The Indexes to Current Work on the History of the Book: A Review Article".

Analytical and Enumerative Bibliography .

6 .

Corsten, Severin, ed. (1995).

Lexikon des Gesamten Buchwesens: LGB .

ISBN 3-7772-8527-7 .

Maniaci, Marilena (1996).

Terminologia del libro manoscritto (PDF) .

Rautenberg, Ursula, ed. (2003).

Reclams Sachlexikon des Buches (2nd ed.). Reclam.

ISBN 3-15-010542-0 .

Historical [ edit ] de Montfaucon, Bernard (1739).

Bibliotheca bibliothecarum manuscriptorum nova .

Birt, Theodor (1896).

Das antike Buchwesen . W. Hertz.

Gardthausen, Viktor Emil (1911).

Griechische palaeographie . Vol. 1.

Arnswaldt, Werner (1925).

Handschriftenkunde für Familienforscher .

Western European codices [ edit ] Gumbert, J. P. (1989).

The Dutch and Their Books in the Manuscript Age .

Friedman, J. B. (1995).

Northern English Books, Owners, and Makers in the Late Middle Ages .

Byzantine codices [ edit ] Slavic codices [ edit ] Güntherová, A.; Mišianik, J. (1961).

Stredoveká knižná maľba na Slovensku .

Дубровіна, Л. А.; Гальченко, О. М. (1992).

Кодикографія української та східнослов'янської рукописної книги і кодикологічна модель структури формалізованого опису рукопису . Institute of Ukrainian Archeography.

Джурова, Аксиния (1997).

Въведение в славянската кодикология. Византийският кодекс и рецепцията му сред славяните .

Фрис, В. (2003).

Історія кириличної рукописної книги в Україні .

Hebrew codices [ edit ] Posner, Raphael; Ta-Shema, Israel (1975).

The Hebrew book: An historical survey . Leon Amiel.

ISBN 9780814805978 .

Beit-Arie, Malachi (1976).

Hebrew codicology: tentative typology of technical practices employed in Hebrew dated medieval manuscripts . Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities.

ISBN 9789652080295 .

Beit-Arié, Malachi (1993).

The Makings of the Medieval Hebrew Book: Studies in Palaeography and Codicology . Magnes Press, Hebrew University.

ISBN 9789652238047 .

Arabic codices [ edit ] Pedersen, Johannes (1984).

The Arabic Book .

The codicology of Islamic manuscripts : proceedings of the second conference of Al-Furqān Islamic Heritage Foundation . Al-Furqān Islamic Heritage Foundation. 1993.

ISBN 978-1-873992-15-9 .

Déroche, F. (2006).

Islamic Codicology .

Gacek, A. (2001–2008).

The Arabic Manuscript Tradition . Vol. 1, 2.

ISBN 9789004120617 .

Gacek, A. (2009).

The Arabic Manuscripts: A Vademecum for Readers . Brill.

Ethiopian codices [ edit ] Asian codices [ edit ] Saktimulya, Sri Ratna (2016).

Naskah-Naskah Skriptorium Pakualaman: Periode Paku Alam II (1830-1858) (Thesis). Universitas Gadjah Mada.

Specific codex texts [ edit ] Doyle, A. I.; Parkes, M. B. (1978). "The Production of Copies of the Canterbury Tales and the Confessio Amantis in the Early Fifteenth Century". In Parkes, M. B.; Watson, A. G. (eds.).

Medieval Scribes, Manuscripts and Libraries .

J. Muir, Bernard (1992).

The Exeter Book: A Bibliography . Exeter Medieval English Texts and Studies.

Gameson, R., ed. (1994).

The Early Medieval Bible: Its Production, Decoration, and Use . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521445405 .

Amblard, P. (2008).

Un pélerinage intérieur .

Parchment [ edit ] Reed, Ronald (1972).

Ancient Skins, Parchments and Leathers . Seminar Press.

ISBN 9780129035503 .

Reed, Ronald (1975).

The Nature and Making of Parchment .

Ruck, Peter (1991).

Pergament: Geschichte-Struktur-Restaurierung-Herstellung .

Ink [ edit ] Carvalho, David N. (1904).

Forty Centuries of Ink .

Thompson, Daniel V. (1936).

The Materials and Techniques of Medieval Painting . New York, Dover Publications.

ISBN 9780486203270 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Bat-Yehouda, Monique Zerdoun (1983).

Les encres noires au moyen age .

Illustration [ edit ] Randall, Lilian M. C. (1966).

Images in the Margins of Gothic Manuscripts .

Diringer, David (1967).

The Illuminated Book, Its History and Production (Revised ed.).

Weitzmann, Kurt (1970).

Illustrations in roll and Codes. A Study of the Origin and Method of Text Illustration (2nd ed.).

Bookbinding [ edit ] Szirmai, János Alexander (1999).

The archaeology of medieval bookbinding .

External links [ edit ] Encyclopedia of the History of Ukraine article on codicology in Ukrainian Scriptorium - journal of codicology Diplomatics and codicology website with resources [ usurped ] in Spanish Auxiliary science of history codicology in German 'Ktiv' - The International Collection of Digitized Hebrew Manuscripts, A catalog of about 400,000 Hebrew manuscripts, of which about 100,000 are digitized.

'Marburger Repertorium of German manuscripts in the 13th and 14th century, Philipps-Universität Marburg (descriptive catalog) (not included are solitary documents and minimal inscriptions in Latin Manuscripts).

Department for Special Collections , University Library of Graz , Online-Catalogue with over 2.000 registered manuscripts partially already (2011) with detailed palaeografic descriptions and digitally complete versions.

Hill Museum & Manuscript Library in Collegeville, Minnesota, 90,000 manuscripts from Austria and Spain.

The Digital Walters , The Walters Art Museum in Baltimore , Maryland. Over 900 illuminated manuscripts and 1250 incunables .

Medieval and Renaissance Manuscripts, 12th–17th centuries, Center for Digital Initiatives, University of Vermont Libraries v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Codicology&oldid=1279527725 " Categories : Codicology Writing Manuscripts Art history Palaeography Textual criticism Textual scholarship Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2021 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2022 CS1: long volume value CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 9 March 2025, at 02:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Codicology 27 languages Add topic

