Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical development Toggle Historical development subsection 1.1 First-wave 1.2 Second-wave feminism 1.3 In contemporary Israeli society 1.3.1 Arab Israeli feminism 1.3.2 Mizrachi feminism 1.3.3 Orthodox and Haredi feminism 2 Legislative responses 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Feminism in Israel 3 languages বাংলা فارسی עברית Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the development of the feminist movement in Israel. For articles on Israeli women in general, see Women in Israel . For the general topic of Jewish feminism, see Jewish feminism .

Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Part of a series of articles on Jewish feminism Advocates List of Jewish feminists Groups Bat Shalom Center for Women's Justice Mizrahi feminism National Council of Jewish Women Orthodox feminism Shira Hadasha Women of the Wall Orthodox Jewish feminism JOFA Kolech Partnership minyan Chochmat Nashim Political activism Lo Nivcharot, Lo Bocharot U'Bizchutan Issues Abortion Birth control Feminism In Israel In Judaism Marriage and Divorce Niddah ( menstruation ) Mikveh ( ritual immersion ) Adultery Get ( divorce document ) Agunah ( "chained" marriages ) Minyan ( synagogue services ) Partnership minyan Mitzvah Ordination Yoatzot ( Advisors of Jewish Law ) Sexuality Tzniut ( modesty ) Negiah ( physical contact ) Yichud ( isolation ) Lesbian v t e Feminism in Israel is a complex issue in contemporary Israeli society due to the varied demographic makeup of the country and the country's particular balance of religion and state issues.

[ 1 ] For secular Israeli women , the successive campaigns for women's rights and equality reflect a similar timeline and progression as Western democracies. For Israeli Arabs , however, the issue of feminism is strongly linked to Palestinian causes. And for Orthodox Jews , selected women's rights and women's representation in the Israeli Parliament are recently debated issues.

Historical development [ edit ] First-wave [ edit ] The manifestations of first-wave feminism in Israel began before statehood, during the Yishuv period. These early campaigns were rooted in the ideology of Israeli socialism . A feature of this era is the women who sought to be treated as equals, chiefly in the areas of agricultural labor in the kibbutzim and within the workers' parties.

[ 2 ] While the first wave of Israeli feminism didn't reach its peak until the 1920s, efforts such as those made in the Revolution of 1886, in which local women worked to gain suffrage in Yishuv institutions are said to have ignited the rise of feminism in the area.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] It was not until 1927 that women gained the right to vote in Jewish communities and the ability to be elected and serve in the local government.

[ 4 ] Second-wave feminism [ edit ] Second-wave feminism took somewhat longer to manifest in Israel. Questions concerning the need for a new women's rights movement began in the early 1970s, and in 1972, Israel's first radical women's movement was established. Notable events during that era include the establishment of the Ratz political party ("Movement for Civil Rights and Peace") which won four seats in the 1973 Israeli legislative election .

[ 2 ] During this period, key early activists were American Jews living in Israel who organized consciousness-raising meetings in Israel's major cities.

[ 5 ] In contemporary Israeli society [ edit ] In 2018, 30,000 women protesters gather in Tel Aviv to respond to the issue of domestic violence .

[ 6 ] Arab Israeli feminism [ edit ] Further information: Islamic feminism Arab Israeli feminism emerged following Israel's second-wave feminism, criticizing the dominant discourse as ignoring the double discrimination experienced by the Palestinians of Israel , and demanded their path to emancipation. Their initial actions concerned work, education, domestic violence. The general stance of Israeli Arab feminists is anti-colonial and sympathetic to Palestinian nationalism , however, no feminist “movement” has been constituted due to internal organizational fragmentation.

[ 7 ] In Arab feminist literature, a common theme of discrimination concerns the childhood experiences of boys and girls in the family.

[ 8 ] Writings on this trend of feminism tend to neglect the impact on the Israeli Druze community.

[ 9 ] Mizrachi feminism [ edit ] Main article: Mizrahi feminism As feminism in Israeli society developed, a distinction began to form between Ashkenazi (Jews of European origin) and Mizrachi (Jews of Middle Eastern origin) forms of feminism. A rift formed along ethnic lines, as Mizrachi activists felt excluded and marginalized from mainstream women's movements. The First Mizrahi Feminist Annual Conference was held in 1995, representing the formal recognition of Mizrachi feminism in Israel.

[ 10 ] Orthodox and Haredi feminism [ edit ] Main article: Orthodox Jewish feminism In 1981, Chana Safrai [ he ] חנה ספראי , established the first institution for advanced study of Talmud by women, where such illustrious teachers as Dr.

Nehama Leibowitz and Rabbi Dr.

Binyamin Lau were among the faculty.

[ 11 ] Following the opening of this school, higher Torah learning institutions for women proliferated in Israel over the next four decades.

[ 11 ] In 1982 a halakhic study was published highlighting that it was appropriate for religious women to serve in the IDF.

[ 12 ] In 2002 Aluma was established, which assists religious girls to attain meaningful service in the IDF.

[ 13 ] In 1987, a legal case was brought before the Supreme Court of Israel arguing that Leah Shakdiel [ he ] לאה שקדיאל must be allowed to serve on local religious councils. The case was brought after the Israeli Minister of Religious Affairs canceled Shakdiel's appointment to the religious affairs committee in Yeruham . After the court ruled in her favor, Leah Shakdiel became the first woman to serve on a religious council in Israel.

[ 14 ] In Haredi Jewish communities, one of the first substantive attempts by religious women to organize along political lines was the establishment of the Lo Nivcharot, Lo Bocharot ("not elected, no vote") in 2012 which campaigned for the Haredi political parties to allow women to join the party.

[ 15 ] A subsequent initiative was the establishment of the political party U'Bizchutan organized by Haredi women.

[ 16 ] A major issue prompting efforts for Orthodox women's rights is the issue of agunot , women whose husbands refuse to divorce under Jewish law .

[ 17 ] Haredi feminism is still a slowly emerging trend but it is distinct from modern Orthodox approaches. Modern Orthodox and Religious Zionist efforts include issues relating to religious law such as the question of women's prayer groups and access to public rituals such as dancing with the Torah scroll on Simchat Torah . By contrast, Haredi feminism has been concerned with the political sphere and does not address restrictions in religious ritual areas.

[ 18 ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Feminism in Israel .

Legislative responses [ edit ] The Israeli government marks International Women's Day , as marked by the United Nations and other countries around the world, to commemorates the struggle for women's equality under the law. The Knesset has established a Committee on the Status of Women and Gender Equality which is responsible for promoting the status of women in social, economic, and political affairs, and addressing gender-based discrimination in Israeli society.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Women in Israel Jewish feminism References [ edit ] ^ "Feminism in Israel | Women in Israel – a revolution halted?" .

Fathom . Retrieved 2020-09-20 .

^ a b "Feminism in Contemporary Israel | Jewish Women's Archive" .

jwa.org . Retrieved 2019-03-17 .

^ "Politics in the Yishuv and Israel" .

Jewish Women's Archive . Retrieved 2020-09-20 .

^ a b Yaron, Joanne (2011).

"The Rise of Feminism in Israel" .

Palestine-Israel Journal of Politics, Economics & Culture . Archived from the original on September 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 31, 2021 .

^ Feldman, Y. S. (2000). From" The Madwoman in the Attic" to" The Women's Room": The American Roots of Israeli Feminism.

Israel Studies , 5(1), 266-286.

^ Lanzkron, Naomi; staff, T. O. I.

"At Tel Aviv rally, 30,000 protest rising violence against women" .

www.timesofisrael.com . Retrieved 2020-09-20 .

^ Marteu, É. (2012). Israeli and Palestinian feminisms: Postcolonial issues.

Revue Tiers Monde , (1), 71-88.

^ Levy, N. W. (2009). “… but it has its price”: Cycles of alienation and exclusion among pioneering Druze women.

International Journal of Educational Development , 29(1), 46-55.

^ Booth, M. (2011). Nazira Zeineddine: A Pioneer of Islamic Feminism, by Miriam Cooke.

^ Dahan-Kalev, H. (2001, November). Tensions in israeli feminism: The mizrahi ashkenazi rift. In Women's Studies International Forum (Vol. 24, No. 6, pp. 669-684). Pergamon.

^ a b See "History of Ne'emanei Torah Va'Avoda:About Us" in Hebrew http://p23291-286-12237.s286.upress.link/% [ permanent dead link ] ^ "The Enlistment of Women to Serve in Sherut Leumi and the IDF: A Halakhic Analysis," ed. Cohen, Yechezkel. (NTA:1982). See NTA website for additional conversation on the subject.

https://toravoda.org.il/ ^ "Serving with Faith | אלומה" .

aluma.org.il . Retrieved 2020-09-20 .

^ "Shakdiel v. Minister of Religious Affairs | Cardozo Israeli Supreme Court Project" .

versa.cardozo.yu.edu . Retrieved 2020-09-20 .

^ Nathan Jeffay, "Israeli elections: Charedi women refuse to vote", The Jewish Chronicle, 10 January 2013.

^ Miriam Krule (21 January 2015).

"Ultra-Orthodox Women in Israel Launch Their Own Political Party" . Slate . Retrieved 18 June 2015 .

^ Zion-Waldoks, T. (2015). Politics of devoted resistance: Agency, feminism, and religion among Orthodox Agunah activists in Israel.

Gender & Society , 29(1), 73-97.

^ Ross, T. (2016). Radical Feminism and a Theology of Jewish Autonomy: An Anatomy of Unexpected Alliances.

Jewish Studies Quarterly , 23(4), 374.

^ "Lexicon of Terms|International Women's Day" .

www.knesset.gov.il . Retrieved 2020-09-20 .

v t e Israel articles History Antiquity Second Temple period Middle Ages Ottoman Syria Old Yishuv Zionism Yishuv British mandate Independence Arab–Israeli conflict Israeli–Palestinian conflict Peace process Iran–Israel proxy conflict Iran–Israel war Timeline by year Geography Borders Cities Districts Lakes Dead Sea Sea of Galilee Land of Israel National parks and nature reserves Rivers Jordan River Wildlife Politics Cabinet Prime Minister Elections Foreign relations Knesset Parties Law Basic Laws Judiciary President System of government Security Censorship Civil defense Intelligence Community Aman Mossad Shin Bet Israel Defense Forces Conscription Structure Police Border Police National Guard Wars West Bank barrier Economy Agriculture Banking Companies Diamond industry Energy Science and technology Taxation Tel Aviv Stock Exchange Tourism Transport Water supply and sanitation Society Crime Demographics Aliyah People Education Health Healthcare Human rights LGBT Kibbutz Languages Hebrew Arabic Racism Religion Standard of living Women Feminism Culture Archaeology Architecture Cinema Cuisine Literature Media Museums Music National symbols Flag Emblem Anthem Colours Public holidays Sport Visual arts World Heritage Sites Outline Index Category Portal v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminism_in_Israel&oldid=1305165890 " Categories : Feminism in Israel Culture of Israel Feminism in the Middle East Jewish feminism Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 12:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminism in Israel 3 languages Add topic

