Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient philosophies 1.2 Jainism 1.3 Medieval 1.4 Early modern 1.5 19th century 1.6 20th century 2 Emergentism 3 Mesmerism 4 Medical philosophies 5 Criticism 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Vitalism 48 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar Malagasy मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief about living organisms This article is about the non-mechanist philosophy. For the Jain philosophical concept, see Vitalism (Jainism) . For other uses, see Vital (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Alternative medicine General information Alternative medicine History Terminology Alternative veterinary medicine Quackery (health fraud) Rise of modern medicine Pseudoscience Antiscience Skepticism Scientific Therapeutic nihilism Fringe medicine and science Acupressure Acupuncture Alkaline diet Anthroposophic medicine Apitherapy Applied kinesiology Aromatherapy Association for Research and Enlightenment Auriculotherapy Bates method Biological terrain assessment Black salve Bodywork Bone-setting Bowen technique Breathwork Fake COVID-19 treatments Camel urine Cancer treatments Charcoal cleanse Chiropractic Chiropractic treatment techniques Vertebral subluxation Christian Science Chromotherapy Colloidal silver Colon cleansing Coffee enema Colorpuncture Conversion therapy Craniosacral therapy Crystal healing Cupping therapy Dental amalgam controversy Detoxification Foot detox Dry needling Ear candling Energy medicine Correactology Esoteric energy Reiki Therapeutic touch Estrogen dominance Fabunan Antiviral Injection Facilitated communication FasciaBlaster Feldenkrais method Functional medicine Hair analysis Holistic dentistry Hologram bracelet Homeopathy Bach flower remedies Hydrotherapy Hypnotherapy Ionized jewelry Iridology Jilly Juice Lightning Process Lymphotherapy Magnet therapy Manual therapy Manual lymphatic drainage Medical intuitive Megavitamin therapy Mesmerism Mind–body interventions MMS Myofascial release NAET Naturopathy Oil pulling Orgone Orthomolecular medicine Orthopathy Osteomyology Osteopathy Ozone therapy Parapsychology Phrenology Postural Integration Psychic surgery Psychodermatology Quantum healing Radionics Rapid prompting method Reflexology RBOP Rolfing Scientific racism ThetaHealing Thomsonianism Thought Field Therapy Urophagia Vaginal steaming Vegetotherapy Vision therapy Vitalism Young blood transfusion Zero balancing Controversies Big Pharma conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism OPV AIDS hypothesis Anti-vaccinationism Vaccine misinformation Vaccines and autism MMR vaccine and autism in chiropractic Water fluoridation controversy COVID-19 misinformation Turbo cancer Classifications Alternative medical systems Mind–body intervention Biologically based therapy Manipulative methods Energy therapy Traditional medicine African Muti Southern Africa Ayurveda Dosha MVAH Balneotherapy Brazilian Bush medicine Cambodian Chinese Blood stasis Chinese herbology Dit da Gua sha Gill plate trade Long gu Meridian Moxibustion Pressure point Qi San Jiao Tui na Zang-fu Chumash Curandero Faith healing Herbal medicine Hilot Iranian Jamu Kayakalpa Kambo Japanese Korean Maya Mien Shiang Mongolian Naftalan oil Prophetic medicine Shamanism Shiatsu Siddha Sri Lankan Thai massage Tibetan Unani Vietnamese Alternative diagnoses Adrenal fatigue Aerotoxic syndrome Candida hypersensitivity Chronic Lyme disease Electromagnetic hypersensitivity Heavy legs Leaky gut syndrome Multiple chemical sensitivity Vertebral subluxation Wilson's temperature syndrome v t e Vitalism is an idea that living organisms are differentiated from the non-living by the presence of forces, properties or powers including those which may not be physical  or chemical. Varied forms of vitalist theories were held in former times and they are now considered pseudoscientific concepts.

[ 1 ] [ a ] Where vitalism explicitly invokes a vital principle, that element is often referred to as the "vital spark", "energy", " élan vital " (coined by vitalist Henri Bergson ), "vital force", or " vis vitalis ", which some equate with the soul . In the 18th and 19th centuries, vitalism was discussed among biologists , between those belonging to the mechanistic school who felt that the known mechanics of physics would eventually explain the difference between life and non-life and vitalists who argued that the processes of life could not be reduced to a mechanistic process. Vitalist biologists such as Johannes Reinke proposed testable hypotheses meant to show inadequacies with mechanistic explanations, but their experiments failed to provide support for vitalism. Biologists now consider vitalism in this sense to have been refuted by empirical evidence , and hence regard it either as a superseded scientific theory , [ 4 ] or as a pseudoscience since the mid-20th century.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Vitalism has a long history in medical philosophies: many traditional healing practices posited that disease results from some imbalance in vital forces.

History [ edit ] Ancient philosophies [ edit ] The notion that bodily functions are due to a vitalistic principle existing in all living creatures has roots going back at least to ancient Egypt .

[ 7 ] In Greek philosophy , the Milesian school proposed natural explanations deduced from materialism and mechanism . However, by the time of Lucretius , this account was supplemented, (for example, by the unpredictable clinamen of Epicurus ), and in Stoic physics , the pneuma assumed the role of logos .

Galen believed the lungs draw pneuma from the air, which the blood communicates throughout the body.

[ 8 ] Jainism [ edit ] Main article: Vitalism (Jainism) Vitalism is an aspect of Jain philosophy . The Tattvarthsutra by Umaswati states that the universe is made up of six eternal substances: sentient beings or souls ( jīva ), non-sentient substance or matter ( pudgala ), principle of motion ( dharma ), the principle of rest ( adharma ), space ( ākāśa ) and time ( kāla ).

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The Sarvārthasiddhi by Pujyapada further divides the Jiva into the amount of  vitalities of the sense possessed.

[ 11 ] Medieval [ edit ] In Europe, medieval physics was influenced by the idea of pneuma , helping to shape later aether theories .

Early modern [ edit ] Vitalists included English anatomist Francis Glisson (1597–1677) and the Italian doctor Marcello Malpighi (1628–1694).

[ 12 ] Caspar Friedrich Wolff (1733–1794) is considered to be the father of epigenesis in embryology , that is, he marks the point when embryonic development began to be described in terms of the proliferation of cells rather than the incarnation of a preformed soul. However, this degree of empirical observation was not matched by a mechanistic philosophy: in his Theoria Generationis (1759), he tried to explain the emergence of the organism by the actions of a vis essentialis (an organizing, formative force).

Carl Reichenbach (1788–1869) later developed the theory of Odic force , a form of life-energy that permeates living things.

In the 17th century, modern science responded to Newton 's action at a distance and the mechanism of Cartesian dualism with vitalist theories: that whereas the chemical transformations undergone by non-living substances are reversible, so-called "organic" matter is permanently altered by chemical transformations (such as cooking).

[ 13 ] As worded by Charles Birch and John B. Cobb , "the claims of the vitalists came to the fore again" in the 18th century: [ 12 ] " Georg Ernst Stahl 's followers were active as were others, such as the physician genius Francis Xavier Bichat of the Hotel Dieu." [ 12 ] However, "Bichat moved from the tendency typical of the French vitalistic tradition to progressively free himself from metaphysics in order to combine with hypotheses and theories which accorded to the scientific criteria of physics and chemistry." [ 14 ] John Hunter recognised "a 'living principle' in addition to mechanics." [ 12 ] Johann Friedrich Blumenbach was influential in establishing epigenesis in the life sciences in 1781 with his publication of Über den Bildungstrieb und das Zeugungsgeschäfte . Blumenbach cut up freshwater Hydra and established that the removed parts would regenerate. He inferred the presence of a "formative drive" ( Bildungstrieb ) in living matter. But he pointed out that this name, like names applied to every other kind of vital power, of itself, explains nothing: it serves merely to designate a peculiar power formed by the combination of the mechanical principle with that which is susceptible of modification.

19th century [ edit ] Further information: Alternatives to Darwinism The synthesis of urea in the early 19th century from inorganic compounds was counterevidence for the vitalist hypothesis that only organisms could make the components of living things.

Jöns Jakob Berzelius , one of the early 19th century founders of modern chemistry , argued that a regulative force must exist within living matter to maintain its functions.

[ 13 ] Berzelius contended that compounds could be distinguished by whether they required any organisms in their synthesis ( organic compounds ) or whether they did not ( inorganic compounds ).

[ 15 ] Vitalist chemists predicted that organic materials could not be synthesized from inorganic components, but Friedrich Wöhler synthesised urea from inorganic components in 1828.

[ 16 ] However, contemporary accounts do not support the common belief that vitalism died when Wöhler made urea. This Wöhler Myth , as historian Peter Ramberg called it, originated from a popular history of chemistry published in 1931, which, "ignoring all pretense of historical accuracy, turned Wöhler into a crusader who made attempt after attempt to synthesize a natural product that would refute vitalism and lift the veil of ignorance, until 'one afternoon the miracle happened ' ".

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ b ] Between 1833 and 1844, Johannes Peter Müller wrote a book on physiology called Handbuch der Physiologie , which became the leading textbook in the field for much of the nineteenth century. The book showed Müller's commitments to vitalism; he questioned why organic matter differs from inorganic, then proceeded to chemical analyses of the blood and lymph. He describes in detail the circulatory, lymphatic, respiratory, digestive, endocrine, nervous, and sensory systems in a wide variety of animals but explains that the presence of a soul makes each organism an indivisible whole. He claimed that the behaviour of light and sound waves showed that living organisms possessed a life-energy for which physical laws could never fully account.

[ 19 ] Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) after his famous rebuttal of spontaneous generation , performed several experiments that he felt supported vitalism. According to Bechtel, Pasteur "fitted fermentation into a more general programme describing special reactions that only occur in living organisms. These are irreducibly vital phenomena." Rejecting the claims of Berzelius, Liebig , Traube and others that fermentation resulted from chemical agents or catalysts within cells, Pasteur concluded that fermentation was a "vital action".

[ 1 ] 20th century [ edit ] Hans Driesch (1867–1941) interpreted his experiments as showing that life is not run by physicochemical laws.

[ 5 ] His main argument was that when one cuts up an embryo after its first division or two, each part grows into a complete adult. Driesch's reputation as an experimental biologist deteriorated as a result of his vitalistic theories, which scientists have seen since his time as pseudoscience.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Vitalism is a superseded scientific hypothesis, and the term is sometimes used as a pejorative epithet .

[ 20 ] Ernst Mayr (1904–2005) wrote: It would be ahistorical to ridicule vitalists. When one reads the writings of one of the leading vitalists like Driesch one is forced to agree with him that many of the basic problems of biology simply cannot be solved by a philosophy as that of Descartes, in which the organism is simply considered a machine... The logic of the critique of the vitalists was impeccable.

[ 21 ] Vitalism has become so disreputable a belief in the last fifty years that no biologist alive today would want to be classified as a vitalist. Still, the remnants of vitalist thinking can be found in the work of Alistair Hardy , Sewall Wright , and Charles Birch , who seem to believe in some sort of nonmaterial principle in organisms.

[ 22 ] Other vitalists included Johannes Reinke and Oscar Hertwig . Reinke used the word neovitalism to describe his work, claiming that it would eventually be verified through experimentation, and that it was an improvement over the other vitalistic theories. The work of Reinke influenced Carl Jung .

[ 23 ] John Scott Haldane adopted an anti-mechanist approach to biology and an idealist philosophy early on in his career. Haldane saw his work as a vindication of his belief that teleology was an essential concept in biology. His views became widely known with his first book Mechanism, life and personality in 1913.

[ 24 ] Haldane borrowed arguments from the vitalists to use against mechanism; however, he was not a vitalist. Haldane treated the organism as fundamental to biology: "we perceive the organism as a self-regulating entity", "every effort to analyze it into components that can be reduced to a mechanical explanation violates this central experience".

[ 24 ] The work of Haldane was an influence on organicism . Haldane stated that a purely mechanist interpretation could not account for the characteristics of life. Haldane wrote a number of books in which he attempted to show the invalidity of both vitalism and mechanist approaches to science. Haldane explained: We must find a different theoretical basis of biology, based on the observation that all the phenomena concerned tend towards being so coordinated that they express what is normal for an adult organism.

— [ 25 ] By 1931, biologists had "almost unanimously abandoned vitalism as an acknowledged belief." [ 25 ] Emergentism [ edit ] Main article: Emergentism Contemporary science and engineering sometimes describe emergent processes , in which the properties of a system cannot be fully described in terms of the properties of the constituents.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] This may be because the properties of the constituents are not fully understood, or because the interactions between the individual constituents are important for the behavior of the system.

Whether emergence should be grouped with traditional vitalist concepts is a matter of semantic controversy.

[ c ] According to Emmeche et al.

(1997): [ 30 ] On the one hand, many scientists and philosophers regard emergence as having only a pseudo-scientific status. On the other hand, new developments in physics, biology, psychology, and cross-disciplinary fields such as cognitive science, artificial life, and the study of non-linear dynamical systems have focused strongly on the high level 'collective behaviour' of complex systems, which is often said to be truly emergent, and the term is increasingly used to characterize such systems.

Mesmerism [ edit ] Main article: Animal magnetism Franz Mesmer proposed the vitalist force of magnétisme animal in animals with breath.

A popular vitalist theory of the 18th century was " animal magnetism ", in the theories of Franz Mesmer (1734–1815). However, the use of the (conventional) English term animal magnetism to translate Mesmer's magnétisme animal can be misleading for three reasons: Mesmer chose his term to clearly distinguish his variant of magnetic force from those referred to, at that time, as mineral magnetism , cosmic magnetism and planetary magnetism .

Mesmer felt that this particular force/power only resided in the bodies of humans and animals.

Mesmer chose the word " animal ," for its root meaning (from Latin animus ="breath") specifically to identify his force as a quality that belonged to all creatures with breath; viz., the animate beings: humans and animals.

Mesmer's ideas became so influential that King Louis XVI of France appointed two commissions to investigate mesmerism ; one was led by Joseph-Ignace Guillotin , the other, led by Benjamin Franklin , included Bailly and Lavoisier . The commissioners learned about Mesmeric theory, and saw its patients fall into fits and trances . In Franklin's garden, a patient was led to each of five trees, one of which had been "mesmerized"; he hugged each in turn to receive the "vital fluid," but fainted at the foot of a 'wrong' one. At Lavoisier's house, four normal cups of water were held before a "sensitive" woman; the fourth produced convulsions, but she calmly swallowed the mesmerized contents of a fifth, believing it to be plain water. The commissioners concluded that "the fluid without imagination is powerless, whereas imagination without the fluid can produce the effects of the fluid." [ 31 ] Medical philosophies [ edit ] Vitalism has a long history in medical philosophies: many traditional healing practices posited that disease results from some imbalance in vital forces. One example of a similar notion in Africa is the Yoruba concept of ase . In the European tradition founded by Hippocrates , these vital forces were associated with the four temperaments and humours . Multiple Asian traditions posited an imbalance or blocking of qi or prana . Amongst unterritorialized traditions such as religions and arts, forms of vitalism continue to exist as philosophical positions or as memorial tenets.

[ citation needed ] Complementary and alternative medicine therapies include energy therapies , [ 32 ] associated with vitalism, especially biofield therapies such as therapeutic touch , Reiki , external qi , chakra healing and SHEN therapy.

[ 33 ] In these therapies, the " subtle energy " field of a patient is manipulated by a practitioner. The subtle energy is held to exist beyond the electromagnetic energy produced by the heart and brain. Beverly Rubik describes the biofield as a "complex, dynamic, extremely weak EM field within and around the human body...." [ 33 ] The founder of homeopathy , Samuel Hahnemann , promoted an immaterial, vitalistic view of disease: "...they are solely spirit-like (dynamic) derangements of the spirit-like power (the vital principle) that animates the human body." The view of disease as a dynamic disturbance of the immaterial and dynamic vital force is taught in many homeopathic colleges and constitutes a fundamental principle for many contemporary practising homeopaths.

[ citation needed ] Criticism [ edit ] The 17th century French playwright Molière mocked vitalism in his 1673 play Le Malade imaginaire .

Vitalism has sometimes been criticized as begging the question by inventing a name.

Molière had famously parodied this fallacy in Le Malade imaginaire , where a quack "answers" the question of "Why does opium cause sleep?" with "Because of its dormitive virtue (i.e., soporific power)." [ 34 ] Thomas Henry Huxley compared vitalism to stating that water is the way it is because of its "aquosity".

[ 35 ] His grandson Julian Huxley in 1926 compared "vital force" or élan vital to explaining a railroad locomotive's operation by its élan locomotif ("locomotive force").

Another criticism, which predates the fields of organic chemistry and developmental biology , is that vitalists have failed to rule out mechanistic explanations. In 1912, Jacques Loeb published The Mechanistic Conception of Life , in which he described experiments on how a sea urchin could have a pin for its father, as Bertrand Russell put it ( Religion and Science ). He offered this challenge: [ 36 ] : 5–6 ... we must either succeed in producing living matter artificially, or we must find the reasons why this is impossible.

Loeb addressed vitalism more explicitly: [ 36 ] : 14–15 It is, therefore, unwarranted to continue the statement that in addition to the acceleration of oxidations the beginning of individual life is determined by the entrance of a metaphysical "life principle" into the egg; and that death is determined, aside from the cessation of oxidations, by the departure of this "principle" from the body. In the case of the evaporation of water we are satisfied with the explanation given by the kinetic theory of gases and do not demand that to repeat a well-known jest of Huxley the disappearance of the "aquosity" be also taken into consideration.

Bechtel states that vitalism "is often viewed as unfalsifiable , and therefore a pernicious metaphysical doctrine." [ 1 ] For many scientists, "vitalist" theories were unsatisfactory "holding positions" on the pathway to mechanistic understanding. In 1967, Francis Crick , the co-discoverer of the structure of DNA , stated "And so to those of you who may be vitalists I would make this prophecy: what everyone believed yesterday, and you believe today, only cranks will believe tomorrow." [ 37 ] While many vitalistic theories have in fact been falsified, notably Mesmerism, the pseudoscientific retention of untested and untestable theories continues to this day.

Alan Sokal published an analysis of the wide acceptance among professional nurses of "scientific theories" of spiritual healing.

[ 38 ] Use of a technique called therapeutic touch was especially reviewed by Sokal, who concluded, "nearly all the pseudoscientific systems to be examined in this essay are based philosophically on vitalism" and added that "Mainstream science has rejected vitalism since at least the 1930s, for a plethora of good reasons that have only become stronger with time." [ 38 ] Joseph C. Keating, Jr.

[ 39 ] discusses vitalism's past and present roles in chiropractic and calls vitalism "a form of bio-theology ." He further explains that: [ 40 ] Vitalism is that rejected tradition in biology which proposes that life is sustained and explained by an unmeasurable, intelligent force or energy. The supposed effects of vitalism are the manifestations of life itself, which in turn are the basis for inferring the concept in the first place. This circular reasoning offers pseudo-explanation, and may deceive us into believing we have explained some aspect of biology when in fact we have only labeled our ignorance. 'Explaining an unknown (life) with an unknowable (Innate),' suggests chiropractor Joseph Donahue, 'is absurd'." Keating views vitalism as incompatible with scientific thinking: [ 40 ] Chiropractors are not unique in recognizing a tendency and capacity for self-repair and auto-regulation of human physiology. But we surely stick out like a sore thumb among professions which claim to be scientifically based by our unrelenting commitment to vitalism. So long as we propound the 'One cause, one cure' rhetoric of Innate, we should expect to be met by ridicule from the wider health science community. Chiropractors can't have it both ways. Our theories cannot be both dogmatically held vitalistic constructs and be scientific at the same time. The purposiveness, consciousness and rigidity of the Palmers' Innate should be rejected.

Keating also mentions Skinner's viewpoint: [ 40 ] Vitalism has many faces and has sprung up in many areas of scientific inquiry. Psychologist B.F. Skinner , for example, pointed out the irrationality of attributing behavior to mental states and traits. Such 'mental way stations,' he argued, amount to excess theoretical baggage which fails to advance cause-and-effect explanations by substituting an unfathomable psychology of 'mind'.

According to Williams, "[t]oday, vitalism is one of the ideas that form the basis for many pseudoscientific health systems that claim that illnesses are caused by a disturbance or imbalance of the body's vital force." [ 41 ] "Vitalists claim to be scientific, but in fact they reject the scientific method with its basic postulates of cause and effect and of provability. They often regard subjective experience to be more valid than objective material reality." [ 41 ] Victor Stenger [ 42 ] states that the term "bioenergetics" "is applied in biochemistry to refer to the readily measurable exchanges of energy within organisms, and between organisms and the environment, which occur by normal physical and chemical processes. This is not, however, what the new vitalists have in mind. They imagine the bioenergetic field as a holistic living force that goes beyond reductionist physics and chemistry." [ 43 ] Such a field is sometimes explained as electromagnetic, though some advocates also make confused appeals to quantum physics.

[ 33 ] Joanne Stefanatos states that "The principles of energy medicine originate in quantum physics." [ 44 ] Stenger [ 43 ] offers several explanations as to why this line of reasoning may be misplaced. He explains that energy exists in discrete packets called quanta. Energy fields are composed of their component parts and so only exist when quanta are present. Therefore, energy fields are not holistic, but are rather a system of discrete parts that must obey the laws of physics. This also means that energy fields are not instantaneous. These facts of quantum physics place limitations on the infinite, continuous field that is used by some theorists to describe so-called "human energy fields".

[ 45 ] Stenger continues, explaining that the effects of EM forces have been measured by physicists as accurately as one part in a billion and there is yet to be any evidence that living organisms emit a unique field.

[ 43 ] Vitalistic thinking has been identified in the naive biological theories of children: "Recent experimental results show that a majority of preschoolers tend to choose vitalistic explanations as most plausible. Vitalism, together with other forms of intermediate causality, constitute unique causal devices for naive biology as a core domain of thought." [ 46 ] See also [ edit ] Animal magnetism – Pseudoscientific theory about force in living things Argument from ignorance – Informal fallacy Henri Bergson – French philosopher (1859–1941) Georges Canguilhem – French philosopher (1904–1995) Egregore – Occult concept Élan vital – Hypothetical explanation for evolution and development of organisms Emergentism – Philosophical belief in emergence Energy (esotericism) – Term used in esoteric forms of spirituality and alternative medicine Energy medicine – Pseudo-scientific alternative medicine Etheric body – Concept in neo-Theosophy Holism in science – Approach to research that emphasizes the study of complex systems Homeopathy – Pseudoscientific system of alternative medicine Hylozoism – Philosophical doctrine which holds that all matter is alive Irreducible complexity – Argument by proponents of intelligent design Lebensphilosophie – German philosophical movement in the late 19th and early 20th centuries Mana (Oceanian cultures) – Life force energy, power, effectiveness, and prestige in Pacific Island culture Manitou – Fundamental life force among Algonquian groups in the Native American mythology Medicus curat, natura sanat – Medical aphorism ("the physician treats, nature heals") Mind–body dualism – Philosophical theory Montpellier vitalism Morphic resonance (Rupert Sheldrake) – English author and parapsychological researcher Odic force – Hypothetical vital energy or life force Orenda – Iroquois name for a spiritual power inherent in people and their environment Orgone – Pseudoscientific concept by Wilhelm Reich Orthogenesis – Hypothesis that organisms have an innate tendency to evolve towards some goal Prana – Sanskrit meaning "life force" or "vital principle" Protoscience – Research field that may become a science Qi – Vital force in traditional Chinese philosophy Ratiovitalism (José Ortega y Gasset) – Spanish philosopher and essayist (1883–1955) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Royal Commission on Animal Magnetism – 1784 French scientific bodies' investigations involving systematic controlled trials Spirit (animating force) – Vital principle or animating force within all living things Vis medicatrix naturae – Latin phrase affirming the body's self-healing nature Vital materialism (Jane Bennett) – American political theorist Vitality – Capacity to live, grow, or develop Notes [ edit ] ^ Stéphane Leduc and D'Arcy Thompson ( On Growth and Form ) published a series of works that in Evelyn Fox Keller's view took on the task of uprooting the remaining vestiges of vitalism, essentially by showing that the principles of physics and chemistry were enough, by themselves, to account for the growth and development of biological form.

[ 2 ] On the other hand, Michael Ruse notes that D'Arcy Thompson's avoidance of natural selection had an "odor of spirit forces" about it.

[ 3 ] ^ In 1845, Adolph Kolbe succeeded in making acetic acid from inorganic compounds, and in the 1850s, Marcellin Berthelot repeated this feat for numerous organic compounds. In retrospect, Wöhler's work was the beginning of the end of Berzelius's vitalist hypothesis, but only in retrospect, as Ramberg had shown.

^ See; [ 28 ] briefly, some philosophers see emergentism as midway between traditional spiritual vitalism and mechanistic reductionism; others argue that, structurally, emergentism is equivalent to vitalism. See also.

[ 29 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Bechtel, William; Williamson, Robert C. (1998).

"Vitalism" . In E. Craig (ed.).

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Evelyn Fox Keller, Making Sense of Life Explaining Biological Development with Models, Metaphors, and Machines . Harvard University Press, 2002.

^ Ruse, Michael (2013).

"17. From Organicism to Mechanism-and Halfway Back?" . In Henning, Brian G.; Scarfe, Adam (eds.).

Beyond Mechanism: Putting Life Back Into Biology . Lexington Books. p. 419.

ISBN 9780739174371 .

^ Williams, Elizabeth Ann (2003).

A Cultural History of Medical Vitalism in Enlightenment Montpellier . Ashgate. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-7546-0881-3 .

^ a b c "Developmental Biology 8e Online: A Selective History of Induction" . Archived from the original on October 31, 2006.

^ a b Dyde, Sean (2013).

"Chapter 5: Life and the Mind in Nineteenth-Century Britain" . In Normandin, Sebastian; Wolfe, T. Charles (eds.).

Vitalism and the Scientific Image in Post-Enlightenment Life Science, 1800–2010 . Springer. p. 104.

ISBN 978-94-007-2445-7 .

In medicine and biology, vitalism has been seen as a philosophically-charged term, a pseudoscientific gloss that corrupted scientific practice … ^ Jidenu, Paulin (1996) African Philosophy, 2nd Ed.

Indiana University Press, ISBN 0-253-21096-8 , p.16.

^ Birch & Cobb 1985 , p. 75 ^ Acarya Nemicandra; Nalini Balbir (2010) p. 1 of  Introduction ^ Grimes, John (1996). Pp.118–119 ^ Pujyapada (Shri.) (1960). S. A. Jain (ed.).

Reality . Vira Sasana Sangha. pp.

62– 63.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b c d Birch & Cobb 1985 , pp. 76–78 ^ a b Ede, Andrew. (2007) The Rise and Decline of Colloid Science in North America, 1900–1935: The Neglected Dimension , p. 23 ^ History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences , p. 238 ^ Wilkinson, Ian (10 June 2002).

"History of Clinical Chemistry" .

EJIFCC .

13 (4): 114– 118.

ISSN 1650-3414 .

PMC 6208063 .

^ Kinne-Saffran, E.; Kinne, R. K. H. (August 7, 1999).

"Vitalism and Synthesis of Urea" .

American Journal of Nephrology .

19 (2): 290– 294.

doi : 10.1159/000013463 .

PMID 10213830 .

S2CID 71727190 – via www.karger.com.

^ Ramberg, Peter J. (2000). "The Death of Vitalism and the Birth of Organic Chemistry: Wohler's Urea Synthesis and the Disciplinary Identity of Organic Chemistry".

Ambix .

47 (3): 170– 195.

doi : 10.1179/amb.2000.47.3.170 .

PMID 11640223 .

S2CID 44613876 .

^ Schummer, Joachim (December 2003).

"The notion of nature in chemistry" (PDF) .

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A .

34 (4): 705– 736.

Bibcode : 2003SHPSA..34..705S .

doi : 10.1016/S0039-3681(03)00050-5 .

^ Otis, Laura (October 2004).

"Johannes Peter Müller (1801-1858)" (PDF) .

Virtual Laboratory: Essays and Resources on the Experimentalization of Life (Max Planck Institute) .

^ Galatzer-Levy, R. M. (August 7, 1976).

"Psychic Energy: A Historical Perspective" .

Ann. Psychoanal .

4 : 41– 61 – via PEP Web.

^ Mayr, Ernst (2002).

"BOTANY ONLINE: Ernst MAYR: Walter Arndt Lecture: The Autonomy of Biology" . Archived from the original on 2006-09-26 . Retrieved 2006-09-24 .

^ Ernst Mayr Toward a new philosophy of biology: observations of an evolutionist 1988, p. 13.

ISBN 978-0674896666 .

^ Noll, Richard.

"Jung's concept of die Dominanten (the Dominants) (1997)" – via www.academia.edu.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ a b Bowler, Peter J. Reconciling science and religion: the debate in early-twentieth-century Britain, 2001, pp. 168–169.

ISBN 978-0226068589 .

^ a b Mayr, Ernst (2010).

"The Decline of Vitalism" . In Bedau, Mark A.

; Cleland, Carol E.

(eds.).

The Nature of Life: Classical and Contemporary Perspectives from Philosophy and Science .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

93– 95.

ISBN 9781139488655 .

Yet considering how dominant vitalism was in biology and for how long a period it prevailed, it is surprising how rapidly and completely it collapsed. The last support of vitalism as a viable concept in biology disappeared about 1930." (p. 94) From p. 95: "Vitalism survived even longer in the writings of philosophers than it did in the writings of physicists. But so far as I know, there are no vitalists among the philosophers of biology who started publishing after 1965. Nor do I know of a single reputable living biologist who still supports straightforward vitalism. The few late twentieth-century biologists with vitalist leanings (A. Hardy, S. Wright, A. Portmann) are no longer alive.

^ Schultz, S.G. (1998).

"A century of (epithelial) transport physiology: from vitalism to molecular cloning" .

The American Journal of Physiology .

274 (1 Pt 1): C13–23.

doi : 10.1152/ajpcell.1998.274.1.C13 .

PMID 9458708 .

^ Gilbert, S.F.; Sarkar, S. (2000).

"Embracing complexity: organicism for the 21st century" .

Developmental Dynamics .

219 (1): 1– 9.

doi : 10.1002/1097-0177(2000)9999:9999<::AID-DVDY1036>3.0.CO;2-A .

PMID 10974666 .

^ O’Connor, Timothy (2021).

"Emergent Properties" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Emmeche, C (16 July 2001).

"Does a robot have an Umwelt? Reflections on the qualitative biosemiotics of Jakob von Uexküll" (PDF) .

Semiotica .

2001 (134): 653– 693.

doi : 10.1515/semi.2001.048 .

^ Emmeche, C. (1997) Explaining Emergence: towards an ontology of levels.

Journal for General Philosophy of Science available online Archived 2006-10-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ Best, M.; Neuhauser, D.; Slavin, L. (2003).

"Evaluating Mesmerism, Paris, 1784: the controversy over the blinded placebo controlled trials has not stopped" .

Quality & Safety in Health Care .

12 (3): 232– 3.

doi : 10.1136/qhc.12.3.232 .

PMC 1743715 .

PMID 12792017 .

^ "Complementary and Alternative Medicine – U.S. National Library of Medicine Collection Development Manual" . Archived from the original on December 9, 2004 . Retrieved 2008-03-31 .

^ a b c Rubik, Beverly.

"Bioenergetic Medicines" .

American Medical Student Association Foundation . Archived from the original on 2006-02-14 . Retrieved 8 November 2006 .

^ Mihi a docto doctore / Demandatur causam et rationem quare / Opium facit dormire. / A quoi respondeo, / Quia est in eo / Vertus dormitiva, / Cujus est natura / Sensus assoupire.

Le Malade imaginaire, (French Wikisource) ^ The Physical Basis of Life , Pall Mall Gazette , 1869 ^ a b Loeb, Jacques (1912).

The Mechanistic Conception of Life: Biological Essays (1st ed.). United States: University of Chicago Press.

^ Crick, Francis (1967) Of Molecules and Men ; Great Minds Series Prometheus Books 2004, reviewed here . Crick's remark is cited and discussed in: Hein H (2004) Molecular biology vs. organicism: The enduring dispute between mechanism and vitalism.

Synthese 20:238–253, who describes Crick's remark as "raising spectral red herrings".

^ a b Pseudoscience and Postmodernism: Antagonists or Fellow-Travelers? (pdf) ^ "Joseph C. Keating, Jr., PhD: Biographical sketch" . Archived from the original on May 25, 2006.

^ a b c Keating, Joseph C. (2002), "The Meanings of Innate", The Journal of the Canadian Chiropractic Association , 46 (1): 4– 10, PMC 2505097 ^ a b Williams, William F., ed. (2013).

"Vitalism" .

Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience: From Alien Abductions to Zone Therapy (revised ed.). p. 367.

ISBN 9781135955229 .

VITALISM – The concept that bodily functions are due to a 'vital principle' or 'life force' that is distinct from the physical forces explainable by the laws of chemistry and physics. Many alternative approaches to modern medicine are rooted in vitalism. ... The exact nature of the vital force was debated by early philosophers, but vitalism in one form or another remained the preferred thinking behind most science and medicine until 1828. That year, German scientist Friedrich Wöhler (1800–82) synthesized an organic compound from an inorganic substance, a process that vitalists considered to be impossible. ... Vitalists claim to be scientific, but in fact they reject the scientific method with its basic postulates of cause and effect and of provability. They often regard subjective experience to be more valid than objective material reality. Today, vitalism is one of the ideas that form the basis for many pseudoscientific health systems that claim that illnesses are caused by a disturbance or imbalance of the body's vital force.

^ "Victor J. Stenger's site" . Archived from the original on March 3, 2016.

^ a b c Stenger, Victor J.

(Spring–Summer 1999).

"The Physics of 'Alternative Medicine': Bioenergetic Fields" .

The Scientific Review of Alternative Medicine .

3 (1). Archived from the original on 2006-12-18 . Retrieved 2006-12-03 .

^ Stefanatos, J. 1997, Introduction to Bioenergetic Medicine , Shoen, A.M. and S.G. Wynn, Complementary and Alternative Veterinary Medicine: Principles and Practices , Mosby-Yearbook, Chicago.

^ Biley, Francis C. 2005, Unitary Health Care: Martha Rogers' Science of Unitary Human Beings , University of Wales College of Medicine, viewed 30 November 2006, "RogersHomepage" . Archived from the original on 2006-12-05 . Retrieved 2006-12-02 .

^ Inagaki, K.; Hatano, G. (2004). " 'Vitalistic causality in young children's naive biology.' ".

Trends Cogn Sci .

8 (8): 356– 62.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2004.06.004 .

PMID 15335462 .

S2CID 29256474 .

Sources [ edit ] Birch, Charles; Cobb, John B (1985).

The Liberation of Life: From the Cell to the Community . CUP Archive.

ISBN 9780521315142 .

History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences . Vol. 29. 2007.

External links [ edit ] Wikiversity has learning resources about Vitalism Vitalism on In Our Time at the BBC Vitalism at the Skeptic's Dictionary For vital force and vitalism in the Spanish context, see Nicolás Fernández-Medina's Life Embodied: The Promise of Vital Force in Spanish Modernity (McGill-Queen's UP, 2018).

v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal v t e Philosophy of biology Themes Ethics Eugenics Dysgenics Kin selection Naturalism Reductionism Holism Emergence Evolutionary taxonomy Evolution Adaptationism Alternatives to Darwinian evolution Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Darwinism Evolutionary epistemology Teleology Tree of life Philosophers of biology John Beatty Lindley Darden Daniel Dennett John Dupré Carla Fehr Marjorie Grene Peter Godfrey-Smith James R. Griesemer Paul E. Griffiths David Hull Hans Jonas Philip Kitcher Tim Lewens Helen Longino Jane Maienschein Roberta Millstein Sandra Mitchell Susan Oyama Alex Rosenberg Michael Ruse Sahotra Sarkar Elliott Sober Kim Sterelny Alfred I. Tauber Francisco Varela Gerard Verschuuren William C. Wimsatt Biologists Francisco J. Ayala Patrick Bateson Charles Darwin Richard Dawkins Jared Diamond Michael Ghiselin François Jacob Stephen Jay Gould Richard Lewontin Konrad Lorenz Humberto Maturana Ernst Mayr Jacques Monod Denis Noble Joan Roughgarden Rolf Sattler John Maynard Smith E. O. Wilson Jonas Salk Related Philosophy of mind History of biology v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qgzq6
Cached time: 20250817035818
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.152 seconds
Real time usage: 1.462 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9730/1000000
Revision size: 42544/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 182517/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8904/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 180937/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.710/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21446898/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1217.460      1 -total
 31.26%  380.559      2 Template:Reflist
 30.32%  369.169     34 Template:Annotated_link
  7.32%   89.164     12 Template:Cite_journal
  7.11%   86.505      2 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  6.90%   84.042      1 Template:Alternative_medicine_sidebar
  6.72%   81.798      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.00%   73.089      1 Template:Short_description
  5.39%   65.629      4 Template:Navbox
  4.59%   55.825      8 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:168322:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817035818 and revision id 1306319462. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vitalism&oldid=1306319462 " Categories : Vitalism History of biology Obsolete scientific theories Pseudoscience Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Source attribution CS1 errors: missing periodical Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 03:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vitalism 48 languages Add topic

