Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Global context Toggle Global context subsection 1.1 Measuring diversity 2 Evolutionary history 3 Biological realms Toggle Biological realms subsection 3.1 Terrestrial (continental) 3.2 Inland aquatic 3.3 Estuarine 3.4 Marine 3.5 Coastal 3.6 Sub-Antarctic 4 Ecoregions Toggle Ecoregions subsection 4.1 Terrestrial ecoregions 4.2 Marine ecoregions 4.3 Habitat types 4.3.1 Marine habitat types 5 Vegetation types 6 Endemism Toggle Endemism subsection 6.1 Terrestrial 6.2 Marine 7 Centres of diversity 8 Genetic diversity 9 Hotspots 10 Species lists Toggle Species lists subsection 10.1 Flora 10.2 Fauna 10.3 Fungi 10.3.1 History 10.4 Other eukaryotes 10.5 Prokaryotes 11 Threats Toggle Threats subsection 11.1 Human impacts 11.2 Climate change 11.3 Endangered species 11.4 Extinction 12 Economic value 13 Management Toggle Management subsection 13.1 Responsibility 13.2 Sustainable use 14 Protection Toggle Protection subsection 14.1 Protected areas 15 Research Toggle Research subsection 15.1 Research institutions 15.2 National Biodiversity Assessment 16 See also 17 References Toggle References subsection 17.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Biodiversity of South Africa 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Variety of life within South Africa and its exclusive economic zone The Biodiversity of South Africa is the variety of living organisms within the boundaries of South Africa and its exclusive economic zone . South Africa is a region of high biodiversity in the terrestrial and marine realms. The country is ranked sixth out of the world's seventeen megadiverse countries , [ 1 ] and is rated among the top 10 for plant species diversity and third for marine endemism.

[ 2 ] This biodiversity is monitored and reported in terms of the continental terrestrial, inland aquatic, coastal, marine and the sub-antarctic Prince Edward Islands components.

[ 3 ] South Africa is a party to the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity , and has declared a number of protected areas , including national parks and marine protected areas which are managed by the national government. Continuing research and periodical reporting on the biodiversity of South Africa is the responsibility of the South African National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) as directed by the Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries , and authorised by various statutory acts.

[ 3 ] SANBI reports an estimate of about 67,000 animal species, and more than 20,400 plant species that have been described. Almost a quarter of the global cephalopod species, about 16% of elasmobranch species, 13% of the world's sunspiders ( Solifugae ), nearly 10% of the world coral species, 8% of seaweeds, 7% of vascular plants , 7% of the birds, 5% of the mammals, nearly 5% of butterflies, 4% of the reptiles, 2% of the amphibians, and 1% of the freshwater fish of the world are found in the country and its exclusive economic zone , including the Prince Edward Islands . Almost two thirds of South Africa's plant species, about half of the species of reptiles, amphibians, butterflies and freshwater fish, and about 40% of the estimated 10,000 marine animal species are endemic.

[ 4 ] Global context [ edit ] Biodiversity is the variety and variability of life on Earth . It is typically a measure of variation at the genetic , species , and ecosystem level.

[ 5 ] and is not distributed evenly, generally being richest in the tropics.

[ 6 ] Marine biodiversity is usually highest along coasts in the Western Pacific , where sea surface temperature is highest, and in the mid-latitudinal band in all oceans.

[ 7 ] Biodiversity generally tends to cluster in hotspots , [ 8 ] and has been increasing through time, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] but will be likely to slow in the future.

[ 11 ] Estimates on the number of Earth's current species range from 10 million to 14 million, [ 12 ] of which about 1.2 million have been documented and over 86 percent have not yet been described.

[ 13 ] More recently, in May 2016, scientists reported that 1 trillion species are estimated to be on Earth currently with only one-thousandth of one percent described.

[ 14 ] The country is ranked sixth out of the world's seventeen megadiverse countries , [ 1 ] with high levels of marine and terrestrial biodiversity.
The main criterion for megadiverse countries is endemism at the level of species, genera and families. A megadiverse country must have at least 5,000 species of endemic plants and must border marine ecosystems.

South Africa is one of the smaller megadiverse countries, with a terrestrial area of about 1.2 million km 2 and is rated among the top 10 for plant species diversity. The EEZ is about 1.1 million km 2 and is rated third for marine endemism.

[ 2 ] Measuring diversity [ edit ] Biodiversity is usually plotted as the richness of a geographic area, with some reference to a temporal scale. Types of biodiversity include taxonomic or species , ecological , morphological , and genetic diversity . Taxonomic diversity, that is the number of species, genera, or families, is the most commonly assessed type.

[ 15 ] The estimated number of South African animal species as of 2018 is about 67 000, with 20 401 plant species described. This comprises about 7% of the world's vascular plants, 7% of birds, 5% of mammals, 4% of reptiles, 2% of amphibians and 1% of freshwater fishes. Less information is available on invertebrate groups, but South Africa has almost a quarter of global cephalopods, and some terrestrial invertebrate groups are very strongly represented.

[ 2 ] Evolutionary history [ edit ] See also: Geology of South Africa and Geological history of Earth This section needs expansion with: Evolutionary history of the biodiversity of SA.

How this relates to the breakup of Gondwana in the early Jurassic , and tectonic movement of the African Plate - disconnection from other continental plates. Relative isolation of southern Africa by distance from the rest of Africa,  global climate changes,  rise and fall of sea levels, relative isolation of populations by altitude and life cycle specifics. Local climate changes, drought, flood and fire.

Drivers of speciation . The critical factor behind the origin of new species is reproductive isolation.

[ 16 ] Physical isolation Habitat isolation Habitat change Changes in external pressures Internal pressures Biodiversity reduced by extinction and migration away from the region. Both affected by habitat change, disease and predation.. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) The age of the Earth is about 4.54 billion years.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] The earliest undisputed evidence of life on Earth dates at least from 3.5 billion years ago, [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] during the Eoarchean Era after a geological crust started to solidify following the earlier molten Hadean Eon. There are microbial mat fossils found in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone discovered in Western Australia .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Other early physical evidence of a biogenic substance is graphite in 3.7 billion-year-old meta-sedimentary rocks discovered in Western Greenland .

[ 26 ] More recently, in 2015, "remains of biotic life " were found in 4.1 billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Since life began on Earth , five major mass extinctions and several minor events have led to large and sudden drops in biodiversity. The Phanerozoic eon (the last 540 million years) marked a rapid growth in biodiversity via the Cambrian explosion —a period during which the majority of multicellular phyla first appeared.

[ 29 ] The next 400 million years included repeated, massive, biodiversity losses classified as mass extinction events. In the Carboniferous , rainforest collapse led to a great loss of plant and animal life.

[ 30 ] The Permian–Triassic extinction event , 251 million years ago, was the worst; vertebrate recovery took 30 million years.

[ 15 ] The most recent, the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event , occurred 65 million years ago and has often attracted more attention than others because it resulted in the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs .

[ 31 ] The period since the emergence of humans has displayed an ongoing biodiversity reduction and an accompanying loss of genetic diversity . Named the Holocene extinction , the reduction is caused primarily by human impacts , particularly habitat destruction .

[ 32 ] Conversely, biodiversity positively impacts human health in a number of ways, although a few negative effects are studied.

[ 33 ] Taxonomic biodiversity of a region may increase either by influx of species from other regions or by speciation within the region. The former is facilitated by physical connections to other regions of compatible habitability, by the mobility of the affected organisms at some stage of their life cycle, and by agents contributing to dispersal. Speciation in situ is facilitated by reproductive isolation [ 16 ] and changes in the environmental pressures on the local populations. Many regions of high biodiversity or endemism arise from habitats which require unusual adaptations.

Biological realms [ edit ] Terrestrial (continental) [ edit ] The Afrotropical realm, marked in blue The continental terrestrial component of the region lies within the Afrotropical biogeographic realm, which is one of Earth's eight biogeographic realms . It includes Africa south of the Sahara Desert , the majority of the Arabian Peninsula , the island of Madagascar , southern Iran and extreme southwestern Pakistan , and the islands of the western Indian Ocean .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Inland aquatic [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Estuarine [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Marine [ edit ] Barred fingerfin at Rocky bank See also: Marine biodiversity of South Africa According to the WWF scheme, [ 34 ] the coastal waters of continental South Africa mostly lie within the marine realm of Temperate Southern Africa , with a part in the Western Indo-Pacific . The boundary between the Temperate Southern Africa and Western Indo-Pacific marine realms is near Lake St. Lucia, in northern KwaZulu-Natal, near the border with Mozambique.

The marine biodiversity of South Africa is the variety of living organisms that live in the seas off the coast of South Africa . It includes genetic , species and ecosystems biodiversity in a range of habitats spread over a range of ecologically varied regions, influenced by the geomorphology of the seabed and circulation of major and local water masses , which distribute both living organisms and nutrients in complex and time-variable patterns.

South Africa has a wide range of marine diversity with coastline in three oceans, two major current systems, major ocean frontal systems and benthic topography extending to a maximum depth of 5 700 m. There are 179 defined marine ecosystem types, 150 of them around South Africa and 29 around the sub-Antarctic territory of the Prince Edward Islands.

[ 35 ] Coastal [ edit ] See also: Coastline of South Africa Since 2018 the National Biodiversity Assessment has produced a separate coastal report, combining data from marine portions of the coastal zone with estuaries and dunes along with beaches and rocky shores, defining the coastal zone as an ecologically determined cross-realm zone spanning the coastal parts of the marine and terrestrial realms, and including all estuaries, within which relevant results from the constituent realms are presented together. This analyses biodiversity across the land-sea interface compares it with the non-coastal parts of the terrestrial and marine realms.

[ 36 ] Vegetation types on the landward side of the coastal zone are included in the ecologically defined coast if they are purely coastal or have a coastal affinity, and least 70% of their area is within 10 km of the shore. On the seaward side, ecosystem types that are influenced by the land are considered to be coastal, and include ecosystems extending as far offshore as the back of the inner shelf,  bays, and marine ecosystem types influenced by rivers.

Estuarine Functional Zones (EFZs) are also considered to be part of the coast.

[ 36 ] The ecologically defined coastal zone is estimated to comprise about 4% of mainland terrestrial area, but includes 186 of the 987 ecosystem types, high biodiversity, and many endemic species, particularly along the south coast. This is largely due to large variations in coastal conditions affected by the warm Agulhas Current on the east coast, and cool Benguela Current along the west coast, distinct variations in temperature and rainfall patterns and variations in geology.

[ 36 ] Coastal parts of ecosystems tend to be hotspots of cumulative pressure, which often causes poor ecological condition in those areas. Ports and harbours have been identified as centres of cumulative impacts and ecological degradation. Intensive pressures on coastal areas include use of biological resources, coastal development, and mining. Coastal species of economic value which are accessible are likely to be over-exploited. Estuaries are often subjected to major flow modification due to upstream water use, which has adverse impacts on many coastal ecosystem types. For example, sand supplies to beaches and dunes are severely reduced, which affects erosion rates. Climate change and invasive species increase pressures on coastal biodiversity, and much of the pressure due to pollution is poorly understood.

[ 36 ] 60% of coastal ecosystem types making up 55% of the coastal zone area, have been identified to be threatened, with a high risk of biodiversity loss in 13 ecosystems, while 9% of the coastal zone area is protected, providing good protection to about 24% of coastal ecosystem types.

[ 36 ] The three South African regions of high plant diversity and endemism all occur partly along the coast. They are the Maputaland-Pondoland-Albany Hotspot , the Succulent Karoo Region, and the Cape Floristic Region .

[ 36 ] The coastal zone provides a rich variety of organisms useful to people as food, medicine, fuel and raw materials for construction and crafts. There are more than 220 coastal plant species recorded as useful for these purposes from South Africa.

[ 36 ] Many coastal inhabitants rely to some extent on estuarine and marine fish and invertebrates as part of their diet, and the money saved by harvesting natural resources can be used for other needs, which is a significant benefit for economically marginal families. About a million people engage in recreational fishing, and the fishery is estimated to have a value of about R1.6 billion in 2018.

[ 36 ] Some 147 communities and 29000 people are involved in subsistence fishing, harvesting fish, rock lobster, abalone, bait organisms and other intertidal resources, to an estimated value of about R16 million in 2018, about 85% of which is linefishing. The major importance of this sector is in employment and food security of poor coastal communities.

[ 36 ] This section needs expansion with: Benefits from coastal biodiversity. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Sub-Antarctic [ edit ] See also: Prince Edward Islands The Prince Edward Islands are Marion Island and Prince Edward Island, two small islands in the subantarctic Indian Ocean that are part of South Africa . The islands have been declared Special Nature Reserves under the South African Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, No. 57 of 2003 , and activities on the islands are therefore restricted to research and conservation management.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Further protection was granted when the area was declared a marine protected area in 2013.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] The only human inhabitants of the islands are the staff of a meteorological and biological research station run by the South African National Antarctic Programme on Marion Island.

[ 41 ] Ecoregions [ edit ] Main article: Ecoregion See also: List of ecoregions in South Africa An ecoregion (ecological region) is an ecologically and geographically defined area that is smaller than a bioregion , which in turn is smaller than a biogeographic realm . Ecoregions cover relatively large areas of land or water, and contain characteristic, geographically distinct assemblages of natural communities and species . The biodiversity of flora , fauna and ecosystems that characterise an ecoregion tends to be distinct from that of other ecoregions. In theory, biodiversity or conservation ecoregions are relatively large areas of land or water where the probability of encountering different species and communities at any given point remains relatively constant, within an acceptable range of variation. An ecoregion will typically include several habitat types.

Terrestrial ecoregions [ edit ] Main article: List of ecoregions in South Africa § Terrestrial ecoregions See also: Ecoregion § Terrestrial Terrestrial ecoregions are land ecoregions, as distinct from freshwater and marine ecoregions. The WWF divides the land surface of the Earth into eight biogeographical realms containing 867 smaller terrestrial ecoregions .

The eight realms follow the major floral and faunal boundaries, identified by botanists and zoologists, that separate the world's major plant and animal communities. Realm boundaries generally follow continental boundaries, or major barriers to plant and animal distribution, like the Himalayas and the Sahara .

Ecoregions are classified by biome type, which are the major global plant communities determined by rainfall and climate. Forests, grasslands (including savanna and shrubland), and deserts (including xeric shrublands ) are distinguished by climate ( tropical and subtropical vs.

temperate and boreal climates) and, for forests, by whether the trees are predominantly conifers ( gymnosperms ), broadleaf ( Angiosperms ), or mixed (broadleaf and conifer). Biome types like Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ; tundra ; and mangroves host very distinct ecological communities, and are also recognized as distinct biome types.

Listed by biome : Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests ; Knysna-Amatole montane forests – Ecoregion of the  tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests biome in South Africa Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets KwaZulu-Cape coastal forest mosaic – Subtropical moist broadleaf forest ecoregion of South Africa Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Maputaland coastal forest mosaic – Subtropical moist broadleaf forest ecoregion on the Indian Ocean coast of Southern Africa.

Southern Zanzibar-Inhambane coastal forest mosaic – Tropical moist broadleaf forest ecoregion of eastern Africa Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands ; Kalahari Acacia-Baikiaea woodlands – Ecoregion in Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Southern Africa bushveld – Sub-tropical woodland ecoregion of Southern Africa Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Zambezian and mopane woodlands – Tropical and subtropical ecoregion of southeastern Africa Montane grasslands and shrublands ; Drakensberg alti-montane grasslands and woodlands – High altitude ecoregion in South Africa Drakensberg montane grasslands, woodlands and forests – Mountain range in South Africa Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Highveld grasslands – Geographic region of the South African inland plateau Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Maputaland-Pondoland bushland and thickets – Montane shrubland ecoregion in South Africa Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ; Albany thickets – Afrotropic terrestrial ecoregion of dense woodland in South Africa Lowland fynbos and renosterveld – Shrubland and heathland ecoregion of southwestern South Africa Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Montane fynbos and renosterveld – Shrubland and heathland ecoregion of southwestern South Africa Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Deserts and xeric shrublands ; Kalahari xeric savanna – Semi-arid sandy savanna ecoregion in Southern Africa Nama Karoo – Xeric shrubland ecoregion on the central plateau of South Africa and Namibia Succulent Karoo – Desert ecoregion of South Africa and Namibia Tundra ; Southern Indian Ocean Islands tundra – Ecoregion of several subantarctic islands in the southern Indian Ocean Mangroves ; Southern Africa mangroves – Ecoregion of mangrove swamps in rivers and estuaries on the eastern coast of South Africa Marine ecoregions [ edit ] Main article: Marine ecoregions of the South African exclusive economic zone Marine ecoregions of the South African Exclusive Economic Zone (redefined 2011) The marine ecoregions of the South African exclusive economic zone are a set of geographically delineated regions of similar ecological characteristics on a fairly broad scale, covering the exclusive economic zone along the South African coast. There were originally five inshore bioregions over the continental shelf and four offshore bioregions covering the continental slope and abyssal regions. These bioregions are used for conservation research and planning. They were defined in the South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment of 2004.

[ 42 ] The South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment of 2011 amended this to reduce the number of regions to four inshore and two offshore and rename them as ecoregions.

[ 43 ] Inshore ecoregions: The Benguela ecoregion comprises the consolidated Namaqua and South-western Cape bioregions.

[ 43 ] which lie between Sylvia Hill in Namibia and Cape Point The northern sector is a cool temperate region from Namibi to Cape Columbine , with large-scale intensive upwelling and nutrient rich water, and the cold Benguela current . The region is known for low oxygen events and it contains extensive mud banks and a relatively wide continental shelf.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] : 102 The southern sector has a relatively narrow continental shelf and a change in geology at Cape Columbine which marks the northern extent of exposed granite, and there is less offshore mud habitat south of this break. This region includes the two underwater canyons, Cape Point Valley and Cape Canyon, and there are large areas of rocky reef. The change in biology at Cape Columbine is indicated  by changes in seaweed and intertidal communities. There is less tendency for oxygen deficient bottom water than in the area further north. The break at the south-eastern end of the region is at Cape Point , where it is distinct in the inshore and tidal habitats, but the change in deeper water tends obliquely to the south-east, and is more diffuse, due to mixing of the Benguela and Agulhas currents between these regions.

[ 44 ] : 102 The Agulhas ecoregion extends over the continental shelf from Cape Point to the Mbashe river. The south coast comprises a warm temperate component from Mbashe to Cape Agulhas, and a large overlap zone between Cape Agulhas and Cape Point where waters of the two currents mix. The continental shelf is at its widest in this region, extending up to 240 km offshore on the Agulhas Bank . The shelf edge includes areas of extensive slumping. There are several areas of reef on the Agulhas Bank, including the Alphard banks . This region has the highest number of South African endemics, and is a breeding area for many species.

[ 44 ] : 103 It was renamed to Agulhas ecoregion in the 2011 assessment.

[ 43 ] Natal ecoregion – Ecoregion off the coast of South Africa Delagoa ecoregion – Ecoregion off the coast of South Africa Offshore ecoregions: Southeast Atlantic ecoregion – Ecoregion off the coast of South Africa Southwest Indian ecoregion – Ecoregion off the coast of South Africa Habitat types [ edit ] See also: Habitat In ecology , a habitat is the type of natural environment in which a particular species of organism lives.  A species's habitat is those places where the species can find food, shelter, protection and mates for reproduction.

[ citation needed ] It is characterized by both physical and biological features. Every organism has certain habitat needs for the conditions in which it will thrive, but some are tolerant of wide variations while others are very specific in their requirements. A habitat is not necessarily a geographical area, it can be the interior of a stem, a rotten log, a rock or a clump of moss ; a parasitic organism has as its habitat the body of its host , part of the host's body (such as the digestive tract), or a single cell within the host's body.

Geographic habitat types include polar , temperate , subtropical and tropical . The terrestrial vegetation type may be forest , steppe , grassland , semi-arid or desert .

Fresh-water habitats include marshes , streams , rivers , lakes , and ponds ; marine habitats include salt marshes, the coast, the intertidal zone , estuaries , reefs , bays, the open sea, the sea bed, deep water and submarine vents .

Habitats may change over time. Causes of change may include a violent event, or change may occur more gradually over millennia with alterations in the climate. Other changes come as a direct result of human activities. The introduction of alien species can have a devastating effect on native wildlife, through increased predation , competition for resources or the introduction of pests and diseases to which the indigenous species have no immunity. A change to a habitat can have far reaching consequences. It can make it more habitable for some inhabitants, at the expense of others. It can open new niches to immigrants, induce speciation, drive out established communities, and in some cases may lead to extinctions at various scales. A habitat is also directly and indirectly affected by the inhabitant organisms, their presence and biological activity influences the environment in complex ways.

Marine habitat types [ edit ] See also: Marine ecoregions of the South African exclusive economic zone § Habitat types A total of 136 marine habitat types have been identified. The classification takes connectivity, depth and slope, substrate geology and sediment grain size, shoreline wave exposure, and biogeography into account. Beach state considers the wave exposure and grain size. These habitats include 37 coastal types, 17 inshore types in the 5 to 30 m depth range, 62 offshore benthic types deeper than 30 m, and 16 offshore pelagic types, [ 45 ] three types of island and one type of lagoon.

[ 43 ] Vegetation types [ edit ] Vegetation types of South Africa.

Main article: List of vegetation types of South Africa See also: Vegetation classification The diverse vegetation types of South Africa are sampled, classified, described, and mapped by the SANBI VEGMAP project. Vegetation types of Lesotho and Eswatini are included in the project. The vegetation map is useful for biodiversity assessment, research, conservation management and environmental planning, and includes a database. The project is ongoing as more data becomes available over time. The first map was published in 2006, and has been updated in 2009. 2012 and 2018.

[ 46 ] The classification system uses a hierarchy to organise the vegetation types within the nine defined biomes and a tenth azonal group. Bioregions are described within the biomes, and the vegetation types are at the more detailed level, and represent groups of communities with similar biotic and abiotic features. The vegetation types are plotted on the map in as much resolution as is available using a GIS system.

[ 46 ] Listed by biome, there are 88 Savanna vegetation types, code SV; [ 47 ] 73 Grassveld vegetation types, code G; [ 47 ] 81 Fynbos vegetation types, code FF; [ 47 ] 29 Renosterveld vegetation types, code FR; [ 47 ] 65 Succulent Karoo vegetation types, code SK; [ 47 ] 54 Albany Thicket and Strandveld vegetation types, codes AT and FS; [ 47 ] 29 Nama Karoo and desert vegetation types, codes NK and D; [ 47 ] 35 Azonal vegetation types, cose AZ; [ 47 ] 17 Forest and coastal belt vegetation types, codes FO and CB; [ 47 ] and 8 Subantarctic vegetation types, code ST.

[ 47 ] Endemism [ edit ] Main article: Endemism Endemism is the ecological state of a species being native to a single defined geographic location, such as an island, nation, country or other defined zone, or habitat type; organisms that are indigenous to a place are not endemic to it if they are also found elsewhere. The extreme opposite of an endemic species is one with a cosmopolitan distribution , having a global or widespread range, and the opposite to an indigenous species in an introduced or invasive species .

Terrestrial [ edit ] The Cape Floristic Region , the smallest of the six recognised floral kingdoms of the world, is an area of extraordinarily high diversity and endemism , and is home to over 9,000 vascular plant species, of which 69 percent are endemic.

[ 48 ] Much of this diversity is associated with the fynbos biome, a Mediterranean-type, fire-prone shrubland.

[ 48 ] Several species are endemic to extremely limited habitats, and are under severe pressure due to habitat reduction and degradation.

Marine [ edit ] See also: Marine biodiversity of South Africa § Endemism Over 13000 species of marine organisms are recorded from South African waters. Endemism is estimated at between 26 and 33%, the third highest marine endemism after New Zealand (51%) and Antarctica (45%). This varies between taxonomic groups from no endemic marine mammals or birds, to over 90% of chitons .

[ 49 ] : 20 The region of highest known endemism is the south coast Agulhas inshore ecoregion, which is relatively far from the national borders, and relatively isolated from large scale oceanic circulation due to the effects of the widening of the continental shelf at the Agulhas Bank on the path of the Agulhas current, and far from other warm temperate regions. This region is largely bypassed by the Agulhas current, and has cooler inshore water due to upwelling, making it less hospitable to tropical Indo-west Pacific species. It is also isolated from the South Atlantic and Southern Ocean, so has been more prone to niche speciation.

[ 49 ] : 20 Centres of diversity [ edit ] See also: Centre of diversity The flora are not evenly distributed over South Africa, they tend to be concentrated in centres of diversity, which are regions of relatively high local biodiversity in a global or national context.

Succulent Karoo - the arid area to the north and west of the Cape fynbos.

[ 50 ] Cape Floristic Region - [ 50 ] Griqualand West Centre - the arid area roughly between Prieska , Vryburg , Vorstershoop and Upington in the Northern Cape Province. The vegetation is mainly a variety of bushveld, grassland and Karoo types.

[ 50 ] Albany Centre - in the Eastern Cape from the Kei River to about Middelburg , Aberdeen and the Baviaanskloof Mountains , with a transitional climate between the winter-rainfall of the Western Cape and the summer-rainfall of eastern southern Africa, with a large variety of vegetation types.

[ 50 ] Drakensberg Alpine Centre - the highest altitude mountain region of southern Africa including most of Lesotho, the mountainous area around Barkly East in the Eastern Cape, and the eastern slopes of the Drakensberg through the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, and the Free State southwest of Harrismith . Van Rooy (2000) considers this to be one of the main centres of diversity of mosses in southern Africa.

[ 50 ] Soutpansberg Centre - the mountains from the Blouberg in the west, along the Soutpansberg , separating the Limpopo valley from the rest of South Africa, and parts of the Limpopo valley into the north-western corner of the Kruger National Park .

[ 50 ] Wolkberg Centre - the escarpment areas previously known as the Transvaal Drakensberg, between Carolina, Mpumalanga , in the south to Haenertsburg , Limpopo Province in the north, and west to Zebediela .

[ 50 ] Sekhukhuneland Centre - a drier area inland of the escarpment of the Wolkberg Centre , on basic and ultramafic rocks of the Bushveld Igneous Complex .

[ 50 ] Barberton Centre - the mountains between Barberton in Mpumalanga Province, and the border with Eswatini .

[ 50 ] Maputaland-Pondoland Region - most of KwaZulu-Natal, with the edges extending into neighbouring areas, particularly southern Mozambique and the Eastern Cape. The area contains various grassland, thicket and forest types.

[ 50 ] Genetic diversity [ edit ] Main article: Genetic diversity Genetic diversity is the amount of variation in the Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) of distinct individuals, representing the genetic characteristics of a species. From a conservation perspective, genetic diversity appears to be highly variable in populations and species.

[ 2 ] Genetic diversity is important for evolutionary potential, as it serves as a way for populations to adapt to changing environments. With more variation, it is more likely that some individuals in a population will possess variations of alleles that are suited for the new environment. Those individuals are more likely to survive to produce offspring bearing that allele. The population will continue for more generations because of the success of these individuals.

[ 51 ] The methods of measuring genetic diversity of a region include: [ 52 ] Species richness , a measure of the number of species, Species abundance , a relative measure of the abundance of species, Species density, an evaluation of the total number of species per unit area Stochastic simulation software can be used to predict the future of a population given measurements such as allele frequency and population size.

[ 53 ] This section needs expansion with: Genetic diversity of SA populations. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Hotspots [ edit ] Main article: Biodiversity hotspot Maputaland-Pondoland-Albany Hotspot Succulent Karroo location map A biodiversity hotspot is a biogeographic region with significant levels of biodiversity that is threatened by human habitation.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Around the world, 36 areas qualify under this definition.

[ 56 ] These sites support nearly 60% of the world's plant, bird, mammal,  reptile, and amphibian species , with a very high proportion of those species as endemics. Some of these hotspots support as many as 15,000 endemic plant species and some have lost up to 95% of their natural habitat.

[ 56 ] Biodiversity hotspots support their diverse ecosystems on just 2.4% of the planet's surface, [ 55 ] but the area defined as hotspots covers a much larger proportion of the land, at about 15.7% of the land surface area, where they have lost around 85% of their original habitat.

[ 57 ] Three of these hotspots are largely or entirely within South Africa: Fynbos in the Western Cape A 360 degree photograph of fynbos in the Groot Winterhoek region of the Western Cape about 18 months after a fire.  New plants can be seen in various stages of growth following the fire.  The infertile white soil that fynbos tends to grow in can also be clearly seen.

Click here to see the photograph in 360 degrees.

The Cape Floristic Region is the smallest of the six recognised floral kingdoms of the world, is an area of extraordinarily high diversity and endemism , and is home to over 9,000 vascular plant species, of which 69 percent are endemic.

[ 48 ] Much of this diversity is associated with the fynbos biome, a Mediterranean-type, fire-prone shrubland.

[ 48 ] The economical worth of fynbos biodiversity, based on harvests of fynbos products (e.g.

wildflowers ) and eco-tourism , is estimated to be in the region of R 77 million a year.

[ 48 ] Thus, it is clear that the Cape Floristic Region has both economic and intrinsic biological value as a biodiversity hotspot .

[ 48 ] The Maputaland-Pondoland-Albany Hotspot is situated near the south-eastern coast of Africa, occupying an area between the Great Escarpment and the Indian Ocean .

[ 58 ] The area is named after Maputaland , Pondoland and Albany . It stretches from the Albany Centre of Plant Endemism in the Eastern Cape Province of South Africa, through the Pondoland Centre of Plant Endemism and KwaZulu-Natal Province, the eastern side of Eswatini (known as Swaziland until 2018) and into southern Mozambique and Mpumalanga . The Maputaland Centre of Plant Endemism is contained in northern KwaZulu-Natal and southern Mozambique.

The Succulent Karoo lies along the coastal strip of southwestern Namibia and South Africa's Northern Cape Province , where the cold Benguela Current offshore creates frequent fogs. The ecoregion extends inland into the uplands of South Africa's Western Cape Province . It is bounded on the south by the Mediterranean climate fynbos , on the east by the Nama Karoo , which has more extreme temperatures and variable rainfall, and on the north by the Namib Desert .

This section needs expansion with: Map of Cape Floristic Region. You can help by adding to it .

( November 2020 ) Species lists [ edit ] See also: Marine biodiversity of South Africa § Species lists A simple measure of taxonomic biodiversity is the count or listing of taxa found within a region. This may be recorded as species checklists. Since the number of species may be large, a checklist may be split into lists of species in a specified taxon at whatever level is convenient. For some taxa, a list by phylum is manageable, for others lists may be broken down to family level. Within the lists, the detail is generally at species level, but may vary depending on the available information, and a utilitarian approach is used, providing available detail that appears useful and reliable. A taxon may be labelled to indicate that it is endemic , indigenous , introduced , cultivated , or invasive .

Flora [ edit ] Protea cynaroides on Table Mountain See also: Wildlife of South Africa § Flora 23,420 species of vascular plant have been recorded in South Africa, making it the sixth most species-rich country in the world and the most species-rich country on the African continent. Of these, 153 species are considered to be threatened.

[ 59 ] Nine biomes have been described in South Africa: Fynbos , Succulent Karoo , desert , Nama Karoo , grassland , savanna , Albany thickets , the Indian Ocean coastal belt , and forests .

[ 60 ] The 2018 National Biodiversity Assessment plant checklist lists 35,130 taxa in the phyla Anthocerotophyta (hornworts (6)), Anthophyta (flowering plants(33534)), Bryophyta (mosses (685)), Cycadophyta (cycads (42)), Lycopodiophyta (Lycophytes(45)), Marchantiophyta (liverworts (376)), Pinophyta (conifers (33)), and Pteridophyta (cryptogams(408)).

[ 61 ] List of conifers of South Africa – Plants of the class Pinophyta recorded from South Africa List of cycads of South Africa – Seed producing vascular plants of the division Cycadophyta recorded from South Africa Lists of flowering plants of South Africa – List of lists of flowering plants recorded from South Africa [ 61 ] List of hornworts of South Africa – Non-vascular spore-bearing plants in the division Anthocerotophyta recorded from South Africa List of liverworts of South Africa – Non-vascular land plants with a gametophyte-dominant life cycle recorded from South Africa List of lycophytes of South Africa – Spore bearing vascular plants of the division Lycopodiophyta recorded from South Africa List of mosses of South Africa – Small, non-vascular flowerless plants recorded from South Africa List of pteridophytes of South Africa – Spore-bearing vascular plants recorded from South Africa Fauna [ edit ] See also: Wildlife of South Africa and Marine biodiversity of South Africa § Species lists Acanthocephala – Group of parasitic thorny-headed worms – List of Acanthocephala of South Africa Annelida – Phylum of segmented worms – List of annelids of South Africa Clitellata – Class of annelids that includes earthworms and leeches Hirudinea – Parasitic or predatory annelid worms Oligochaeta – Subclass of annelids including earthworms Polychaeta – Class of annelid worms Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Arthropoda Arachnida Astigmata , Mesostigmata , Prostigmata , Oribatida Ixodida Amblypygi Araneae Opiliones Palpigradi Pseudoscorpiones Schizomida Scorpiones Solifugae Branchiopoda Anostraca Conchostraca Cladocera Notostraca Chilopoda Diplopoda Entognatha Collembola Diplura Insecta Archaeognatha Blattodea – Order of insects that includes cockroaches and termites Coleoptera – Order of insects Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Dermaptera Diptera Embioptera Ephemeroptera Notoptera Hemiptera Hymenoptera – Order of insects Isoptera Lepidoptera – Order of insects including moths and butterflies List of butterflies of South Africa List of moths of South Africa List of moths of South Africa (Arctiinae) List of moths of South Africa (Crambidae) List of moths of South Africa (Gelechiidae) List of moths of South Africa (Geometridae) List of moths of South Africa (Nepticulidae) List of moths of South Africa (Noctuidae) List of moths of South Africa (Pyralidae) List of moths of South Africa (Tortricidae) Mantodea Mecoptera Megaloptera Neuroptera Odonata Orthoptera Phasmida Phthiraptera Plecoptera Psocoptera Siphonaptera Strepsiptera Thysanoptera Trichoptera Zygentoma Malacostraca – List of marine crustaceans of South Africa#Malacostraca Amphipoda Bathynellacea Cumacea Decapoda Euphausiacea Isopoda Leptostraca Mysida Spelaeogriphacea Stomatopoda Tanaidacea Maxillopoda – List of marine crustaceans of South Africa#Maxillopoda Branchiura Copepoda – List of marine crustaceans of South Africa#Copepoda Mystacocarida Pentastomida Thecostraca Ostracoda – List of marine crustaceans of South Africa#Ostracoda Pauropoda Pycnogonida – List of sea spiders of South Africa Symphyla Brachiopoda Bryozoa Chaetognatha Chordata Actinopterygii – Class of ray-finned bony fishes – List of marine bony fishes of South Africa#Actinopterygii List of marine spiny-finned fishes of South Africa List of marine Perciform fishes of South Africa List of marine fishes of the suborder Percoidei of South Africa Amphibia Appendicularia / Thaliacea Ascidiacea Aves – List of birds of South Africa Cephalochordata Chondrichthyes – List of marine fishes of South Africa#Chondrichtyes Mammalia – List of mammals of South Africa Myxini – List of marine fishes of South Africa#Myxini Reptilia List of lizards of South Africa Sarcopterygii – List of marine bony fishes of South Africa#Gigaclass Sarcopterygii — Lobefin fishes Cnidaria – List of marine cnidarians of South Africa Ctenophora – List of comb jellies of South Africa Cycliophora Echinodermata – List of echinoderms of South Africa Echiura Entoprocta Gastrotricha Gnathostomulida Hemichordata Kinorhyncha Loricifera Micrognathozoa Mollusca Aplacophora – List of marine molluscs of South Africa#Aplacophora Bivalvia – List of marine molluscs of South Africa#Bivalvia Cephalopoda – List of marine molluscs of South Africa#Cephalopoda Gastropoda – List of marine gastropods of South Africa List of marine heterobranch gastropods of South Africa Polyplacophora – List of marine molluscs of South Africa#Polyplacophora Scaphopoda – List of marine molluscs of South Africa#Scaphopoda Myxozoa Nematoda Nematomorpha Nemertea Onychophora Orthonectida Phoronida Placozoa Platyhelminthes Cestoda Monogenea Trematoda Turbellaria Porifera – List of sponges of South Africa Priapulida Rhombozoa Rotifera Sipuncula Tardigrada Xenacoelomorpha This section needs expansion with: Introductory text and links to more lists, Lists of indigenous animal species, [ 62 ] Lists of invasive alien species, Lists of endangered species. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Fungi [ edit ] By 1945, more than 4900 species of fungi (including lichen-forming species) had been recorded, [ 63 ] and by 2006, the number of fungi in South Africa was estimated at 200,000 species, without taking into account fungi associated with insects.

[ 50 ] If correct, then the number of South African fungi dwarfs that of its plants. In at least some major South African ecosystems, an exceptionally high percentage of fungi are highly specific in terms of the plants with which they occur.

[ 64 ] The country's Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan does not mention fungi (including lichen-forming fungi).

[ 65 ] This section needs expansion with: List of checklists by phylum or similar, also Wood, Alan R. (2017).

"Fungi and invasions in South Africa" .

Bothalia .

47 (2). Pretoria: Bothalia - African Biodiversity & Conservation.

doi : 10.4102/abc.v47i2.2124 .

ISSN 2311-9284 .

. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Ascomycota Basidiomycota Zygomycota Lichen -forming and lichenicolous fungi Oomycete History [ edit ] I. B. Pole-Evans established a national collection of fungi in Pretoria after his appointment in 1905. The previously existing collections of MacOwan and Medley Wood comprised 765 specimens. By 1950 the collection included more than 35 000 fungal specimens. The collections of P.A. van der Bijl and L. Verwoerd were housed at Stellenbosch, and the P. MacOwan collection and Bolus herbarium collections at Cape Town. Several European herbaria, including Kew and the International Mycological Institute also held collections.

E. M. Doidge (1950) summarised the content, listing 835 species of Ascomycetes, 1704 Basidiomycetes, 93  Myxomycetes, 77 Phycomycetes, 1159 lichens, and 880 fungi imperfecti, with a total of 4748 species.

[ 50 ] Other eukaryotes [ edit ] Seaweed – Macroscopic marine algae Green algae – Paraphyletic group of eukaryotes – List of green seaweeds of South Africa Brown algae – Large group of multicellular algae, comprising the class Phaeophyceae – List of brown seaweeds of South Africa Red algae – Division of plant life – List of red seaweeds of South Africa This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Prokaryotes [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Threats [ edit ] Biodiversity loss is the extinction of species worldwide, and also the local reduction or loss of species in a given habitat . Local losses can be temporary or permanent, depending on whether the environmental degradation that leads to the loss is reversible through ecological restoration or ecological resilience , or effectively permanent. Global extinction has so far been proven to be irreversible.

Even though permanent global species loss is a more dramatic phenomenon than regional changes in species composition , even minor changes from a healthy stable state can have dramatic influence on the food web and the food chain insofar as reductions in only one species can adversely affect the entire chain ( coextinction ), leading to an overall reduction in biodiversity , possible alternative stable states of an ecosystem notwithstanding.

Ecological effects of biodiversity are usually counteracted by its loss. Reduced biodiversity in particular leads to reduced ecosystem services and eventually poses an immediate danger for food security , both within the ecosystem, and for human populations relying on it.

[ 66 ] Habitat change by way of habitat fragmentation or habitat destruction ) is the most important driver currently affecting biodiversity, as some 40% of forests and ice-free habitats have been converted to cropland or pasture.

[ 67 ] Other drivers are: overexploitation , pollution , invasive species , and climate change .

Human impacts [ edit ] According to a 2019 Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services by IPBES , 25% of plant and animal species are globally threatened with extinction as the result of human activity.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] As a region with high endemic diversity and three major biodiversity hotspots, South Africa is one of the regions where this is highly significant.

This section needs expansion with: Anthropogenic threats to biodiversity of SA. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Climate change [ edit ] See also: Climate change in South Africa Climate change includes both the global warming driven by human emissions of greenhouse gases , and the resulting large-scale shifts in weather patterns.

[ 71 ] While there have been previous periods of climatic change , changes observed since the mid-20th century have been unprecedented in rate and scale.

[ 72 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Endangered species [ edit ] See also: Endangered species An endangered species is a species that is very likely to become extinct in the near future, either worldwide or in a particular region. Endangered species may be at risk due to factors such as habitat loss , poaching and invasive species . The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List lists the global conservation status of many species, and various other agencies assess the status of species within particular areas. Some endangered species are the target of extensive conservation efforts such as captive breeding and habitat restoration .

This section needs expansion with: Lists of endangered species. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Extinction [ edit ] See also: Extinction Rapid environmental changes typically cause mass extinctions .

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] More than 99.9 percent of all species that ever lived on Earth, amounting to over five billion species, [ 76 ] are estimated to be extinct.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] This section needs expansion with: Lists of recent extinctions. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Economic value [ edit ] Ways in which the biodiversity of SA has economic value to the inhabitants Natural resources Employment opportunities Tourism industry The economical worth of fynbos biodiversity, based on harvests of fynbos products (e.g.

wildflowers ) and eco-tourism , is estimated to be in the region of R 77 million a year.

[ 48 ] Thus, it is clear that the Cape Floristic Region has both economic and intrinsic biological value as a biodiversity hotspot .

[ 48 ] Management [ edit ] South Africa signed the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity on 4 June 1994, and became a party to the convention on 2 November 1995.

[ 79 ] It has subsequently produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan , which was received by the convention on 7 June 2006.

[ 65 ] Responsibility [ edit ] Government department - Department of the Environment, Forestry and Fisheries. Previous departments: DEAT etc.

Laws This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Sustainable use [ edit ] Ecotourism in South Africa has become more prevalent as a possible method of supporting the maintenance of biodiversity.

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Protection [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: intro on ways to protect, and their effectiveness. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Protected areas [ edit ] See also: List of protected areas of South Africa The protected areas of South Africa include national parks and marine protected areas managed by the national government , public nature reserves managed by provincial and local governments , and private nature reserves managed by private landowners. Most protected areas are intended for the conservation of flora and fauna . National parks are maintained by South African National Parks ( SANParks ).

[ 80 ] A number of national parks have been incorporated in transfrontier conservation areas .

Research [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: History of research on biodiversity in SA. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) Research institutions [ edit ] The South African National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) is an organisation established in 2004 in terms of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, No 10 of 2004 , under the South African Department of Environmental Affairs (later named Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries ), tasked with research and dissemination of information on biodiversity, and legally mandated to contribute to the management of the country's biodiversity resources.

[ 81 ] Council for Scientific and Industrial Research ( CSIR ) – South African scientific research and development organisation Iziko South African Museum – South African national museum in Cape Town Marine research: South African Association for Marine Biological Research – Non profit conservation research organisation based in Durban, SA South African Environmental Observation Network ( SAEON ) – A network to perform long-term ecological research in South Africa and surrounding waters South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity ( SAIAB ) – Centre for the study of aquatic biodiversity in Grahamstown, South Africa This section needs expansion with: Others?. You can help by adding to it .

( September 2020 ) National Biodiversity Assessment [ edit ] The National Biodiversity Assessment (NBA) is a recurring project by the South African National Biodiversity Institute in collaboration with the government department currently responsible for environmental affairs and several other organisations to assess the state of South Africa's biodiversity over time as an input for policy and decision making where the environment may be affected. The NBA looks into genetic, species and ecosystems biodiversity for terrestrial, freshwater, estuarine and marine environments. Each assessment cycle nominally takes approximately five years, and both generates new knowledge and analyses existing knowledge.

[ 82 ] NBA reports are named for the year of the data, and are usually published in the following year. They have been published for 2004, [ 42 ] 2011, [ 43 ] and 2018, [ 49 ] and include reports, data, and supplementary documents.

[ 83 ] See also [ edit ] Biodiversity – Variety and variability of life forms References [ edit ] ^ a b "Biodiversity of the world by countries" . Institutoaqualung.com.br. Archived from the original on 1 November 2010 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ a b c d Tolley, K.A.; da Silva, J.M.; Jansen van Vuuren, B. (2019).

South African National Biodiversity Assessment 2018 Technical Report (Report). Vol. 7: Genetic Diversity. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute.

hdl : 20.500.12143/6376 .

^ a b Skowno, A.L.; Poole, C.J.; Raimondo, D.C.; Sink, K.J.; Van Deventer, H.; Van Niekerk, L.; Harris, L.R.; Smith-Adao, L.B.; Tolley, K.A.; Zengeya, T.A.; Foden, W.B.; Midgley, G.F.; Driver, A. (2019). National Biodiversity Assessment 2018: The status of South Africa's ecosystems and biodiversity. Synthesis Report (Report). South African National Biodiversity Institute, an entity of the Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries, Pretoria. pp.

1– 214.

ISBN 978-1-928224-34-1 .

^ Poole, Carol (18 September 2019).

National Biodiversity Assessment 2018: Facts Findings and Messages (Report). South African National Biodiversity Institute.

hdl : 20.500.12143/6639 .

^ "What is biodiversity?" (PDF) .

United Nations Environment Programme , World Conservation Monitoring Centre.

^ Garston, Kevin J.; Spicer, John I. (2013-04-22).

Biodiversity: An Introduction . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-118-68491-7 .

^ Tittensor, Derek P.; Mora, Camilo; Jetz, Walter; Lotze, Heike K.; Richard, Daniel; Vanden Berghe, Edward; Worm, Boris (28 July 2010). "Global patterns and predictors of marine biodiversity across taxa".

Nature .

466 (7310): 1098– 1101.

Bibcode : 2010Natur.466.1098T .

doi : 10.1038/nature09329 .

PMID 20668450 .

S2CID 4424240 .

^ Myers, Norman; Mittermeier, Russell A.; Mittermeier, Cristina G.; Da Fonseca, Gustavo A. B.; Kent, Jennifer (24 February 2000). "Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities".

Nature .

403 (6772): 853– 858.

Bibcode : 2000Natur.403..853M .

doi : 10.1038/35002501 .

PMID 10706275 .

S2CID 4414279 .

^ McPeek, Mark A.; Brown, Jonathan M. (1 April 2007). "Clade Age and Not Diversification Rate Explains Species Richness among Animal Taxa".

The American Naturalist .

169 (4): E97 – E106 .

Bibcode : 2007ANat..169E..97M .

doi : 10.1086/512135 .

PMID 17427118 .

S2CID 22533070 .

^ Peters, Shanan.

"Sepkoski's Online Genus Database" . University of Wisconsin-Madison . Retrieved 10 April 2013 .

^ Rabosky, Daniel L. (1 August 2009). "Ecological limits and diversification rate: alternative paradigms to explain the variation in species richness among clades and regions".

Ecology Letters .

12 (8): 735– 743.

Bibcode : 2009EcolL..12..735R .

doi : 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2009.01333.x .

PMID 19558515 .

S2CID 10292976 .

^ Miller, G.; Spoolman, Scott (2012).

Environmental Science – Biodiversity Is a Crucial Part of the Earth's Natural Capital .

Cengage Learning . p. 62.

ISBN 978-1-133-70787-5 . Retrieved 27 December 2014 .

^ Mora, C.; Tittensor, D.P.; Adl, S.; Simpson, A.G.; Worm, B. (23 August 2011).

"How many species are there on Earth and in the ocean?" .

PLOS Biology .

9 (8): e1001127.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001127 .

PMC 3160336 .

PMID 21886479 .

^ Staff (2 May 2016).

"Researchers find that Earth may be home to 1 trillion species" .

National Science Foundation . Retrieved 6 May 2016 .

^ a b Sahney, S.; Benton, M. J. (2008).

"Recovery from the most profound mass extinction of all time" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

275 (1636): 759– 765.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2007.1370 .

PMC 2596898 .

PMID 18198148 .

^ a b Mayr, Ernst (1982).

The Growth of Biological Thought: Diversity, Evolution, and Inheritance . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-36445-5 .

LCCN 81013204 .

OCLC 7875904 .

^ "Age of the Earth" . U.S. Geological Survey. 1997.

Archived from the original on 23 December 2005 . Retrieved 10 January 2006 .

^ Dalrymple, G. Brent (2001). "The age of the Earth in the twentieth century: a problem (mostly) solved".

Special Publications, Geological Society of London .

190 (1): 205– 221.

Bibcode : 2001GSLSP.190..205D .

doi : 10.1144/GSL.SP.2001.190.01.14 .

S2CID 130092094 .

^ Manhesa, Gérard; Allègre, Claude J.; Dupréa, Bernard; Hamelin, Bruno (1980). "Lead isotope study of basic-ultrabasic layered complexes: Speculations about the age of the earth and primitive mantle characteristics".

Earth and Planetary Science Letters .

47 (3): 370– 382.

Bibcode : 1980E&PSL..47..370M .

doi : 10.1016/0012-821X(80)90024-2 .

^ Schopf, J. William; Kudryavtsev, Anatoliy B.; Czaja, Andrew D.; Tripathi, Abhishek B. (5 October 2007). "Evidence of Archean life: Stromatolites and microfossils".

Precambrian Research . Earliest Evidence of Life on Earth.

158 ( 3– 4): 141– 155.

Bibcode : 2007PreR..158..141S .

doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2007.04.009 .

^ Schopf, J. William (29 June 2006).

"Fossil evidence of Archaean life" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

361 (1470): 869– 885.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2006.1834 .

ISSN 0962-8436 .

PMC 1578735 .

PMID 16754604 .

^ Hamilton Raven, Peter; Brooks Johnson, George (2002).

Biology . McGraw-Hill Education. p. 68.

ISBN 978-0-07-112261-0 . Retrieved 7 July 2013 .

^ Borenstein, Seth (13 November 2013).

"Oldest fossil found: Meet your microbial mom" .

AP News .

^ Pearlman, Jonathan (13 November 2013).

" 'Oldest signs of life on Earth found' – Scientists discover potentially oldest signs of life on Earth – 3.5 billion-year-old microbe traces in rocks in Australia" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 15 December 2014 .

^ Noffke, Nora ; Christian, Daniel; Wacey, David; Hazen, Robert M. (8 November 2013).

"Microbially Induced Sedimentary Structures Recording an Ancient Ecosystem in the ca. 3.48 Billion-Year-Old Dresser Formation, Pilbara, Western Australia" .

Astrobiology .

13 (12): 1103– 1124.

Bibcode : 2013AsBio..13.1103N .

doi : 10.1089/ast.2013.1030 .

PMC 3870916 .

PMID 24205812 .

^ Ohtomo, Yoko; Kakegawa, Takeshi; Ishida, Akizumi; Nagase, Toshiro; Rosing, Minik T. (8 December 2013). "Evidence for biogenic graphite in early Archaean Isua metasedimentary rocks".

Nature Geoscience .

7 (1): 25– 28.

Bibcode : 2014NatGe...7...25O .

doi : 10.1038/ngeo2025 .

S2CID 54767854 .

^ Borenstein, Seth (19 October 2011).

"Hints of life on what was thought to be desolate early Earth" .

^ Bell, Elizabeth A.; Boehnike, Patrick; Harrison, T. Mark; Mao, Wendy L.

(24 November 2015).

"Potentially biogenic carbon preserved in a 4.1 billion-year-old zircon" (PDF) .

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A .

112 (47): 14518– 14521.

Bibcode : 2015PNAS..11214518B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1517557112 .

ISSN 1091-6490 .

PMC 4664351 .

PMID 26483481 .

^ "The Cambrian Period" .

University of California Museum of Paleontology . Archived from the original on 15 May 2012 . Retrieved 17 May 2012 .

^ Sahney, S.; Benton, M.J.; Falcon-Lang, H.J. (2010). "Rainforest collapse triggered Pennsylvanian tetrapod diversification in Euramerica".

Geology .

38 (12): 1079– 1082.

Bibcode : 2010Geo....38.1079S .

doi : 10.1130/G31182.1 .

^ "Cretaceous-Tertiary mass extinction videos, news and facts" . BBC Nature. Archived from the original on 9 June 2017 . Retrieved 5 June 2017 .

^ Vignieri, S. (25 July 2014).

"Vanishing fauna (Special issue)" .

Science .

345 (6195): 392– 412.

Bibcode : 2014Sci...345..392V .

doi : 10.1126/science.345.6195.392 .

PMID 25061199 .

^ Sala, Osvaldo E.; Meyerson, Laura A.; Parmesan, Camille (26 January 2009).

Biodiversity change and human health: from ecosystem services to spread of disease . Island Press. pp.

3– 5.

ISBN 978-1-59726-497-6 . Retrieved 28 June 2011 .

^ Spalding, M. D. (2007).

"Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas" (PDF) .

BioScience .

57 (7): 573– 583.

doi : 10.1641/B570707 .

S2CID 29150840 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-10-06.

^ "Tenfold increase in marine protected areas supports SA's sustainable oceans economy" .

www.sanbi.org . 7 October 2019 . Retrieved 30 August 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Harris, L.R.; Sink, K.J.; Skowno, A.L.; Van Niekerk, L., eds. (2019).

South African National Biodiversity Assessment 2018: Technical Report (Report). Vol. 5: Coast. Pretoria.: South African National Biodiversity Institute.

hdl : 20.500.12143/6374 .

^ Cooper, John (June 2006).

"Antarctica and Islands – Background Research Paper produced for the South Africa Environment Outlook report on behalf of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism" (PDF) . p. 6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2016 . Retrieved 5 October 2010 .

^ 1993 United Nations list of national parks and protected areas . World Conservation Monitoring Centre, International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, Commission on Natural Parks and Protected Areas, United Nations Environment Programme. 1993. p. 173.

ISBN 978-2-8317-0190-5 .

^ "Prince Edward Islands declared a Marine Protected Area" . Department of Environmental Affairs, Republic of South Africa. 9 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2016.

^ "Prince Edward Islands Marine Protected Area: A global treasure setting new conservation benchmarks" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 July 2016.

^ Whitehead, T.O.; Von der Meden, C.; Skowno, A.L.; Sink, K.J.; Van der Merwe, S.; Adams, R.; Holness, S., eds. (2019).

South African National Biodiversity Assessment 2018 Technical Report (Report). Vol. 6: sub-Antarctic Territory. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute.

hdl : 20.500.12143/6375 .

^ a b Lombard, A.T.; Strauss, T.; Harris, J.; Sink, K.; Attwood, C.; Hutchings, L. (2004).

South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment 2004: Technical Report (PDF) (Report). Vol. 4: Marine Component. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute.

^ a b c d e f Sink, K; Holness, S; Harris, L; Majiedt, P; Atkinson, L; Robinson, T; Kirkman, S; Hutchings, L; Leslie, R; Lamberth, S; Kerwath, S; von der Heyden, S; Lombard, A; Attwood, C; Branch, G; Fairweather, T.; Taljaard, S.; Weerts, S.; Cowley, P.; Awad, A.; Halpern, B.; Grantham, H; Wolf, T. (2012).

National Biodiversity Assessment 2011: Technical Report (PDF) (Report). Vol. 4: Marine and Coastal Component. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute. p. 325.

Note: This is the full document, with numbered pages.

^ a b c Sink, K.; Harris, J.; Lombard, A. (October 2004).

Appendix 1. South African marine bioregions (PDF) .

South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment 2004: Technical Report Vol. 4 Marine Component DRAFT (Report). pp.

97– 109.

^ Sink, K.; Holness, S.; Harris, L.; Majiedt, P.; Atkinson, L.; Robinson, T.; Kirkman, S.; Hutchings, L.; Leslie, R.; Lambeth, S.; Kerwath, S.; von der Heyden, S.; Lombard, A.; Attwood, C.; Branch, G.; Fairweather, T.; Taljaard, S.; Weerts, S.; Cowley, P.; Awad, A.; Halpern, B.; Grantham, H.; Wolf, T. (2012).

National Biodiversity Assessment 2011: Technical Report (PDF) (Report). Vol. 4: Marine and Coastal Component. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute. Key findings.

Note: This is the executive summary ^ a b "National Vegetation Map" .

www.sanbi.org . SANBI. 4 March 2018 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Mucina, L.; Rutherford, M.C.; Powrie, L.W. (eds.).

"2012 Vegetation Map of South Africa, Lesotho and Swaziland" .

South African National Biodiversity Institute .

^ a b c d e f g h Odendaal, L. J.; Haupt, T. M.; Griffiths, C. L. (2008).

"The alien invasive land snail Theba pisana in the West Coast National Park: Is there cause for concern?" .

Koedoe – African Protected Area Conservation and Science .

50 (1): 93– 98.

doi : 10.4102/KOEDOE.V50I1.153 .

.

^ a b c Sink, Kerry, J; Van der Bank, Megan; Majiedt, Prideel; Harris, Linda; Atkinson, Lara; Kirkman, Stephen; Karenyi, Natasha (29 September 2019).

South African National Biodiversity Assessment 2018 Technical Report (Report). Vol. 4: Marine Realm. South African National Biodiversity Institute.

hdl : 20.500.12143/6372 .

{{ cite report }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Crous, P. W.; Rong, I. H.; Wood, A.; Lee, S.; Glen, H.; Botha, W. l; Slippers, B.; De Beer, W. Z.; Wingfield, M. J.; Hawksworth, D. L. (2006).

"How many species of fungi are there at the tip of Africa?" .

Studies in Mycology .

55 : 13– 33.

doi : 10.3114/sim.55.1.13 .

PMC 2104731 .

PMID 18490969 .

^ "National Biological Information Infrastructure" .

Introduction to Genetic Diversity . U.S. Geological Survey. Archived from the original on February 25, 2011 . Retrieved March 1, 2011 .

^ "measuring species diversity" (PDF) .

www.webpages.uidaho.edu . University of Idaho.

^ Hoban, Sean (2014-04-30).

"An overview of the utility of population simulation software in molecular Ecology" .

Molecular Ecology .

23 (10): 2383– 2401.

Bibcode : 2014MolEc..23.2383H .

doi : 10.1111/mec.12741 .

PMID 24689878 .

^ "Biodiversity Hotspots in India" .

www.bsienvis.nic.in .

^ a b "Why Hotspots Matter" .

Conservation International .

^ a b "Biodiversity hotspots defined" .

Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund . Conservation International . Retrieved 10 August 2020 .

^ "Biodiversity Hotspots" .

www.e-education.psu.edu .

^ "Biodiversity" . Archived from the original on 2010-03-23.

^ Butler, Rhett A. (1 July 2019).

"Total number of plant species by country" . Mongabay . Retrieved 21 July 2019 .

^ "Vegetation of South Africa" .

PlantZAfrica.com . SA National Biodiversity Institute . Retrieved 24 July 2019 .

^ a b "species_checklist_20180710.csv" . South African National Biodiversity Institute. Archived from the original on 7 October 2020 . Retrieved 27 September 2020 .

^ Khoza, Thembile (26 March 2020).

"Checklist for South African Animal Species" .

opus.sanbi.org . South African National Biodiversity Institute.

hdl : 20.500.12143/6971 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 .

^ Rong, I. H.; Baxter, A. P. (2006).

"The South African National Collection of Fungi: Celebrating a centenary 1905–2005" .

Studies in Mycology .

55 : 1– 12.

doi : 10.3114/sim.55.1.1 .

PMC 2104721 .

PMID 18490968 .

^ Marincowitz, S.; Crous, P.W.; Groenewald, J.Z.; Wingfield, M.J. (2008).

"Microfungi occurring on Proteaceae in the fynbos. CBS Biodiversity Series 7" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 July 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 .

^ a b "South Africa's National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan" (PDF) . Retrieved 10 December 2012 .

^ Cardinale, Bradley (2012).

"Biodiversity loss and its impact on humanity" (PDF) .

Nature .

486 (7401): 59– 67.

Bibcode : 2012Natur.486...59C .

doi : 10.1038/nature11148 .

PMID 22678280 .

S2CID 4333166 .

^ Pereira, H. M. (2012).

"Global Biodiversity Change: The Bad, the Good, and the Unknown" .

Annual Review of Environment and Resources .

37 (1): 25– 50.

Bibcode : 2012ARER...37...25P .

doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-042911-093511 .

S2CID 154898897 .

^ Staff (6 May 2019).

"Media Release: Nature's Dangerous Decline 'Unprecedented'; Species Extinction Rates 'Accelerating' " .

Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services . Retrieved 9 May 2019 .

^ Watts, Jonathan (6 May 2019).

"Human society under urgent threat from loss of Earth's natural life" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 May 2019 .

^ Plumer, Brad (6 May 2019).

"Humans Are Speeding Extinction and Altering the Natural World at an 'Unprecedented' Pace" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 9 May 2019 .

^ IPCC AR5 WG1 Summary for Policymakers 2013 , p. 4: Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s many of the observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia. The atmosphere and ocean have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have diminished, sea level has risen, and the concentrations of greenhouse gases have increased; Gleick, 7 January 2017 ^ IPCC SR15 Ch1 2018 , p. 54: Abundant empirical evidence of the unprecedented rate and global scale of effect of human influence on the Earth System (Steffen et al., 2016; Waters et al., 2016) has led many scientists to call for an acknowledgement that the Earth has entered a new geological epoch: the Anthropocene .

^ Cockell, Charles; Koeberl, Christian; Gilmour, Iain (18 May 2006).

Biological Processes Associated with Impact Events (1 ed.). Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

197– 219.

Bibcode : 2006bpai.book.....C .

ISBN 978-3-540-25736-3 .

^ Algeo, T. J.; Scheckler, S. E. (29 January 1998).

"Terrestrial-marine teleconnections in the Devonian: links between the evolution of land plants, weathering processes, and marine anoxic events" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

353 (1365): 113– 130.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.1998.0195 .

PMC 1692181 .

^ Bond, David P. G.; Wignall, Paul B. (1 June 2008).

"The role of sea-level change and marine anoxia in the Frasnian–Famennian (Late Devonian) mass extinction" (PDF) .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

263 ( 3– 4): 107– 118.

Bibcode : 2008PPP...263..107B .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2008.02.015 .

^ Kunin, W. E.; Gaston, Kevin, eds. (31 December 1996).

The Biology of Rarity: Causes and consequences of rare—common differences . Springer.

ISBN 978-0-412-63380-5 . Retrieved 26 May 2015 .

^ Stearns, Beverly Peterson; Stearns, S. C.; Stearns, Stephen C. (2000).

Watching, from the Edge of Extinction .

Yale University Press . p. preface x.

ISBN 978-0-300-08469-6 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ Novacek, Michael J. (8 November 2014).

"Prehistory's Brilliant Future" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 25 December 2014 .

^ "List of Parties" . Retrieved 8 December 2012 .

^ "Biodiversity & ecosystems" .

Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism . Retrieved 2009-07-01 .

^ "South African National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI)" .

Department of Environmental Affairs . Retrieved 20 January 2019 .

^ "National Biodiversity Assessment" .

www.sanbi.org . 4 March 2018 . Retrieved 14 February 2019 .

^ "2018 National Biodiversity Assessment" .

biodiversityadvisor.sanbi.org . Retrieved 30 August 2020 .

Sources [ edit ] Gleick, Peter (7 January 2017).

"Statements on Climate Change from Major Scientific Academies, Societies, and Associations (January 2017 update)" .

ScienceBlogs . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

IPCC (2013). Stocker, T. F.; Qin, D.; Plattner, G.-K.; Tignor, M.; et al. (eds.).

Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis (PDF) . Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK & New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-05799-9 .

.

IPCC (2013).

"Summary for Policymakers" (PDF) .

IPCC AR5 WG1 2013 .

IPCC (2018). Masson-Delmotte, V.; Zhai, P.; Pörtner, H.-O.; Roberts, D.; et al. (eds.).

Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty (PDF) . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

Global Warming of 1.5 °C — .

Allen, M. R.; Dube, O. P.; Solecki, W.; Aragón-Durand, F.; et al. (2018).

"Chapter 1: Framing and Context" (PDF) .

IPCC SR15 2018 . pp.

49– 91.

v t e Biodiversity of South Africa Afrotropical realm Marine biodiversity of South Africa Temperate Southern Africa Western Indo-Pacific Wildlife of South Africa National taxon checklists Plants Conifers Cycads Hornworts Liverworts Lycophytes Mosses Pteridophytes Flowering plants Acorales Alismatales Apiales Apiaceae Aquifoliales Arecales Asparagales Asphodelaceae Hyacinthaceae Iridaceae Orchidaceae Asterales Asteraceae Boraginales Brassicales Bruniales Buxales Canellales Caryophyllales Aizoaceae Celastrales Ceratophyllales Commelinales Cornales Crossosomatales Cucurbitales Dioscoreales Dipsacales Ericales Escalloniales Fabales Fagales Gentianales Apocynaceae Rubiaceae Geraniales Gunnerales Huerteales Icacinales Lamiales Acanthaceae Lamiaceae Scrophulariaceae Laurales Liliales Magnoliales Malpighiales Euphorbiaceae Malvales Myrtales Nymphaeales Oxalidales Pandanales Piperales Poales Poaceae Proteales Ranunculales Rosales Santalales Sapindales Saxifragales Solanales Vahliales Vitales Zingiberales Zygophyllales Animals Ascidians Bryozoans Comb jellies Echinoderms Nematodes Polychaetes Marine cnidarians Marine flatworms Sponges Tardigrades Arthropods Marine crustaceans Sea spiders Centipedes Millipedes Entognatha Arachnids Harvestmen Microwhip scorpions Pseudoscorpions Scorpions Shorttailed whipscorpions Solifugae Araneae Ixodida Whip spiders and tailless whip scorpions Insects Alderflies, dobsonflies and fishflies Beetles Booklice, barklice and barkflies Butterflies and moths Caddisflies Cockroaches and termites Dragonflies and damselflies Earwigs Fleas Flies Jumping bristletails Lice Mantises Mayflies Net-winged insects Notoptera Orthoptera Sawflies, wasps, bees, and ants Scorpionflies Silverfish and firebrats Stick and leaf insects Stoneflies Strepsiptera Termites Thrips True bugs Webspinners Molluscs Non-marine molluscs Marine molluscs Marine gastropods Marine heterobranch gastropods Vertebrates Amphibians Birds Freshwater fishes Marine fishes Marine bony fishes Marine spiny-finned fishes Marine Perciform fishes Mammals Reptiles Seaweeds Green seaweeds Brown seaweeds Red seaweeds Fungi A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Related List of bacteria of South Africa List of invasive species in South Africa List of invasive plant species in South Africa List of Oomycetes of South Africa List of slime moulds of South Africa List of Southern African indigenous trees and woody lianes List of botanists by author abbreviation Regional taxon checklists and other minor lists List of marine invertebrates of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of marine vertebrates of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of green seaweeds of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of brown seaweeds of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of red seaweeds of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay Related: Timber trees of Gauteng Biodiversity hotspots and Centres of diversity Cape Floristic Region Maputaland-Pondoland-Albany Hotspot Succulent Karoo Succulent Karoo Cape Floristic Region Griqualand West Centre Albany Centre Drakensberg Alpine Centre Soutpansberg Centre Wolkberg Centre Sekhukhuneland Centre Barberton Centre Maputaland-Pondoland Region Ecoregions List of ecoregions in South Africa Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests Knysna–Amatole montane forests KwaZulu–Cape coastal forest mosaic Maputaland coastal forest mosaic Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Kalahari Acacia-Baikiaea woodlands Southern Africa bushveld Zambezian and mopane woodlands Montane grasslands and shrublands Drakensberg alti-montane grasslands and woodlands Drakensberg montane grasslands, woodlands and forests Highveld grasslands Maputaland–Pondoland bushland and thickets Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Albany thickets Lowland fynbos and renosterveld Montane fynbos and renosterveld Deserts and xeric shrublands Kalahari xeric savanna Nama Karoo Succulent Karoo Tundra Southern Indian Ocean Islands tundra Mangroves Southern Africa mangroves Marine ecoregions Agulhas ecoregion Benguela ecoregion Delagoa ecoregion Natal ecoregion Southeast Atlantic ecoregion Southwest Indian ecoregion Biomes and Vegetation classification List of vegetation types of South Africa Savanna Andesite Mountain Bushveld Aoub Duneveld Barberton Serpentine Sourveld Bhisho Thornveld Cathedral Mopane Bushveld Central Sandy Bushveld Delagoa Lowveld Dwaalboom Thornveld Dwarsberg-Swartruggens Mountain Bushveld Eastern Valley Bushveld Gabbro Grassy Bushveld Gauteng Shale Mountain Bushveld Ghaap Plateau Vaalbosveld Gold Reef Mountain Bushveld Gordonia Duneveld Gordonia Kameeldoring Bushveld Gordonia Plains Shrubland Granite Lowveld Gravelotte Rocky Bushveld Kaalrug Mountain Bushveld Kathu Bushveld Kimberley Thornveld Koranna-Langeberg Mountain Bushveld Kuruman Mountain Bushveld Kuruman Thornveld Kuruman Vaalbosveld KwaZulu-Natal Hinterland Thornveld KwaZulu-Natal Sandstone Sourveld Lebombo Summit Sourveld Legogote Sour Bushveld Limpopo Ridge Bushveld Limpopo Sweet Bushveld Loskop Mountain Bushveld Loskop Thornveld Lowveld Rugged Mopaneveld Madikwe Dolomite Bushveld Mafikeng Bushveld Makatini Clay Thicket Makhado Sweet Bushveld Makuleke Sandy Bushveld Malelane Mountain Bushveld Mamabolo Mountain Bushveld Marikana Thornveld Molopo Bushveld Moot Plains Bushveld Mopane Basalt Shrubland Mopane Gabbro Shrubland Musina Mopane Bushveld Ngongoni Veld Norite Koppies Bushveld Northern Lebombo Bushveld Northern Zululand Sourveld Nossob Bushveld Nwambyia-Pumbe Sandy Bushveld Ohrigstad Mountain Bushveld Olifantshoek Plains Thornveld Phalaborwa-Timbavati Mopaneveld Pilanesberg Mountain Bushveld Polokwane Plateau Bushveld Postmasburg Thornveld Poung Dolomite Mountain Bushveld Pretoriuskop Sour Bushveld Roodeberg Bushveld Schmidtsdrif Thornveld Schweizer-Reneke Bushveld Sekhukhune Mountain Bushveld Sekhukhune Plains Bushveld South Eastern Coastal Thornveld Southern Lebombo Bushveld Soutpansberg Mountain Bushveld Springbokvlakte Thornveld Stella Bushveld Swaziland Sour Bushveld Tembe Sandy Bushveld Thukela Thornveld Thukela Valley Bushveld Tsende Mopaneveld Tshokwane-Hlane Basalt Lowveld Tzaneen Sour Bushveld Vaalbos Rocky Shrubland VhaVenda Miombo Waterberg Mountain Bushveld Western Maputaland Clay Bushveld Western Maputaland Sandy Bushveld Western Sandy Bushveld Zeerust Thornveld Zululand Coastal Thornveld Zululand Lowveld Grassland Aliwal North Dry Grassland Amathole Mistbelt Grassland Amathole Montane Grassland Amersfoort Highveld Clay Grassland Barberton Montane Grassland Basotho Montane Shrubland Bedford Dry Grassland Besemkaree Koppies Shrubland Bloemfontein Dry Grassland Bloemfontein Karroid Shrubland Carletonville Dolomite Grassland Central Free State Grassland Drakensberg Afroalpine Heathland Drakensberg Foothill Moist Grassland Drakensberg-Amathole Afromontane Fynbos East Griqualand Grassland Eastern Free State Clay Grassland Eastern Free State Sandy Grassland Eastern Highveld Grassland Egoli Granite Grassland Frankfort Highveld Grassland Income Sandy Grassland Ithala Quartzite Sourveld KaNgwane Montane Grassland Karoo Escarpment Grassland Klerksdorp Thornveld KwaZulu-Natal Highland Thornveld Leolo Summit Sourveld Lesotho Highland Basalt Grassland Low Escarpment Moist Grassland Lydenburg Montane Grassland Lydenburg Thornveld Mabela Sandy Grassland Midlands Mistbelt Grassland Mooi River Highland Grassland Mthatha Moist Grassland Northern Drakensberg Highland Grassland Northern Escarpment Afromontane Fynbos Northern Escarpment Dolomite Grassland Northern Escarpment Quartzite Sourveld Northern Free State Shrubland Northern KwaZulu-Natal Moist Grassland Northern KwaZulu-Natal Shrubland Northern Zululand Mistbelt Grassland Paulpietersburg Moist Grassland Queenstown Thornveld Rand Highveld Grassland Sekhukhune Montane Grassland Senqu Montane Shrubland Southern Drakensberg Highland Grassland Southern KwaZulu-Natal Moist Grassland Soutpansberg Summit Sourveld Soweto Highveld Grassland Steenkampsberg Montane Grassland Stormberg Plateau Grassland Strydpoort Summit Sourveld Tarkastad Montane Shrubland Tsakane Clay Grassland Tsomo Grassland uKhahlamba Basalt Grassland Vaal Reefs Dolomite Sinkhole Woodland Vaal-Vet Sandy Grassland Vredefort Dome Granite Grassland Wakkerstroom Montane Grassland Waterberg-Magaliesberg Summit Sourveld Western Free State Clay Grassland Western Highveld Sandy Grassland Western Lesotho Basalt Shrubland Winburg Grassy Shrubland Wolkberg Dolomite Grassland Woodbush Granite Grassland Xhariep Karroid Grassland Zastron Moist Grassland Fynbos Agulhas Limestone Fynbos Agulhas Sand Fynbos Albertinia Sand Fynbos Algoa Sandstone Fynbos Atlantis Sand Fynbos Bokkeveld Sandstone Fynbos Boland Granite Fynbos Breede Alluvium Fynbos Breede Quartzite Fynbos Breede Sand Fynbos Breede Shale Fynbos Canca Limestone Fynbos Cape Flats Sand Fynbos Cape Winelands Shale Fynbos Cederberg Sandstone Fynbos Central Coastal Shale Band Vegetation Central Inland Shale Band Vegetation De Hoop Limestone Fynbos Eastern Coastal Shale Band Vegetation Eastern Inland Shale Band Vegetation Elgin Shale Fynbos Elim Ferricrete Fynbos Garden Route Granite Fynbos Garden Route Shale Fynbos Graafwater Sandstone Fynbos Greyton Shale Fynbos Grootrivier Quartzite Fynbos Hangklip Sand Fynbos Hawequas Sandstone Fynbos Hopefield Sand Fynbos Kamiesberg Granite Fynbos Kango Conglomerate Fynbos Knysna Sand Fynbos Kogelberg Sandstone Fynbos Kouebokkeveld Alluvium Fynbos Kouebokkeveld Shale Fynbos Kouga Grassy Sandstone Fynbos Kouga Sandstone Fynbos Leipoldtville Sand Fynbos Loerie Conglomerate Fynbos Lourensford Alluvium Fynbos Matjiesfontein Quartzite Fynbos Matjiesfontein Shale Fynbos Montagu Shale Fynbos Namaqualand Sand Fynbos North Hex Sandstone Fynbos North Kammanassie Sandstone Fynbos North Langeberg Sandstone Fynbos North Outeniqua Sandstone Fynbos North Rooiberg Sandstone Fynbos North Sonderend Sandstone Fynbos North Swartberg Sandstone Fynbos Northern Inland Shale Band Vegetation Olifants Sandstone Fynbos Overberg Sandstone Fynbos Peninsula Granite Fynbos Peninsula Sandstone Fynbos Piketberg Sandstone Fynbos Potberg Ferricrete Fynbos Potberg Sandstone Fynbos Robertson Granite Fynbos South Hex Sandstone Fynbos South Kammanassie Sandstone Fynbos South Langeberg Sandstone Fynbos South Outeniqua Sandstone Fynbos South Rooiberg Sandstone Fynbos South Sonderend Sandstone Fynbos South Swartberg Sandstone Fynbos Southern Cape Dune Fynbos Stinkfonteinberge Quartzite Fynbos Suurberg Quartzite Fynbos Suurberg Shale Fynbos Swartberg Altimontane Sandstone Fynbos Swartberg Shale Fynbos Swartland Alluvium Fynbos Swartruggens Quartzite Fynbos Swellendam Silcrete Fynbos Tsitsikamma Sandstone Fynbos Western Altimontane Sandstone Fynbos Western Coastal Shale Band Vegetation Winterhoek Sandstone Fynbos Renosterveld Baviaanskloof Shale Renosterveld Breede Alluvium Renosterveld Breede Shale Renosterveld Central Mountain Shale Renosterveld Central Ruêns Shale Renosterveld Ceres Shale Renosterveld Eastern Ruêns Shale Renosterveld Hantam Plateau Dolerite Renosterveld Humansdorp Shale Renosterveld Kango Limestone Renosterveld Langkloof Shale Renosterveld Matjiesfontein Shale Renosterveld Montagu Shale Renosterveld Mossel Bay Shale Renosterveld Namaqualand Granite Renosterveld Nieuwoudtville Shale Renosterveld Nieuwoudtville-Roggeveld Dolerite Renosterveld Peninsula Shale Renosterveld Robertson Granite Renosterveld Roggeveld Shale Renosterveld Ruêns Silcrete Renosterveld Swartberg Shale Renosterveld Swartland Alluvium Renosterveld Swartland Granite Renosterveld Swartland Shale Renosterveld Swartland Silcrete Renosterveld Uniondale Shale Renosterveld Vanrhynsdorp Shale Renosterveld Western Ruêns Shale Renosterveld Succulent Karoo Aggeneys Gravel Vygieveld Agter-Sederberg Shrubland Anenous Plateau Shrubland Bushmanland Inselberg Shrubland Central Knersvlakte Vygieveld Central Richtersveld Mountain Shrubland Citrusdal Vygieveld Die Plate Succulent Shrubland Doringrivier Quartzite Karoo Eastern Little Karoo Eenriet Plains Succulent Shrubland Goariep Mountain Succulent Shrubland Hantam Karoo Kamiesberg Mountains Shrubland Klawer Sandy Shrubland Knersvlakte Dolomite Vygieveld Knersvlakte Quartz Vygieveld Knersvlakte Shale Vygieveld Koedoesberge-Moordenaars Karoo Kosiesberg Succulent Shrubland Lekkersing Succulent Shrubland Little Karoo Quartz Vygieveld Namaqualand Arid Grassland Namaqualand Blomveld Namaqualand Coastal Duneveld Namaqualand Heuweltjie Strandveld Namaqualand Heuweltjieveld Namaqualand Inland Duneveld Namaqualand Klipkoppe Shrubland Namaqualand Shale Shrubland Namaqualand Spinescent Grassland Namaqualand Strandveld Northern Knersvlakte Vygieveld Northern Richtersveld Scorpionstailveld Northern Richtersveld Yellow Duneveld Oograbies Plains Sandy Grassland Piketberg Quartz Succulent Shrubland Platbakkies Succulent Shrubland Prince Albert Succulent Karoo Richtersveld Coastal Duneveld Richtersveld Red Duneveld Richtersveld Sandy Coastal Scorpionstailveld Riethuis-Wallekraal Quartz Vygieveld Robertson Karoo Roggeveld Karoo Rooiberg Quartz Vygieveld Rosyntjieberg Succulent Shrubland Southern Namaqualand Quartzite Klipkoppe Shrubland Southern Richtersveld Inselberg Shrubland Southern Richtersveld Scorpionstailveld Southern Richtersveld Yellow Duneveld Steytlerville Karoo Stinkfonteinberge Eastern Apron Shrubland Swartruggens Quartzite Karoo Tanqua Escarpment Shrubland Tanqua Karoo Tatasberg Mountain Succulent Shrubland Umdaus Mountains Succulent Shrubland Upper Annisvlakte Succulent Shrubland Vanrhynsdorp Gannabosveld Vyftienmyl se Berge Succulent Shrubland Western Bushmanland Klipveld Western Gwarrieveld Western Little Karoo Willowmore Gwarrieveld Albany Thicket and Strandveld Albany Arid Thicket Albany Bontveld Albany Mesic Thicket Albany Valley Thicket Baviaans Valley Thicket Bethelsdorp Bontveld Blombos Strandveld Buffels Mesic Thicket Buffels Valley Thicket Cape Flats Dune Strandveld Crossroads Grassland Thicket Doubledrift Karroid Thicket Eastern Gwarrieveld Elands Forest Thicket Escarpment Arid Thicket Escarpment Mesic Thicket Escarpment Valley Thicket Fish Arid Thicket Fish Mesic Thicket Fish Valley Thicket Gamka Arid Thicket Gamka Valley Thicket Geluk Grassland Thicket Goukamma Dune Thicket Gouritz Valley Thicket Grahamstown Grassland Thicket Grassridge Bontveld Groot Brak Dune Strandveld Hamburg Dune Thicket Hartenbos Dune Thicket Kasouga Dune Thicket Koedoeskloof Karroid Thicket Lambert's Bay Strandveld Langebaan Dune Strandveld Mons Ruber Fynbos Thicket Motherwell Karroid Thicket Nanaga Savanna Thicket Oudshoorn Karroid Thicket Overberg Dune Strandveld Saldanha Flats Strandveld Saldanha Granite Strandveld Saldanha Limestone Strandveld Saltaire Karroid Thicket Sardinia Forest Thicket St Francis Dune Thicket Subtropical Dune Thicket Sundays Arid Thicket Sundays Mesic Thicket Sundays Valley Thicket Thorndale Forest Thicket Umtiza Forest Thicket Vanstadens Forest Thicket Western Gwarrieveld Willowmore Gwarrieveld Nama Karoo and desert Albany Broken Veld Blouputs Karroid Thornveld Bushmanland Arid Grassland Bushmanland Basin Shrubland Bushmanland Sandy Grassland Eastern Lower Karoo Eastern Upper Karoo Gamka Karoo Kalahari Karroid Shrubland Lower Gariep Broken Veld Lower Karoo Gwarrieveld Northern Upper Karoo Upper Karoo Hardeveld Western Upper Karoo Alexander Bay Coastal Duneveld Eastern Gariep Plains Desert Eastern Gariep Rocky Desert Helskloof Canyon Desert Kahams Mountain Desert Kwaggarug Mountain Desert Namib Lichen Fields Noms Mountain Desert Northern Nababiepsberge Mountain Desert Richtersberg Mountain Desert Richtersveld Sheet Wash Desert Southern Nababiepsberge Mountain Desert Western Gariep Hills Desert Western Gariep Lowland Desert Western Gariep Plains Desert Azonal Albany Alluvial Vegetation Albany Dune Strandveld Algoa Dune Strandveld Arid Estuarine Salt Marshes Bushmanland Vloere Cape Estuarine Salt Marshes Cape Inland Salt Pans Cape Lowland Alluvial Vegetation Cape Lowland Freshwater Wetlands Cape Seashore Vegetation Cape Vernal Pools Drakensberg Wetlands Eastern Temperate Freshwater Wetlands Fynbos Riparian Vegetation Highveld Alluvial Vegetation Highveld Salt Pans Lesotho Mires Lower Gariep Alluvial Vegetation Muscadel Riviere Namaqualand Riviere Namaqualand Salt Pans Namaqualand Seashore Vegetation Namib Seashore Vegetation Southern Kalahari Mekgacha Southern Kalahari Salt Pans Southern Karoo Riviere Subantarctic Kelp Bed Vegetation Subtropical Alluvial Vegetation Subtropical Dune Thicket Subtropical Estuarine Salt Marshes Subtropical Freshwater Wetlands Subtropical Salt Pans Subtropical Seashore Vegetation Tanqua Wash Riviere Upper Gariep Alluvial Vegetation Forest and Coastal belt KwaZulu-Natal Coastal Belt Maputaland Coastal Belt Maputaland Wooded Grassland Pondoland-Natal Sandstone Coastal Sourveld Transkei Coastal Belt Ironwood Dry Forest Lowveld Riverine Forest Mangrove Forest Northern Afrotemperate Forest Northern Coastal Forest Northern Mistbelt Forest Sand Forest Scarp Forest Southern Afrotemperate Forest Southern Coastal Forest Southern Mistbelt Forest Swamp Forest Subantarctic biome Subantarctic Biotic Herbfield and Grassland Subantarctic Cinder Cone Vegetation Subantarctic Coastal Vegetation Subantarctic Drainage Line Vegetation Subantarctic Fellfield Subantarctic Fernbrake Vegetation Subantarctic Mire Subantarctic Polar Desert not on VEGMAP List of forests of South Africa List of forests of the Eastern Cape Forests of KwaZulu-Natal KwaZulu-Natal Dune Forest KwaZulu-Natal coastal lowland forest List of forests of the Western Cape Protected areas of South Africa Index of protected areas of South Africa South African National Parks Addo Elephant National Park Agulhas National Park Augrabies Falls National Park Bontebok National Park Camdeboo National Park Garden Route National Park Tsitsikamma National Park Wilderness National Park Golden Gate Highlands National Park Karoo National Park Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park Kruger National Park Mapungubwe National Park Marakele National Park Mokala National Park Mountain Zebra National Park Namaqua National Park Table Mountain National Park Tankwa Karoo National Park West Coast National Park ǀAi-ǀAis/Richtersveld Transfrontier Park Biosphere reserves Cape Winelands Biosphere Reserve Gouritz Cluster Biosphere Reserve Kogelberg Nature Reserve Kruger to Canyons Biosphere Magaliesberg Biosphere Reserve Waterberg Biosphere Marine protected areas of South Africa Coastal Addo Elephant National Park Marine Protected Area Amathole Marine Protected Area Betty's Bay Marine Protected Area Bird Island Marine Protected Area De Hoop Marine Protected Area Dwesa-Cwebe Marine Protected Area Goukamma Marine Protected Area Helderberg Marine Protected Area Hluleka Marine Protected Area I iSimangaliso Marine Protected Area Jutten Island Marine Protected Area Langebaan Lagoon Marine Protected Area Malgas Island Marine Protected Area Marcus Island Marine Protected Area Namaqua National Park Marine Protected Area Pondoland Marine Protected Area Robben Island Marine Protected Area Rocherpan Marine Protected Area Robberg Marine Protected Area Sardinia Bay Marine Protected Area Sixteen Mile Beach Marine Protected Area Stilbaai Marine Protected Area Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area Trafalgar Marine Protected Area Tsitsikamma Marine Protected Area uThukela Banks Marine Protected Area Walker Bay Whale Sanctuary Offshore Agulhas Bank Complex Marine Protected Area Agulhas Front Marine Protected Area Agulhas Muds Marine Protected Area Aliwal Shoal Marine Protected Area Amathole Offshore Marine Protected Area Benguela Bank Marine Protected Area Benguela Muds Marine Protected Area Browns Bank Complex Marine Protected Area Browns Bank Corals Marine Protected Area Cape Canyon Marine Protected Area Childs Bank Marine Protected Area iSimangaliso Offshore Marine Protected Area Namaqua Fossil Forest Marine Protected Area Orange Shelf Edge Marine Protected Area Prince Edward Islands Marine Protected Area Protea Banks Marine Protected Area Southeast Atlantic Seamounts Marine Protected Area Southwest Indian Seamount Marine Protected Area Port Elizabeth Corals Marine Protected Area uThukela Banks Marine Protected Area Management organisations CapeNature City of Cape Town Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries Department of Science and Innovation Eastern Cape Parks Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife iSimangaliso Wetland Park Authority Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality South African National Parks Biodiversity research in SA Bolus Herbarium Iziko South African Museum National Research Foundation South African National Collection of Fungi Research organisations Animal Demography Unit BirdLife South Africa South African Association for Marine Biological Research South African Environmental Observation Network South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity South African National Biodiversity Institute Research projects African Coelacanth Ecosystem Programme National Biodiversity Assessment National Vegetation Map Project Reef Atlas Project SeaKeys Citizen science databases iNaturalist iSpot Percy FitzPatrick Institute of African Ornithology Virtual Museum Botanical gardens Durban Botanic Gardens Free State National Botanical Garden Garden Route Botanical Garden Hantam National Botanical Garden Harold Porter National Botanical Garden Johannesburg Botanical Garden Karoo Desert National Botanical Garden Kwelera National Botanical Garden Kirstenbosch National Botanical Garden KwaZulu-Natal National Botanical Garden Lowveld National Botanical Garden Makana Botanical Gardens Manie van der Schijff Botanical Garden North-West University Botanical Garden Pretoria National Botanical Garden Stellenbosch University Botanical Garden Thohoyandou National Botanical Garden University of KwaZulu-Natal Botanical Garden Walter Sisulu National Botanical Garden Taxonomists List of authors of South African botanical taxa List of authors of South African animal taxa Related Biodiversity Biosphere Ecotourism Encyclopedia of Life Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving International Union for Conservation of Nature Marine protected area National park Nature conservation Nature reserve Scuba diving tourism South African Sustainable Seafood Initiative World Register of Marine Species World Wide Fund for Nature Regional biodiversity Biodiversity of Cape Town List of nature reserves in Cape Town Legislation Marine Living Resources Act, 18 of 1998 National Environmental Management Act, 1998 National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 10 of 2004 National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management Act, 24 of 2008 National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 57 of 2003 Publications List of field guides to South African biota Categories: Biodiversity of South Africa Index v t e Biodiversity worldwide Biodiversity hotspot Biodiversity loss Global biodiversity Ecology Bioresilience Dark diversity Ecological effects of biodiversity Elevational diversity gradient Genetic diversity Insect biodiversity Soil biodiversity Species–area relationship Species richness Measurement All-taxa biodiversity inventory Alpha diversity Beta diversity Diversity index Environmental DNA Gamma diversity Range condition scoring Species diversity Phylogenetic diversity Zeta diversity Conservation Biodiversity action plan Convention on Biological Diversity 2010 Biodiversity Target Key Biodiversity Areas Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework Economics Agricultural biodiversity Biodiversity in agriculture Biodiversity banking Biodiversity credit Crop diversity Biodiversity and drugs Food biodiversity Biodiversity offsetting Health Biodiversity hypothesis of health By region Africa Algeria Angola Botswana Benin Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Libya Madagascar Mali Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria Rodrigues Rwanda Seychelles Somalia South Africa Cape Town Marine South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Borneo Cambodia China Georgia India Assam Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Palestine Papua New Guinea Philippines Qatar Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Syria Thailand Turkey Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Latvia Lithuania Kosovo Montenegro Norway Poland Portugal Republic of Ireland Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Wales North America Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Jamaica Martinique Mexico Nicaragua Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States Oceania Australia New Caledonia New Zealand Papua New Guinea South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Antarctica Antarctica List of biodiversity databases Global 200 Megadiverse countries Millennium Ecosystem Assessment NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐zn4pm
Cached time: 20250817151103
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.919 seconds
Real time usage: 2.398 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18197/1000000
Revision size: 114454/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 591087/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12904/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 24/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 395133/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.188/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19272079/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1943.291      1 -total
 36.13%  702.068      1 Template:Reflist
 26.29%  510.885     52 Template:Annotated_link
 13.75%  267.123     25 Template:Cite_journal
 11.09%  215.425     20 Template:Expand_section
 10.21%  198.458     20 Template:Ambox
  8.16%  158.576     30 Template:Cite_web
  7.13%  138.472      1 Template:Biodiversity_of_South_Africa
  6.96%  135.206      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  5.49%  106.614     13 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:65184894:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817151103 and revision id 1284012174. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biodiversity_of_South_Africa&oldid=1284012174 " Category : Biodiversity of South Africa Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from September 2020 All articles to be expanded Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Articles to be expanded from November 2020 This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 02:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biodiversity of South Africa 1 language Add topic

