Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basic explanation 2 Parental investment 3 Development of the argument 4 Fisher's sources 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Fisher's principle 12 languages Català Čeština Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Evolutionary model that explains the sex ratio Fisher's principle is an evolutionary model that explains why the sex ratio of most species that produce offspring through sexual reproduction is approximately 1:1 between males and females .

A. W. F. Edwards has remarked that it is "probably the most celebrated argument in evolutionary biology ".

[ 1 ] Fisher's principle was outlined by Ronald Fisher in his 1930 book The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection [ 2 ] (but has been incorrectly attributed as original to Fisher [ 1 ] ). Fisher couched his argument in terms of parental expenditure , and predicted that parental expenditure on both sexes should be equal. Sex ratios that are 1:1 are hence known as " Fisherian ", and those that are not 1:1 are " non-Fisherian " or " extraordinary " and occur because they break the assumptions made in Fisher's model.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Basic explanation [ edit ] W. D. Hamilton gave the following simple explanation in his 1967 paper on "Extraordinary sex ratios", [ 3 ] given the condition that males and females cost equal amounts to produce: Suppose male births are less common than female.

A newborn male then has better mating prospects than a newborn female, and therefore can expect to have more offspring.

Therefore parents genetically disposed to produce males tend to have more than average numbers of grandchildren born to them.

Therefore the genes for male-producing tendencies spread, and male births become more common.

As the 1:1 sex ratio is approached, the advantage associated with producing males dies away.

The same reasoning holds if females are substituted for males throughout. Therefore 1:1 is the equilibrium ratio.

In modern language, the 1:1 ratio is the evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS).

[ 5 ] Parental investment [ edit ] Main article: Parental investment Fisher wrote the explanation described by Eric Charnov and James J. Bull as being "characteristically terse" and "cryptic": [ 6 ] in Chapter 6: "Sexual Reproduction and Sexual Selection ": [ 2 ] In organisms of all kinds the young are launched upon their careers endowed with a certain amount of biological capital derived from their parents. This varies enormously in amount in different species, but, in all, there has been, before the offspring is able to lead an independent existence, a certain expenditure of nutriment in addition, almost universally, to some expenditure of time or activity, which the parents are induced by their instincts to make for the advantage of their young. Let us consider the reproductive value of these offspring at the moment when this parental expenditure on their behalf has just ceased. If we consider the aggregate of an entire generation of such offspring it is clear that the total reproductive value of the males in this group is exactly equal to the total value of all the females, because each sex must supply half the ancestry of all future generations of the species. From this it follows that the sex ratio will so adjust itself, under the influence of Natural Selection, that the total parental expenditure incurred in respect of children of each sex, shall be equal; for if this were not so and the total expenditure incurred in producing males, for instance, were less than the total expenditure incurred in producing females, then since the total reproductive value of the males is equal to that of the females, it would follow that those parents, the innate tendencies of which caused them to produce males in excess, would, for the same expenditure, produce a greater amount of reproductive value; and in consequence would be the progenitors of a larger fraction of future generations than would parents having a congenital bias towards the production of females. Selection would thus raise the sex-ratio until the expenditure upon males became equal to that upon females.

[ 2 ] Development of the argument [ edit ] Fisher's principle is an early example of a model in which genes for greater production of either sex become equalized in the population, because each sex supplies exactly half the genes of all future generations.

Fisher's principle is rooted in the concept of frequency-dependent selection , though Fisher's principle is not frequency-dependent selection per se . Frequency-dependent selection, in this scenario, is the logic that the probability of an individual being able to breed is dependent on the frequency of the opposite sex in relation to its own sex. It was first described by Darwin in 1871 .

Fisher's principle extends frequency dependence to explain how natural selection can act on genes that affect the frequency of an individual's grandchildren without affecting the frequency of their children. Fisher predicted that parents will invest their resources equally between each sex of offspring, because each sex supplies exactly half the genes of all future generations. As a result, those genes that cause parents to invest unequally in the sexes will tend to be selected against. Fisher was aware that in humans, more boys are born, but boys are also more likely to die in infancy. As a consequence, he reasoned that because parents tend to invest less in boys –  because more boys die before the end of the period of parental care –  there is a higher rate of male births to equalise parental investment in each sex.

Fisher's principle is also a precursor to evolutionary game theory .

R.H. MacArthur (1965) first suggested applying to sex ratios the language of game theory , [ 7 ] and this was subsequently picked up by W.D. Hamilton (1967) who termed the equilibrium point the " unbeatable strategy ".

[ 3 ] Hamilton's unbeatable strategy was refined by John Maynard Smith and George R. Price (1973) into their concept of the evolutionarily stable strategy , i.e. one which cannot be invaded by a mutant strategy.

[ 5 ] Fisher's concept of parental expenditure (now termed parental investment ), developed particularly by Robert Trivers , is now an important concept in ecology .

George C. Williams , Richard Dawkins , and Randolph M. Nesse cite Fisher's principle as an example that illustrates the dominance of individual-level selection over group selection because, regardless of the hypothetical sex imbalance of a group, the genes of a parental organism produce offspring of the less frequent sex in order to maximize their transmission to subsequent generations but at substantial cost to the group growth rate.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Fisher's sources [ edit ] Historical research by A.W.F. Edwards has shown that, although the idea has been attributed to Fisher, Charles Darwin had originally formulated a similar argument in the first edition of The Descent of Man but removed it for the second edition – Fisher only had a copy of the second edition – and quotes Darwin in The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection .

[ 1 ] [ 11 ] [ 2 ] Carl Düsing of the University of Jena published a similar argument in three works between 1883 and 1884, [ 11 ] which is essentially identical to Shaw and Mohler's later model.

[ 12 ] It has been argued that Darwin's argument and Fisher's are different, in that Darwin assumes monogamy whereas Fisher's does not; the same author contends that Fisher's argument is very much like Dusing's, except that Fisher introduced the idea of parental investment and calculated the sex ratio that should exist at the age of independence, which may precede the age of reproduction.

[ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Edwards, A.W.F.

(1998). "Natural selection and the sex ratio: Fisher's sources".

American Naturalist .

151 (6): 564– 569.

doi : 10.1086/286141 .

PMID 18811377 .

S2CID 40540426 .

^ a b c d Fisher, R.A.

(1930). "Chapter 6: Sexual Reproduction and Sexual Selection § Natural Selection and the sex-ratio".

The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection . Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press. p. 141.

^ a b c Hamilton, W.D. (1967). "Extraordinary sex ratios".

Science .

156 (3774): 477– 488.

Bibcode : 1967Sci...156..477H .

doi : 10.1126/science.156.3774.477 .

PMID 6021675 .

^ Charnov, E., and Bull, J. (1989). " Non-fisherian sex ratios with sex change and environmental sex determination ", Nature 338, pp. 148–150.

https://doi.org/10.1038/338148a0 Retrieved 29 March 2022.

^ a b Maynard Smith, J.; Price, G.R. (1973). "The logic of animal conflict".

Nature .

246 (5427): 15– 18.

Bibcode : 1973Natur.246...15S .

doi : 10.1038/246015a0 .

S2CID 4224989 .

^ Bull, J.J.

; Charnov, E.L.

(1988). "How fundamental are Fisherian sex ratios?". In Harvey, P.H.; Partridge, L. (eds.).

Oxford Surveys on Evolutionary Biology . Vol. 5. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. pp.

96– 135.

^ MacArthur, R.H.

(1965). Waterman, T.; Horowitz, H. (eds.).

Theoretical and Mathematical Biology . New York, NY: Blaisdell.

^ Williams, George C. (2019) [1966].

Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some Current Evolutionary Thought .

Princeton, NJ : Princeton University Press . pp.

146– 157.

ISBN 978-0691182865 .

^ Dawkins, Richard (2006) [1976].

The Selfish Gene . New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

143– 145.

ISBN 978-0199291151 .

^ Nesse, Randolph M. (2019).

Good Reasons for Bad Feelings: Insights from the Frontier of Evolutionary Psychiatry . New York: Dutton . pp.

164– 166.

ISBN 978-1101985663 .

^ a b Edwards, A.W.F. (2000). "Carl Düsing (1884) on the Regulation of the Sex-Ratio".

Theoretical Population Biology .

58 (3): 255– 257.

doi : 10.1006/tpbi.2000.1482 .

PMID 11120652 .

^ Shaw, R.F.; Mohler, J.D. (1953). "The selective significance of the sex ratio".

American Naturalist .

87 (837): 337– 342.

doi : 10.1086/281794 .

JSTOR 2458523 .

S2CID 85283716 .

^ Sober, E.

(2011).

Did Darwin Write the Origin Backwards? Philosophical Essays on Darwin's Theory . Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.

Further reading [ edit ] As the most celebrated argument in evolutionary biology , (Edwards, 1998, pp. 564–569) Fisher's principle is a staple of popular science books on evolution. For example, see: Gould, Stephen Jay (2002).

The Structure of Evolutionary Theory . pp.

648– 649, 678, 692.

Dawkins, Richard ; Wong, Yan (2004). "The Seal's Tale".

The Ancestor's Tale: A pilgrimage to the dawn of life (revised & expanded ed.). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company.

ISBN 0-618-00583-8 .

For those wishing more advanced treatment, see Pen, Ido; Weissing, Franz J. (2002). "chapters 1 and 2". In Hardy, Ian C.W. (ed.).

Sex Ratios: Concepts and Research Methods .

v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fisher%27s_principle&oldid=1283036065 " Categories : Evolutionary biology Sex ratio Evolutionary game theory 1930 introductions Ronald Fisher Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2020 This page was last edited on 30 March 2025, at 01:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fisher's principle 12 languages Add topic

