Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient Greece 1.2 Roman era 2 Landmarks 3 Current population 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading and viewing 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Delos 68 languages Afrikaans العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Malti مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 37°23′36″N 25°16′16″E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.39333°N 25.27111°E ﻿ / 37.39333; 25.27111 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Island in Greece For other uses, see Delos (disambiguation) .

Delos Native name: Δήλος General view of Delos Delos (on the right) and Rineia in the Cyclades Delos Geography Coordinates 37°23′36″N 25°16′16″E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.39333°N 25.27111°E ﻿ / 37.39333; 25.27111 Archipelago Cyclades Area 3.43 km 2 (1.32 sq mi) Highest elevation 112 m (367 ft) Highest point Mt. Kynthos Administration Greece Region South Aegean Regional unit Mykonos Demographics Population 24 (2011) Pop. density 6.8/km 2 (17.6/sq mi) UNESCO World Heritage Site Criteria Cultural: ii, iii, iv, vi Reference 530 Inscription 1990 (14th Session ) Delos ( / ˈ d iː l ɒ s / ; Greek : Δήλος [ˈðilos] ; Attic Greek : Δῆλος Dêlos , Doric Greek : Δᾶλος Dâlos ), is a small Greek island near Mykonos , close to the centre of the Cyclades archipelago .  Though only 3.43 km 2 (1.32 sq mi) in area, it is one of the most important mythological, historical, and archaeological sites in Greece . The ongoing excavations in the island are among the most extensive in the Mediterranean , and many of the artifacts found are displayed at the Archaeological Museum of Delos and the National Archaeological Museum of Athens .

Delos had a position as a holy sanctuary for a millennium before Olympian Greek mythology made it the birthplace of Apollo and Artemis . From its Sacred Harbour are visible the three conical mounds that have identified landscapes sacred to a goddess (presumably Athena ). Another site, retaining its Pre-Greek name Mount Cynthus , [ 1 ] is crowned with a sanctuary of Zeus .

In 1990, UNESCO added Delos to the World Heritage List , citing its exceptional archaeological site which "conveys the image of a great cosmopolitan Mediterranean port", its influence on the development of Greek architecture, and its sacred importance throughout Ancient Greece .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Ancient Greece [ edit ] Further information: Mosaics of Delos The island of Delos, Carl Anton Joseph Rottmann , 1847 The theatre Investigation of ancient stone huts found on the island indicate that it has been inhabited since the third millennium BC.

Thucydides claims that the original inhabitants were piratical Carians who were eventually expelled by King Minos of Crete .

[ 3 ] By the writing of the Odyssey , the island was already famous as the birthplace of the twin gods Apollo and Artemis (although some confusion seems to exist of Artemis' birthplace being either Delos or the island of Ortygia ).

Between 900 BC and 100 AD, Delos was a major cult centre, where the gods Dionysus and Leto , mother of the twin deities Apollo and Artemis, were revered. Eventually acquiring Panhellenic religious significance, Delos was initially a religious pilgrimage for the Ionians .

A number of " purifications " were performed by the city-state of Athens in an attempt to render the island fit for the proper worship of the gods. The first took place in the sixth century BC, directed by the tyrant Pisistratus , who ordered that all graves within sight of the temple be dug up and the bodies moved to another nearby island. In the fifth century BC, during the sixth year of the Peloponnesian War and under instruction from the Delphic Oracle , the entire island was purged of all dead bodies. A new decree was eventually issued, so that no one should be allowed to be buried or give birth on the island due to its sacred importance, and to preserve its neutrality in commerce since no one could then claim ownership through inheritance. Immediately after this purification, the first quinquennial festival of the Delian games were celebrated there.

[ 4 ] Four years later, all inhabitants of the island were removed to Adramyttium in Asia as a further purification.

[ 5 ] After the Persian Wars , the island became the natural meeting ground for the Delian League , founded in 478 BC, the congresses being held in the temple (a separate quarter was reserved for foreigners and the sanctuaries of foreign deities ). The league's common treasury was kept here as well until 454 BC, when Pericles removed it to Athens.

[ 6 ] During the Hellenistic period , a well-established Phoenician colony on the island had extensive trade relations.

[ 7 ] The island had no productive capacity for food , fiber , or timber , which were all imported. Limited water was exploited with an extensive cistern and aqueduct system, wells , and sanitary drains . Various regions operated agorae (markets).

Suda writes that the Greeks used the proverb "ᾌδεις ὥσπερ εἰς Δῆλον πλέων", meaning you sing as if sailing into Delos in reference to someone who is happy, light-hearted, and enjoying himself.

[ 8 ] Iamblichus writes that Delos Mysteries (similar to the Eleusinian Mysteries ) were established.

[ 9 ] Semos of Delos (Σῆμος ὁ Δήλιος) wrote many works, including 8 books about the history of Delos. The Suda mistakenly lists him as being from Elis .

[ 10 ] Roman era [ edit ] Strabo writes that in 166 BC, the Romans converted Delos into a free port, which was partially motivated by seeking to damage the trade of Rhodes , at the time the target of Roman hostility. In 167 or 166 BC, after the Roman victory in the Third Macedonian War , the Roman Republic ceded Delos to the Athenians , who expelled most of the original inhabitants.

[ 11 ] Roman traders came to purchase tens of thousands of slaves captured by the Cilician pirates or captured in the wars following the disintegration of the Seleucid Empire . It became the center of the slave trade, with the largest slave market in the larger region being maintained here.

The Roman destruction of Corinth in 146 BC allowed Delos to at least partially assume Corinth's role as the premier trading center of Greece , but Delos' commercial prosperity, construction activity, and population waned significantly after the island was assaulted by the forces of Mithridates VI of Pontus in 88 and 69 BC, during the Mithridatic Wars with Rome.

[ 12 ] Before the end of the first century BC, trade routes had changed; Delos was replaced by Puteoli as the chief focus of Italian trade with the east, and as a cult centre, too, it entered a sharp decline.

Despite its decline, Delos maintained some population in the early Roman Imperial period.

Pausanias (8,33,2), writing in the second century AD, states that Delos was uninhabited apart from a few custodians of the sanctuaries. Evidence has been found of Roman baths, coins, an aqueduct, residential and elite houses, multiple churches, basilicas, and a monastery all from the first to sixth centuries AD, which, however, does not suggest that the island was continuously inhabited in the period.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The pottery found indicates that produce, such as wine and oil, continued to be imported from regional centres. Also, a number of wine presses were found amidst the ruins of the ancient city that date to this period, suggesting that the population at this time was engaged in considerable viticultural endeavour.

[ 15 ] Delos was eventually abandoned around the eighth century AD.

[ 16 ] Landmarks [ edit ] The Agora of the Competaliasts The small sacred lake in its circular bowl, now intentionally left dry by the island's caretakers to suppress the spread of malaria-bearing mosquitoes, [ 17 ] is a topographical feature that determined the placement of later features.

The Minoan Fountain was a rectangular public well hewn in the rock, with a central column; it formalized the sacred spring in its present sixth-century BC form, reconstructed in 166 BC, according to an inscription. Tightly laid courses of masonry form the walls; water can still be reached by a flight of steps that fill one side.

Several market squares were found. The Hellenistic Agora of the Competaliasts by the Sacred Harbour retains the postholes for market awnings in its stone paving. Two powerful Italic merchant guilds dedicated statues and columns there. The so-called "Agora of the Italians" was probably not a agora, despite its common appellation in modern literature.

[ 18 ] The Temple of the Delians , dedicated to Apollo, is a classic example of the Doric order . Beside the temple, once stood a colossal kouros of Apollo, only parts of which remain. Dating to the sixth century BC, parts of the upper torso and pelvis remain in situ , a hand is kept at the local museum, and a foot is in the British Museum .

[ 19 ] The Terrace of the Lions The Terrace of the Lions, also was dedicated to Apollo by the people of Naxos shortly before 600 BC. It originally had 9–12 squatting, snarling marble guardian lions along the Sacred Way; one was removed and is presently situated over the main gate of the Venetian Arsenal . The lions create a monumental avenue comparable to Egyptian avenues of sphinxes . (A Greek sphinx is in the Delos Museum.) Today, only seven of the original lions remain.

The Oikos of the Naxians (House of the Naxians), first quarter of sixth century BC, has a long hall with one central ionic colonnade, a west porch tristyle in antis, and an east marble prostasis of the middle of the sixth century BC.

[ 20 ] The Establishment of the Poseidoniasts, clubhouse of "the Koinon of the Berytian Poseidoniast merchants, shipmasters, and warehousemen", [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] during the early years of Roman hegemony , late 2nd century BC. To their protective triad of Baal / Poseidon , Astarte / Aphrodite and Eshmun / Asklepios , they added Roma .

The 'house of Dionysus' named after a mosaic of Greek god Dionysus riding a panther The Doric Temple of Isis was built on a high, overlooking hill at the beginning of the Roman period to venerate the familiar trinity of Isis , the Alexandrian Serapis , and Anubis .

The Temple of Hera, circa 500 BC, is a rebuilding of an earlier Heraion on the site.

The House of Dionysus is a luxurious second-century private house named for the floor mosaic of Dionysus riding a panther .

The House of the Dolphins is similarly named from its atrium mosaic, where erotes ride dolphins ; its Phoenician owner commissioned a floor mosaic of Tanit in his vestibule .

The Stoivadeion dedicated to Dionysus bears a statue of the god of wine and the life-force . On either side of the platform, a pillar supports a colossal phallus , the symbol of Dionysus. The southern pillar, which is decorated with relief scenes from the Dionysiac circle, was erected around 300 BC to celebrate a winning theatrical performance. The statue of Dionysus was originally flanked by those of two actors impersonating Paposilenoi (conserved in the Archaeological Museum of Delos ). The marble theatre is a rebuilding of an older one, undertaken shortly after 300 BC.

The “ Delos Synagogue ”, the ruins of what was once believed to be an ancient Samaritan synagogue .

[ 24 ] Current population [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The 2001 Greek census reported a population of 14 inhabitants on the island. The island is administratively a part of the municipality of Mýkonos.

According to more recent numbers, in 2011 the island counted 24 inhabitants.

Gallery [ edit ] The Theatre Quarter Sacred Way Establishment of the Poseidoniasts House of Dionysus floor mosaic House of the Masks House of Cleopatra Statues at the House of Cleopatra House of the Lake Temple of Isis Bust of Hermes Mosaic from the Insula of the Jewellery A mosaic on the floor of the House of the Dolphins Agora of the Italians Heraion (Temple of Hera ) House of the Trident See also [ edit ] Delia (festival) Delian problem History of the Cyclades Asteria References [ edit ] ^ The combination -nth- is a marker for Pre-Greek words: Corinth, menthos, labyrinth, etc. A name Artemis and even Diana retained was Cynthia .

^ "Delos" . UNESCO World Heritage Convention. United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization . Retrieved 20 November 2022 .

^ Thucydides, I,8.

^ Thucydides, III,104.

^ Thucydides, V,1.

^ Thucydides, I,96.

^ Boussac, Marie-Françoise (1982).

"À propos de quelques sceaux déliens" .

Bulletin de correspondance hellénique (in French).

106 (1): 445– 446.

doi : 10.3406/bch.1982.1923 .

ISSN 0007-4217 .

^ Suda, alpha, 455 ^ Iamblichus, Life of Pythagoras, § 28.151 ^ Suda, Sigma, 327 ^ Tang, Birgit (2005), Delos, Carthage, Ampurias: the Housing of Three Mediterranean Trading Centres , Rome: L'Erma di Bretschneider (Accademia di Danimarca), p. 14, ISBN 8882653056 .

^ Tang, Birgit (2005), Delos, Carthage, Ampurias: the Housing of Three Mediterranean Trading Centres , Rome: L'Erma di Bretschneider (Accademia di Danimarca), pp. 14, 32, ISBN 8882653056 .

^ DODD, EMLYN K. (2020).

ROMAN AND LATE ANTIQUE WINE PRODUCTION IN THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN : a comparative ... archaeological study at antiochia ad cragum . [Place of publication not identified]: ARCHAEOPRESS.

ISBN 978-1-78969-403-1 .

OCLC 1139263254 .

^ Le Quéré, Enora (2015).

Les Cyclades sous l'Empire romain : histoire d'une renaissance . Impr. Université Rennes 2). Rennes: Presses universitaires de Rennes.

ISBN 978-2-7535-4045-3 .

OCLC 919408437 .

^ DODD, EMLYN K. (2020).

ROMAN AND LATE ANTIQUE WINE PRODUCTION IN THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN : a comparative ... archaeological study at antiochia ad cragum . [Place of publication not identified]: ARCHAEOPRESS.

ISBN 978-1-78969-403-1 .

OCLC 1139263254 .

^ DODD, EMLYN K. (2020).

ROMAN AND LATE ANTIQUE WINE PRODUCTION IN THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN : a comparative ... archaeological study at antiochia ad cragum . [Place of publication not identified]: ARCHAEOPRESS.

ISBN 978-1-78969-403-1 .

OCLC 1139263254 .

^ "Sacred Lake | Greece Attractions" .

Lonely Planet . Retrieved 12 April 2020 .

^ Trümper, Monika (2008).

Die ‚Agora des Italiens’ in Delos. Baugeschichte, Architektur, Ausstattung und Funktion einer späthellenistischen Porticus-Anlage [The ‘Agora of the Italians’ in Delos. Building history, architecture, decoration and function of a late Hellenistic porticus complex]. Rahden: Leidorf, ISBN 978-3-89646-376-0 ( English summary in a review ).

^ British Museum Collection ^ Gruben G., Griechische Tempel und Heiligtümer, München, 2001 ^ Gazette numismatique suisse . 1992. p. 124.

^ Carter, Jane B. (1997). "Thiasos and Marzeaḥ". In Langdon, Susan (ed.).

New Light on a Dark Age . University of Missouri Press. p. 99.

ISBN 9780826210999 .

^ Hephaistos . 2006. p. 129.

^ Delos Further reading and viewing [ edit ] Reger, Gary (1994) Regionalism and Change in the Economy of Independent Delos .

Berkeley, Los Angeles and Oxford: University of California Press.

Tréheux, Jacques (2023).

Études critiques sur les inventaires de l'indépendance délienne . Athènes: École Française d'Athènes.

ISBN 9782869585669 .

Vial, Claude (1984) Délos indépendante .

Bulletin de correspondance hellénique Supplement X. Athens.

Vial, Claude (2008) Inscriptions de Délos. Index, tome II: les Déliens (Paris: De Boccard) Delos: Island at the Center of the World . Princeton, New Jersey: Films for the Humanities and Sciences, 2006.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Delos .

Hellenic Ministry of Culture site: Delos Delos UNESCO Collection on Google Arts and Culture EfA website with history of the Delos Archaeological site (in French) English translations of inscriptions from Delos Delos Island on WikiMapia The Barrington Atlas Directory notes: Delos GRE "Delos" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. VII (9th ed.). 1878. p. 51.

v t e Delos Landmarks Agora of the Competaliasts Archaeological Museum of Delos Cynthus Delos Synagogue Minoan Fountain Mosaics of Delos Stoibadeion Temple of the Delians People Anius Antiphanes of Delos Related Delia Delian League League of the Islanders Prohibition of dying v t e Aegean Sea General Countries Greece Turkey Other Aegean civilizations Aegean dispute Aegean Islands Greek islands Turkish islands Aegean Islands Cyclades Amorgos Anafi Ananes Andros Antimilos Antiparos Daskalio Delos Despotiko Donousa Folegandros Gyaros Ios Irakleia Kardiotissa Kea Keros Kimolos Koufonisia Kythnos Milos Mykonos Naxos Paros Polyaigos Rineia Santorini Schoinoussa Serifopoula Serifos Sifnos Sikinos Syros Therasia Tinos Vous Aegean Sea Dodecanese Agathonisi Alimia Arkoi Armathia Astakida Astypalaia Çatalada Chamili Farmakonisi Gaidaros Gyali Halki Imia Kalolimnos Kalymnos Kandelioussa Kara Ada Karpathos Kasos Kinaros Kos Küçük Tavşan Adası Leipsoi (Lipsi) Leros Levitha (Lebynthos) Nimos Nisyros Pacheia Patmos Platy Pserimos Rhodes Salih Ada Saria Symi Syrna Telendos Tilos Zaforas North Aegean Agios Efstratios Agios Minas Ammouliani Ayvalık Islands Büyük Ada Chios Chryse Cunda Foça Islands Fournoi Korseon Icaria Imbros Koukonesi Lemnos Lesbos Megalonisi (Nisiopi) Metelik Island Oinousses Pasas Psara Samiopoula Samos Samothrace Tenedos Thasos Thymaina Uzunada Zourafa Saronic Aegina Agios Georgios Agistri Dokos Hydra Poros Psyttaleia Salamis Spetses Sporades Adelfoi Islets Agios Georgios Skopelou Alonnisos Argos Skiathou Dasia Erinia Gioura Grammeza Kyra Panagia Lekhoussa Peristera Piperi Psathoura Repi Sarakino Skandili Skantzoura Skiathos Skopelos Skyropoula Skyros Tsoungria Valaxa Cretan Afentis Christos Agia Varvara Agioi Apostoloi Agioi Pantes Agioi Theodoroi Agios Nikolaos Anavatis Arnaouti Aspros Volakas Avgo Crete Daskaleia Dia Diapori Dionysades Elasa Ftena Trachylia Glaronisi Gramvousa Grandes Kalydon (Spinalonga) Karavi Karga Katergo Kavallos Kefali Kolokytha Koursaroi Kyriamadi Lazaretta Leon Mavros Mavros Volakas Megatzedes Mochlos Nikolos Palaiosouda Peristeri Peristerovrachoi Petalida Petalouda Pontikaki Pontikonisi Praso (Prasonisi) Prosfora Pseira Sideros Souda Valenti Vryonisi Other Ionian Islands Antikythera Kythira Euboea Makronisos v t e Islands of the Cyclades Main Amorgos Anafi Andros Antiparos Delos Folegandros Ios Kea Kimolos Kythnos Milos Mykonos Naxos Paros Santorini Serifos Sifnos Sikinos Syros Therasia Tinos Lesser Cyclades Donousa Irakleia Keros Koufonisia Schoinoussa Other Makronisos Saliagos Polyaigos Uninhabited Ananes Ano Antikeri Antimilos Anydros Askania Christiania Daskalio Despotiko Eschati Glaros Gyaros Kardiotissa Kato Antikeri Keros Kitriani Nikouria Pachia (Anafi) Pachia (Nisyros) Rineia Serifopoula Vous Greek islands : Aegean Islands , Saronic Islands , Crete , Cyclades , Dodecanese , Euboea , North Aegean Islands , Sporades , Ionian Islands , Echinades v t e World Heritage Sites in Greece North Aigai Mount Athos Paleochristian and Byzantine monuments of Thessaloniki City Walls Rotunda Church of the Acheiropoietos Church of Saint Demetrios Latomou Monastery Church of Hagia Sophia Church of Panagia Chalkeon Church of Saint Panteleimon Church of the Holy Apostles Church of Saint Nicholas Orphanos Church of Saint Catherine Church of the Saviour Vlatades Monastery Church of Prophet Elijah Byzantine Bath Philippi Zagori Central Delphi Temple of Athena Pronaia Tholos Athenian Treasury Gymnasium Stoa of the Athenians Temple of Apollo Hosios Loukas Meteora Old Town of Corfu Attica Acropolis of Athens Daphni Monastery South Epidaurus Mycenae and Tiryns Lion Gate Tomb of Aegisthus Treasury of Atreus Tomb of Clytemnestra Grave Circle A Grave Circle B Mystras Olympia Temple of Apollo Epicurius at Bassae Aegean Islands Delos Medieval City of Rhodes Grand Master's Palace Fortifications Minoan Palatial Centres Knossos Kydonia Malia Phaistos Zakros Zominthos Monastery of Saint John the Theologian and the Cave of the Apocalypse Nea Moni of Chios Pythagoreion and Heraion of Samos v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Phoenician cities and colonies Algeria Camarata Cartennae ( Tenes ) Hippo Regius Icosium ( Algiers ) Igilgili ( Jijel ) Iol (Cherchell) Iomnium ( Tigzirt ) Cirta ( Constantine ) Kissi (Djinet) Macomades Malaca Rachgoun Rusazus ( Azeffoun ) Rusguniae ( Tamentfoust ) Rusicade (Skikda) Rusippisir (Taksebt) Rusubbicari ( Zemmouri El Bahri) Rusuccuru (Dellys) Sarai ( Aïn Oulmene ) Thagora ( Taoura ) Tipasa in Mauretania Tipasa in Numidia Timici Cyprus Dhali Kition ( Larnaca ) Lapathus Marion Greece Callista (Santorini) Paxi Rhodes Delos Israel Tell Abu Hawam ( Haifa ) Achzib Akka (Acre) Dora Michal Jaffa Reshef Shikmona ( Haifa ) Strato's Tower (Caesarea) Italy Bitan ( Chia ) Cape Melqart (Cefalù) Drepanum ( Trapani ) Eryx ( Erice ) Heraclea Minoa Kapara (Soluntum) Karaly ( Cagliari ) Lilybaeum Motya Neapolis Nora Olbia Pantelleria Selinunte Sulci ( Sant'Antioco ) Tharros Ṣiṣ (Palermo) Lebanon Amia Ampi Arqa Athar (Tripoli) Baalbek Birut ( Beirut ) Botrys (Teros) Gebal (Byblos) Ornithon (Tell el-Burak) Porphyreon (Jieh) Sarepta Sidon Sur (Tyre) , Ushu (Palaetyrus) Umm al-Amad Libya Lepcis ( Khoms ) Oyat ( Tripoli ) Tsabratan Malta Maleth ( Cospicua ) Ann ( Mdina ) Gaulos (Gozo) Għajn Qajjet Mtarfa Ras il-Wardija Tas-Silġ Morocco Azama (Azemmour) Arambys (Mogador) Caricus Murus Heq she Elisha (Ksar es-Seghir) Likush ( Larache ) Shalat (Chellah) Tamusida Tinga ( Tangier ) Anfa ( Casablanca ) Volubilis 1 Mogador Rusadir Oualidia Zilil Gadir Sala Thymiaterium Rusibis Portugal Portus Hannibalis Portus Magonis (Portimão) Olissipona (Lisbon) Ossonoba (Faro) Balsa ( Tavira ) Spain Abdera ( Adra ) Abyla ( Ceuta ) Akra Leuka ( Alicante ) Gadir (Cadiz) Herna Iboshim ( Ibiza ) Mahón Malake ( Málaga ) Onoba Carthage (Cartagena) Rushadir ( Melilla ) Saguntum Sexi ( Almunecar ) Tagilit (Tíjola) Toscanos ( Velez ) Tyreche Syria Arwad Marat (Amrit) Balanaea (Baniyas) Carne Paltus Safita Shuksi Sumur Ugarit Tunisia Aspis (Kelibia) Bulla Regia Carthage Hadrumetum ( Sousse ) Hippo Diarrhytus (Bizerte) Kerkouane Lepcis ( Monastir ) Maqom Hadesh (Ounga) Meninx ( Djerba ) Ruspe Ruspina Sicca (El Kef) Tabarka Tayinat ( Thyna ) Thapsus Thysdrus ( El Djem ) Utica Other Myriandus Phoenicus Gibraltar Tahpanhes Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Geographic Pleiades Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nm4kn
Cached time: 20250817210735
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.149 seconds
Real time usage: 1.523 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6151/1000000
Revision size: 21234/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 298308/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6307/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 141433/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.652/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18898669/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1164.922      1 -total
 33.50%  390.204      2 Template:Infobox
 31.56%  367.706      1 Template:Infobox_islands
 23.94%  278.940     17 Template:Navbox
 14.73%  171.559      1 Template:Reflist
  9.13%  106.375      1 Template:Lang
  7.37%   85.902      2 Template:Cite_web
  6.90%   80.349      1 Template:Aegean_Sea
  6.32%   73.602      1 Template:Delos
  5.89%   68.649      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:79077:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817210735 and revision id 1306452693. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Delos&oldid=1306452693 " Categories : Delos Geography of ancient Greece Islands of Greece World Heritage Sites in Greece Ancient Greek sanctuaries in Greece Landforms of Mykonos Islands of the South Aegean Delian League Populated places in the ancient Aegean islands Phoenician colonies in Greece Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from February 2025 Use dmy dates from February 2025 Articles containing Greek-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with Greek IPA Articles containing Attic Greek-language text Articles containing Doric Greek-language text Articles needing additional references from March 2025 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 21:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Delos 68 languages Add topic

