Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Budapest School 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch فارسی Français עברית Magyar 日本語 Русский 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School of Marxist humanism This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e The Budapest School ( Hungarian : Budapesti iskola ; German : Budapester Schule ) was a school of thought , originally of Marxist humanism , but later of post-Marxism [ 1 ] and dissident liberalism that emerged in Hungary in the early 1960s, belonging to so-called Hungarian New Left . Its members were students or colleagues of Georg Lukács . The school was originally oriented towards developing Lukács' later works on social ontology and aesthetics , but quickly began to challenge the paradigm of Lukácsian Marxism, thus reconstructing contemporary critical theory .  Most of the members later came to abandon Marxism . The school also critiqued the "dictatorship over needs" of the Soviet states. Most of the members were forced into exile by the pro-Soviet Hungarian government.

In a letter to The Times Literary Supplement February 15, 1971, Georg Lukács drew attention to "The Budapest School of Marxism", and helped attract attention to the school from Western Marxism .

Members of the school include György Lukács , Ágnes Heller , Ferenc Fehér , György Márkus , István Mészáros , Mihály Vajda , and Maria Márkus , among others. The Budapest School's writings have been read and researched widely since the 1960s.

History [ edit ] The 1956 Hungarian Revolution was one of the most important political events of Ágnes Heller's life, for at this time she saw the effect of the academic freedoms of Marxist critical theory as dangerous to the entire political and social structure of Hungary. The uprising confirmed Heller's ideas that what Karl Marx really intended is for the people to have political autonomy and collective determination of social life.

Lukács, Heller, and other Marxist critical theorists emerged from the Revolution with the belief that Marxism and socialism needed to be applied to different nations in individual ways, effectively questioning the role of the Soviet Union in Hungary's future. These ideas set Heller on an ideological collision course with the new Moscow-supported government of János Kádár . Heller was again expelled from the Communist Party and she was dismissed from the university in 1958 for refusing to indict Lukács as a collaborator in the Revolution.

From 1963 can be seen the emergence of what would later be called the Budapest School , a philosophical forum that was formed by Lukács to promote the renewal of Marxist criticism in the face of actually existing socialism and its theories. Other participants in the Budapest School included together with Heller her second husband Ferenc Fehér, György Márkus, Mihály Vajda, and some other scholars with looser connections to the school (such as András Hegedüs , István Eörsi , János Kis , and György Bence ). The school emphasized the idea of the renaissance of Marxism, described by radical philosophy scholar Simon Tormey as "a flowering of the critical, oppositional potential they believed lay within Marxism and in particular within the 'early Marx' ... the Marxism of the individual 'rich in needs,' of solidarity and self-governance ... they hoped to precipitate a crisis in those systems that had the temerity to call themselves 'socialist'." The Budapest School carried out research on the political economy of both the Soviet Union and Western capitalism. The school accepted many of the critiques of Soviet planning and inefficiency from Neoclassical Economics , as well as the connection between markets and freedom. The Soviet system was condemned as a dictatorship over needs. The school also analyzed the mixed economies of modern capitalism. Most traditional Marxist economics was jettisoned.

Sweden and the Nordic Model was held as a model of the mixed economy and managed capitalism. The school advocated Radical Democracy as a solution to the authoritarian and undemocratic features of the mixed economy.

Lukács’ death in 1971 deprived the members of the Budapest School of the degree of protection he had been able to offer against an increasingly hostile regime, and in 1973 the Communist Party officially condemned their work and the members of the group were dismissed from their academic positions.

See also [ edit ] Ágnes Heller György Márkus Maria Márkus István Mészáros Mihály Vajda Post-Marxism References [ edit ] ^ Dorahy, J. F. (2019-01-21), "The Budapest School: Beyond Marxism" , The Budapest School , Brill, ISBN 978-90-04-39598-5 , retrieved 2023-06-21 Further reading [ edit ] A. Hegedus, M. Vajda, and others, “Die neue Linke in Ungarn”, Vol. 2., Internationale Marxistische Diskussion No.53, Merve Verlag, [West] Berlin, 1976.

A. Hegedus, M. Markus, and others, “Die neue Linke in Ungarn”，Internationale Marxistische Diskussion No.45, Merve Verlag, [West] Berlin, 1974.

Ágnes Heller, “Preface to A Study of Ágnes Heller’s Thoughts on Aesthetic Modernity by Fu Qilin”, Comparative literature: east & west , 2007, num. 8 Arato, Andrew. “The Budapest School and actually existing socialism”, Theory and Society , no.16, 1987.593-619.

Blechman, Max. “Revolutionary Romanticism: A Reply to Ágnes Heller”, in Radical Philosophy , no. 99(2000), 40–43.

Brown, Doug. “Karl Polanyi’s Influence on the Budapest School”, Journal of Economic Issues , Mar 1987, vol.21, no. 1.339-347.

Burnheim, John, ed. The Social Philosophy of Ágnes Heller. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1994.

Charles Andras, “New Left in Hungary Attracts Attention of Western Marxists”, RAD Background Report/91，(East-West), 23 April 1976.

Coop, Barry. “A Philosophy of History in Fragments, Ágnes Heller”, in Despoix, Phillippe. “On the Possibility of a Philosophy of Values: A Dialogue Within the Budapest School”, in John Burnheim, ed. The Social Philosophy of Ágnes Heller. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1994.

Falk, Barbara J. The Dilemmas of Dissidence in East-Central Europe：Citizen Intellectuals and Philosopher Kings. Budapest: Central European University Press, 2003.

Frankel, Serge and Daniel Martin. “The Budapest School,” Telos 17 (Fall 1973).

Fu Qilin, “Ágnes Heller’s thoughts on aesthetic modernity”, Review of China Books , 2007, num.3.

Fu Qilin ed, Ágnes Heller, “Reflection on the postmodern art”, Journal of Sichuan University , 2007, num.5 Fu Qilin, “A Study of Ágnes Heller’s Thoughts on Aesthetic Modernity :Abstract”, Comparative literature: east & west , 2007, num.8 Fu Qilin, “Ágnes Heller’s analysis of aesthetic modernity in Renaissance”, Journal of Langfang teachers’ college, 2010, num.2 Fu Qilin, “Budapest School’s way to post-Marxist”, Cultural Studies and Literary Theory , 2008, num.18 Fu Qilin, “on Budapest School’s critique of Frankfurt School’s aesthetics”, Literary Theory and Studies , 2009, num.2 Fu Qilin, “On Budapest School’s critique of György Lukács ’ totality aesthetics", Research on Marxist Aesthetics , 2008, num.11.

Fu Qilin, “On Budapest School’s Critique of Institution Theory of Art”, Journal of Center South University , 2005, num.3 Fu Qilin, “On Budapest School’s Reconstructing Aesthetics”, Studies of Foreign Literature , 2004, num.2.

Fu Qilin, “on Budapest School’s study of influence of market on cultural distribution”, Journal of Langfang Teachers' College , 2007, num.4 Fu Qilin, “Reconstructing the concept of art and interpreting the postmodern arts: A summary of Ágnes Heller’s lectures  on the academic journey to China”, Modern Philosophy , 2008, num.4 Fu Qilin, A Study of Ágnes Heller's Thoughts about Aesthetic Modernity. Chengdu, China: Bashu Publishing House, 2006.

Fu Qilin, Critique of Grand Narrative and the Construction of Pluralist Aesthetics: A Study of Reconstructing Aesthetics of Budapest School. Harbin, China: Heilongjiang University Press, 2011.

Fu Qilin, “On Budapest School Aesthetics: An Interview with Ágnes Heller”, Thesis Eleven, 2008(Aug.), Num. 94 Vol.1 Fu Qilin，“On Ágnes Heller’s Theory of Imaginary Institution in Modernity”， Journal of Huaiyin Teachers' College , 2008, num.4.

Gaiger, Jason. “The Fake: Forgery and its Place in Art by Sándor Radnóti”.

British Journal of Aesthetics , Jul(2001), Vol. 41 Issue 3.

Gardiner， Michael. “ A postmodern utopia?  Heller and Ferenc’s critique of Messianic Marxism”, in Utopian Studies , vol. 8 no.1(1997), 89-122.

Gardiner，Michael. Critique of Everyday Life. London and New York: Routledge, 2000.

Gransow, Volker. “Heller, Ágnes”, in Robert A. Gorman, ed.

Biographical Dictionary of Neo-Marxism . Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1985.

Grumley, John，Paul Crittenden and Pauline Johnson, ed. Culture and Enlightenment : Essays for Gyorgy Markus. Ashgate, Aldershot, 2002.

Grumley, John. “Negotiating the ‘double bind’: Heller's theory of modernity", in European Journal of Social Theory , vol. 3, no. 4(2000),429-447.

Grumley, John. Ágnes Heller: A Moralist in the Vortex of History. London: Pluto Press, 2005.

Hall, John A. “Beyond Justice by Ágnes Heller ”, in The American Journal of Sociology , vol. 95, no. 5(1990), 1352–1354.

Harrison, Paul R. “The Grandeur and Twilight of Radical Universalism, by Ágnes Heller and Ferenc Fehér”, in Contemporary Sciology , vol. 21, Issue. 4 (1992), 539–540.

Howard, W. “Heller, Ágnes, Modernity’s pendulum, Thesis Eleven, 1992, 31, 1-13”, in Sociological Abstracts , Vol. 40, no. 5(1992). P. 2265.

Kammas，Anthony. “Introducing Ágnes Heller：The Radical Imagination of an unhappy consciousness”, in East European Politics and Societies, Vol.17, Num.4(2003), 712–718.

Köves, Margit. “Ferenc Fehér(1933-1994), Reflections on a Member of the Lukács School”, Social Scientist, Vol. 23, No. 4/6(Apr.-Jun., 1995), pp. 98–107.

Löwy, Michael. “Introduction: Le bilan globalement négatif”, in Ágnes Heller and Ferenc Feher, Marxisme et démocratie, trans. Anna Libera. Paris: Maspero, 1981.

Lukács, George. "The Development of the Budapest School," The Times Literary Supplement , No. 3615 (June 11, 1971).

Murphy, Peter. “Ágnes Heller and Ferenc Feher, The Grandeur and Twilight of Radical Universalism”, in Theory and Society, vol. 22,  no. 4(1993), 569–575.

Nordquist, J. “Ágnes Heller and the Budapest School: A Bibliography”, Social Theory , n.59, 2000.

Roberts, David. “Between Home and World: Ágnes Heller’s the Concept of the Beautiful”, in Thesis Eleven, no. 59(1999), 95-101.

Roucek，Joseph S. “The Humanization of Socialism: Writings of the Budapest School”, Social Forces , Vol.56, No.3(Mar.1978) Rundell, John. “The postmodern ethical condition: A conversation with Ágnes Heller”, in Critical Horizons , vol.1, no.1(2000), 136–145.

Shusterman, Rechard. “Saving Art from Aesthetics”, Poetics Today , Vol. 8, No. 3/4,(1987), 651–660.

Simon Tormey, “Preface to the Book on Ágnes Heller”, Comparative literature: east & west , 2007, num.8.

Stalnaker, Nan. “ The Fake: Forgery and Its Place in Art by Sándor Radnóti”, The Philosophical Quarterly , Vol. 50, No. 200 Jul. (2000), 425–427.

Tormey, Simon. Ágnes Heller: Socialism, autonomy and the postmodern. Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, 2001.

Turner, Bryan S. “Can Modernity Survive? By Ágnes Heller”, in Contemporary Sociology , Vol. 21, No. 1(Jan. 1992), 128–130.

Vardys, V. Stanley. “The Humanization of Socialism: Writings of the Budapest School”.

The American Political Science Review , Vol,73, No.2 (Jun. 1979).

Waller, William. “Towards a Radical Democracy: The Political Economy of the Budapest School by Douglas M. Brown”, Social Science Journal , 1991, Vol. 28, Issue 4.

Wolin, Richard. “A Radical Philosophy by Ágnes Heller”, New German Critique , No. 38,  (Spring, 1986), 196–202.

Wolin, Richard. “Ágnes Heller on Everyday Life”, in Theory & Society , Vol. 16, Issue. 2(1987), 295–304.

v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Budapest_School&oldid=1294414002 " Categories : Critical theory Cultural studies Historical schools Marxist schools of thought Sociological theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from January 2020 Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 15:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Budapest School 11 languages Add topic

