Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History 3 Theories 4 Distinctions 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Work of art 55 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Latina Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский සිංහල Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Works of art ) For other uses, see Work of art (disambiguation) and Artwork (disambiguation) .

"Piece of art" redirects here; not to be confused with Art of peace .

Artistic creation of aesthetic value Examples of paintings The Four Continents by Peter Paul Rubens A portrait of Madame de Pompadour and a dog at the foot of her shoes by François Boucher Luncheon of the Boating Party by Pierre-Auguste Renoir The Old Plantation attributed to John Rose Examples of sculptures Examples of architecture Examples of ceramic art Examples of mosaics Examples of furniture Hm, hm, hm!

Composed by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart , An example of music , specifically opera Problems playing this file? See media help .

Shine On, Harvest Moon Performed by Ada Jones and Billy Murray , another example of music, specifically early-1900s vaudeville Problems playing this file? See media help .

A work of art , artwork , [ 1 ] art piece , piece of art or art object is an artistic creation of aesthetic value. Except for "work of art", which may be used of any work regarded as art in its widest sense, including works from literature and music , these terms apply principally to tangible, physical forms of visual art : An example of fine art , such as a painting or sculpture .

Objects in the decorative arts or applied arts that have been designed for aesthetic appeal, as well as any functional purpose, such as a piece of jewellery , many ceramics and much folk art .

An object created for principally or entirely functional, religious or other non-aesthetic reasons which has come to be appreciated as art (often later, or by cultural outsiders).

A non-ephemeral photograph or film .

A work of installation art or conceptual art .

Used more broadly, the term is less commonly applied to: A fine work of architecture or landscape design A production of live performance , such as theater , ballet , opera , performance art , musical concert and other performing arts , and other ephemeral, non-tangible creations.

This article is concerned with the terms and concepts as used in and applied to the visual arts, although other fields such as aural -music and written word-literature have similar issues and philosophies.  The term objet d'art is reserved to describe works of art that are not paintings, prints, drawings or large or medium-sized sculptures, or architecture (e.g. household goods, figurines, etc., some purely aesthetic, some also practical).  The term oeuvre is used to describe the complete body of work completed by an artist throughout a career.

[ 2 ] Definition [ edit ] A work of art in the visual arts is a physical two- or three- dimensional object that is professionally determined or otherwise considered to fulfill a primarily independent aesthetic function.  A singular art object is often seen in the context of a larger art movement or artistic era , such as: a genre , aesthetic convention , culture , or regional-national distinction.

[ 3 ] It can also be seen as an item within an artist's "body of work" or oeuvre . The term is commonly used by museum and cultural heritage curators , the interested public, the art patron -private art collector community, and art galleries .

[ 4 ] Physical objects that document immaterial or conceptual art works, but do not conform to artistic conventions, can be redefined and reclassified as art objects. Some Dada and Neo-Dada conceptual and readymade works have received later inclusion. Also, some architectural renderings and models of unbuilt projects, such as by Vitruvius , Leonardo da Vinci , Frank Lloyd Wright , and Frank Gehry , are other examples.

The products of environmental design , depending on intention and execution, can be "works of art" and include: land art , site-specific art , architecture , gardens , landscape architecture , installation art , rock art , and megalithic monuments .

Legal definitions of "work of art" are used in copyright law; see Visual arts § United States of America copyright definition of visual art .

History [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2024 ) Theories [ edit ] Theorists have argued that objects and people do not have a constant meaning, but their meanings are fashioned by humans in the context of their culture, as they have the ability to make things mean or signify something.

[ 5 ] A prime example of this theory are the Readymades of Marcel Duchamp .

Marcel Duchamp criticized the idea that the work of art must be a unique product of an artist's labour or skill through his "readymades": "mass-produced, commercially available, often utilitarian objects" to which he gave  titles, designating them as artwork only through these processes of choosing and naming.

[ 6 ] Artist Michael Craig-Martin , creator of An Oak Tree , said of his work – "It's not a symbol. I have changed the physical substance of the glass of water into that of an oak tree. I didn't change its appearance. The actual oak tree is physically present, but in the form of a glass of water." [ 7 ] Distinctions [ edit ] Some art theorists and writers have long made a distinction between the physical qualities of an art object and its identity-status as an artwork.

[ 8 ] For example, a painting by Rembrandt has a physical existence as an " oil painting on canvas" that is separate from its identity as a masterpiece "work of art" or the artist's magnum opus .

[ 9 ] Many works of art are initially denied "museum quality" or artistic merit, and later become accepted and valued in museum and private collections. Works by the Impressionists and non-representational abstract artists are examples. Some, such as the readymades of Marcel Duchamp including his infamous urinal Fountain , are later reproduced as museum quality replicas.

Research suggests that presenting an artwork in a museum context can affect the perception of it.

[ 10 ] There is an indefinite distinction, for current or historical aesthetic items: between " fine art " objects made by " artists "; and folk art , craft-work , or " applied art " objects made by "first, second, or third-world" designers , artisans and craftspeople. Contemporary and archeological indigenous art , industrial design items in limited or mass production , and places created by environmental designers and cultural landscapes , are some examples. The term has been consistently available for debate, reconsideration, and redefinition.

See also [ edit ] Anti-art Artistic media Cultural artifact Opus number (used in music) Outline of aesthetics " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " Western canon References [ edit ] ^ Mostly in American English ^ Oeuvre Merriam Webster Dictionary, Accessed April 2011 ^ Gell, Alfred (1998).

Art and agency: an Anthropological Theory . Clarendon Press. p. 7.

ISBN 0-19-828014-9 . Retrieved 2011-03-11 .

^ Macdonald, Sharon (2006).

A Companion to Museum Studies . Blackwell companions in cultural studies. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 52.

ISBN 1-4051-0839-8 . Retrieved 2011-03-11 .

^ Hall, S (ed.) 1997, Cultural Representations and Signifying Practice , Open University Press, London, 1997.

^ MoMA: The Museum of Modern Art.

"Marcel Duchamp and the Readymade" .

MoMA: The Museum of Modern Art . Retrieved February 2, 2024 .

^ "There's No Need to be Afraid of the Present" , The Independent , 25 Jun 2001 ^ "FTC Wins $2.3 Million Judgment Against Gallery Owner In Phony Art Scam" (Press release).

Federal Trade Commission . August 11, 1995. Archived from the original on August 4, 2009 . Retrieved October 29, 2008 .

^ "Rembrandt Research Project - Home" .

rembrandtresearchproject.org .

^ Susanne Grüner; Eva Specker & Helmut Leder (2019).

"Effects of Context and Genuineness in the Experience of Art" .

Empirical Studies of the Arts .

37 (2): 138– 152.

doi : 10.1177/0276237418822896 .

S2CID 150115587 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wollheim, Richard .

Art and Its Objects (2nd ed) 1980. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-29706-0 . The classic philosophical enquiry into what a work of art is.

External links [ edit ] Look up art student , artwork , objet d'art , or work of art in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Works of art at Wikimedia Commons v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 3 Spain Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Work_of_art&oldid=1303544248 " Categories : Visual arts media Art Concepts in aesthetics Design Visual arts Works of art Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with hAudio microformats Articles to be expanded from April 2024 All articles to be expanded Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 16:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Work of art 55 languages Add topic

