Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods 2 Concussion 3 Methods & Tools 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Rehabilitation (neuropsychology) 6 languages العربية Español فارسی Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Therapy to regain or improve neurocognitive function that has been lost or diminished This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rehabilitation" neuropsychology – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Medical intervention Rehabilitation Specialty Neurology [ edit on Wikidata ] Rehabilitation of sensory and cognitive function typically involves methods for retraining neural pathways or training new neural pathways to regain or improve neurocognitive functioning that have been diminished by disease or trauma . The main objective outcome for rehabilitation is to assist in regaining physical abilities and improving performance.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Three common neuropsychological problems treatable with rehabilitation are attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), [ 3 ] concussion , [ 4 ] and spinal cord injury .

[ 1 ] Rehabilitation research and practices are a fertile area for clinical neuropsychologists , rehabilitation psychologists , and others.

Methods [ edit ] Physical therapy , speech therapy , occupational therapy , hot and cold therapy , and other methods that "exercise" specific brain functions are used. For example, eye–hand coordination exercises may rehabilitate certain motor deficits, or well-structured planning and organizing exercises might help rehabilitate executive functions following a traumatic blow to the head.

Brain functions that are impaired because of traumatic brain injuries are often the most challenging and difficult to rehabilitate. Much work is being done in nerve regeneration for the most severely damaged neural pathways.

Neurocognitive techniques, such as cognitive rehabilitation therapy , provide assessment and treatment of cognitive impairments from a variety of brain diseases and insults that cause persistent disability for many individuals. Such disabilities result in a loss of independence, a disruption in normal childhood activities and social relationships, and a loss in school attendance and educational and employment opportunities. Injuries or insults that may benefit from neurocognitive rehabilitation include traumatic and acquired brain injuries (e.g., stroke, concussion, neurosurgery, etc.), cranial radiation, intrathecal chemotherapy, and neurological disorders, such as ADHD . The rehabilitation targets cognitive functions such as attention, memory, and executive function (organization, planning, time management, etc.). Specific programs are tailored to develop and address an individual's challenges after a baseline assessment of abilities and challenges.

Concussion [ edit ] Much research and focus has been given to concussion suffered frequently by athletes. While the severity of brain trauma has been standardized for immediate "sideline" assessment, much work needs to be done to understand how to rehabilitate or accelerate the rehabilitation of athletes' brain function following serious concussion—whether consciousness is lost or a dazed/confused feeling is experienced or not. Currently, rehabilitation of concussive brain injury is based on rest and gradual return to normal activities with as much involvement as can be tolerated.

[ 5 ] Various parts of the brain are responsible for different functions.

Methods & Tools [ edit ] Standardized neuropsychological tests These tasks have been designed so the performance on the task can be linked to specific neurocognitive processes. These tests are typically standardized , meaning that they have been administered to a specific group (or groups) of individuals before being used in individual clinical cases. The data resulting from standardization are known as normative data. After these data have been collected and analyzed, they are used as the comparative standard against which individual performances can be compared. Examples of neuropsychological tests include: the Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS), the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS), Boston Naming Test, the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test , the Benton Visual Retention Test , and the Controlled Oral Word Association.

Brain scans The use of brain scans to investigate the structure or function of the brain is common, either as simply a way of better assessing brain injury with high resolution pictures, or by examining the relative activations of different brain areas. Such technologies may include fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) and positron emission tomography (PET), which yields data related to functioning, as well as MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) and computed axial tomography (CAT or CT), which yields structural data.

Global Brain Project Brain models based on mouse and monkey have been developed based on theoretical neuroscience involving working memory and attention, while mapping brain activity based on time constants validated by measurements of neuronal activity in various layers of the brain. These methods also map to decision states of behavior in simple tasks that involve binary outcomes.

Electrophysiology The use of electrophysiological measures designed to measure the activation of the brain by measuring the electrical or magnetic field produced by the nervous system. This may include electroencephalography (EEG) or magneto-encephalography (MEG).

Experimental tasks The use of designed experimental tasks, often controlled by computer and typically measuring reaction time and accuracy on a particular tasks thought to be related to a specific neurocognitive process. An example of this is the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB) or CNS Vital Signs (CNSVS).

See also [ edit ] Medicine portal Philosophy portal Psychology portal Clinical neuropsychology – Sub-field of neuropsychology concerned with the applied science of brain-behaviour relationships Cognitive neuropsychology – Relation of brain structure to psychological processes Neuropsychology – Study of the brain related to specific psychological processes and behaviors Occupational therapy – Healthcare profession Physical medicine and rehabilitation – Branch of medicine Physiotherapy – Profession that helps a disabled person function in everyday life Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Rehabilitation psychology – Specialty area of psychology Speech therapy – Disability therapy profession Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ a b Kaur, Jaskirat; Ghosh, Shampa; Sahani, Asish Kumar; Sinha, Jitendra Kumar (November 2020). "Mental Imagery as a Rehabilitative Therapy for Neuropathic Pain in People With Spinal Cord Injury: A Randomized Controlled Trial".

Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair .

34 (11): 1038– 1049.

doi : 10.1177/1545968320962498 .

ISSN 1552-6844 .

PMID 33040678 .

S2CID 222300017 .

^ Henry, David.

"Frequenzen" . Retrieved 14 October 2023 .

^ Ng, Qin Xiang; Ho, Collin Yih Xian; Chan, Hwei Wuen; Yong, Bob Zheng Jie; Yeo, Wee-Song (October 2017). "Managing childhood and adolescent attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with exercise: A systematic review".

Complementary Therapies in Medicine .

34 : 123– 128.

doi : 10.1016/j.ctim.2017.08.018 .

ISSN 1873-6963 .

PMID 28917364 .

^ Leddy, John J.; Baker, John G.; Willer, Barry (May 2016). "Active Rehabilitation of Concussion and Post-concussion Syndrome".

Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics of North America .

27 (2): 437– 454.

doi : 10.1016/j.pmr.2015.12.003 .

ISSN 1558-1381 .

PMID 27154855 .

^ "Recovering from Mild Traumatic Brain Injury/Concussion–A Guide for Patients and Their Families" (PDF) .

McKay Moore Sohlberg and Catherine A. Mateer (2001) Cognitive Rehabilitation: An Integrative Neuropsychological Approach. Andover: Taylor and Francis Halligan, P.W., & Wade, D.T. (Eds.) (2005). Effectiveness of Rehabilitation for Cognitive Deficits. Oxford University Press, UK.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Rehabilitation at Wikimedia Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rehabilitation_(neuropsychology)&oldid=1301189371 " Categories : Neurotrauma Neuropsychology Occupational therapy Rehabilitation medicine Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using div col with small parameter Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 15:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rehabilitation (neuropsychology) 6 languages Add topic

