Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description and definition Toggle Description and definition subsection 1.1 Placement and distinctions 1.2 Biosocial definition 1.3 Evolutionary perspective 2 Origins 3 Cyborg tissues in engineering 4 Actual cyborgization attempts Toggle Actual cyborgization attempts subsection 4.1 bodyNET 5 Practical applications Toggle Practical applications subsection 5.1 In medicine and biotechnology 5.1.1 Prosthetics 5.1.2 Neural enhancement and restoration 5.1.3 Pharmacology 5.2 In the military 5.3 In sports 5.4 In art 5.4.1 Artists as cyborgs 5.5 In body modification 5.6 In space 5.7 In cognitive science 6 Future scope and regulation of implantable technologies 7 Cyborg Foundation 8 In fiction 9 Animal cyborgs Toggle Animal cyborgs subsection 9.1 Bacterial cyborg cells 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Cyborg 54 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano עברית Қазақша ລາວ Latina Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Cyborgs in fiction ) Being with both organic and biomechatronic body parts For other uses, see Cyborg (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Artist's illustration of a cyborg Part of a series on Cyborgs Cyborgology Bionics Biomimicry Biomedical engineering Brain–computer interface Cybernetics Distributed cognition Genetic engineering Human ecosystem Human enhancement Intelligence amplification Whole brain emulation Theory Cyborg anthropology Centers Cyberpunk Cyberspace Politics Cognitive liberty Extropianism Morphological freedom Singularitarianism Techno-progressivism Transhumanism Related articles Cyborg art v t e A cyborg ( / ˈ s aɪ b ɔːr ɡ / , a portmanteau of cybernetic and organism ) is a being with both organic and biomechatronic body parts. The term was coined in 1960 by Manfred Clynes and Nathan S. Kline .

[ 1 ] In contrast to biorobots and androids , the term cyborg applies to a living organism that has restored function or enhanced abilities due to the integration of some artificial component or technology that relies on feedback.

[ 2 ] Description and definition [ edit ] Alternative names for a cyborg include cybernetic organism, cyber-organism, cyber-organic being, cybernetically enhanced organism, cybernetically augmented organism, technorganic being, techno-organic being, and techno-organism.

Unlike bionics , biorobotics , or androids , a cyborg is an organism that has restored function or, especially, enhanced abilities due to the integration of some artificial component or technology that relies on some sort of feedback , for example: prostheses , artificial organs , implants or, in some cases, wearable technology .

[ 3 ] Cyborg technologies may enable or support collective intelligence .

[ 4 ] A related idea is the " augmented human ".

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] While cyborgs are commonly thought of as mammals , including humans, the term can apply to any organism .

Placement and distinctions [ edit ] D. S. Halacy's Cyborg: Evolution of the Superman (1965) featured an introduction which spoke of a "new frontier" that was "not merely space, but more profoundly the relationship between 'inner space' to 'outer space' – a bridge...between mind and matter." [ 7 ] In " A Cyborg Manifesto ", Donna Haraway rejects the notion of rigid boundaries between humanity and technology, arguing that, as humans depend on more technology over time, humanity and technology have become too interwoven to draw lines between them. She believes that since we have allowed and created machines and technology to be so advanced, there should be no reason to fear what we have created, and cyborgs should be embraced because they are part of human identities.

[ 8 ] However, Haraway has also expressed concern over the contradictions of scientific objectivity and the ethics of technological evolution, and has argued that "There are political consequences to scientific accounts of the world." [ 9 ] Biosocial definition [ edit ] According to some definitions of the term, the physical attachments that humans have with even the most basic technologies have already made them cyborgs.

[ 10 ] In a typical example, a human with an artificial cardiac pacemaker or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator would be considered a cyborg, since these devices measure voltage potentials in the body, perform signal processing , and can deliver electrical stimuli , using a synthetic feedback mechanism to keep that person alive. Implants, especially cochlear implants , that combine mechanical modification with any kind of feedback response are also cybernetic enhancements. Some theorists [ who?

] cite such modifications as contact lenses , hearing aids , smartphones , [ 11 ] or intraocular lenses as examples of fitting humans with technology to enhance their biological capabilities.

The emerging trend of implanting microchips inside the body (mainly the hands), to make financial operations like a contactless payment, or basic tasks like opening a door, has been erroneously marketed as more recent examples of cybernetic enhancement. The latter has not yet seen significant traction outside niche areas in Scandinavia and in actual function is little more than a pre-programmed Radio-frequency identification (RFID) microchip encased in glass that does not interact with the human body (it is the same technology used in the microchips injected into animals for ease of identification ), thus not fitting the definition of a cybernetic implant.

As cyborgs currently are on the rise, some theorists [ who?

] argue there is a need to develop new definitions of aging . For instance, a bio-techno-social definition of aging has been suggested.

[ 12 ] The term is also used to address human-technology mixtures in the abstract. This includes not only commonly used pieces of technology such as phones , computers, the Internet, and so on, but also artifacts that are not usually considered technology; for example, pen and paper, and speech and language . When augmented with these technologies and connected in communication with people in other times and places, a person becomes capable of more than they were before. An example is a computer, which gains power by using Internet protocols to connect with other computers. Another example is a social-media bot —either a bot-assisted human or a human-assisted-bot—used to target social media with likes and shares .

[ 13 ] Cybernetic technologies thus include highways, pipes , electrical wiring , buildings, electrical plants , libraries, and other infrastructural constructs .

Bruce Sterling , in his Shaper/Mechanist universe , suggested an idea of an alternative cyborg called 'Lobster', which is made not by using internal implants, but by using an external shell (e.g. a powered exoskeleton ).

[ 14 ] The computer game Deus Ex: Invisible War prominently features cyborgs called Omar, Russian for 'lobster'.

[ citation needed ] Evolutionary perspective [ edit ] In 1994, Hans Hass formulated a scientific view of the human-machine hybrids he called "hypercells".

[ 15 ] They can expand their biological cell body with artificial artifacts and thus expand their performance body. The theory of hypercells or "Homo proteus", as Hass called the human-machine hybrid to distinguish Homo sapiens , extends Charles Darwin's theory of evolution and deals with the course of evolution beyond humans.

In his 2019 book Novacene , James Lovelock used the term "cyborgs" to refer to the next generation of beings who will become the "understanders of the future" and "lead the cosmos to self-knowledge". While acknowledging the organic component in Clynes' and Kline's definition, he proposed that these cyborgs "will have designed and built themselves from the artificial intelligence systems we have already constructed", and used the term cyborg "to emphasize that the new intelligent beings will have arisen, like us, from Darwinian evolution." [ 16 ] Origins [ edit ] Engraving by an unknown author depicting a man-machine hybrid, 1569 The concept of a man-machine mixture was widespread in science fiction before World War II . As early as 1843, Edgar Allan Poe described a man with extensive prostheses in the short story " The Man That Was Used Up ". In 1911, Jean de La Hire introduced the Nyctalope , a science fiction hero who was perhaps the first literary cyborg, in Le Mystère des XV (later translated as The Nyctalope on Mars ).

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Nearly two decades later, Edmond Hamilton presented space explorers with a mixture of organic and machine parts in his 1928 novel The Comet Doom . He later featured the talking, living brain of an old scientist, Simon Wright, floating in a transparent case, and in all the adventures of his famous hero, Captain Future . In 1944, in the short story " No Woman Born ", C. L. Moore wrote of Deirdre, a dancer, whose body was burned completely and whose brain was placed in a faceless but beautiful and supple mechanical body.

In 1960, the term "cyborg" was coined by Manfred E. Clynes and Nathan S. Kline to refer to their conception of an enhanced human being who could survive in extraterrestrial environments: [ 1 ] For the exogenously extended organizational complex functioning as an integrated homeostatic system unconsciously, we propose the term 'Cyborg'.

Their concept was the outcome of thinking about the need for an intimate relationship between human and machine as the new frontier of space exploration was beginning to develop. A designer of physiological instrumentation and electronic data-processing systems, Clynes was the chief research scientist in the Dynamic Simulation Laboratory at Rockland State Hospital in New York.

The term first appears in print 5 months earlier when The New York Times reported on the " Psychophysiological Aspects of Space Flight Symposium " where Clynes and Kline first presented their paper: A cyborg is essentially a man-machine system in which the control mechanisms of the human portion are modified externally by drugs or regulatory devices so that the being can live in an environment different from the normal one.

[ 20 ] Thereafter, Hamilton would first use the term "cyborg" explicitly in the 1962 short story, "After a Judgment Day", to describe the "mechanical analogs" called "Charlies," explaining that "[c]yborgs, they had been called from the first one in the 1960s...cybernetic organisms." In 2001, a book titled Cyborg: Digital Destiny and Human Possibility in the Age of the Wearable computer was published by Doubleday .

[ 21 ] Some of the ideas in the book were incorporated into the documentary film Cyberman that same year.

Cyborg tissues in engineering [ edit ] Cyborg tissues structured with carbon nanotubes and plant or fungal cells have been used in artificial tissue engineering to produce new materials for mechanical and electrical uses.

Such work was presented by Raffaele Di Giacomo , Bruno Maresca , and others, at the Materials Research Society 's spring conference on 3 April 2013.

[ 22 ] The cyborg obtained was inexpensive, light and had unique mechanical properties. It could also be shaped in the desired forms.

Cells combined with multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) co-precipitated as a specific aggregate of cells and nanotubes that formed a viscous material. Likewise, dried cells still acted as a stable matrix for the MWCNT network. When observed by optical microscopy , the material resembled an artificial " tissue " composed of highly packed cells. The effect of cell drying was manifested by their " ghost cell " appearance. A rather specific physical interaction between MWCNTs and cells was observed by electron microscopy , suggesting that the cell wall (the outermost part of fungal and plant cells) may play a major active role in establishing a carbon nanotube 's network and its stabilization. This novel material can be used in a wide range of electronic applications, from heating to sensing. For instance, using Candida albicans cells, a species of yeast that often lives inside the human gastrointestinal tract , cyborg tissue materials with temperature sensing properties have been reported.

[ 23 ] Actual cyborgization attempts [ edit ] Cyborg Neil Harbisson with his antenna implant In current prosthetic applications, the C-Leg system developed by Otto Bock HealthCare , is used to replace a human leg that has been amputated because of injury or illness. The use of sensors in the artificial C-Leg aids in walking significantly by attempting to replicate the user's natural gait , as it would be prior to amputation.

[ 24 ] A similar system is being developed by the Swedish orthopedic company Integrum, the OPRA Implant System, which is surgically anchored and integrated by means of osseointegration into the skeleton of the remainder of the amputated limb.

[ 25 ] The same company has developed e-OPRA, a will-powered upper limb prosthesis system that is being evaluated in a clinical trial to allow sensory input to the central nervous system using pressure and temperature sensors in the prosthesis' finger tips.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Prostheses like the C-Leg, the e-OPRA Implant System, and the iLimb , are considered by some to be the first real steps towards the next generation of real-world cyborg applications.

[ citation needed ] Additionally, cochlear implants and magnetic implants , which provide people with a sense that they would not otherwise have had, can additionally be thought of as creating cyborgs.

[ citation needed ] In vision science , direct brain implants have been used to treat non- congenital (acquired) blindness. One of the first scientists to come up with a working brain interface to restore sight was private researcher William Dobelle .
Dobelle's first prototype was implanted into "Jerry", a man blinded in adulthood, in 1978. A single-array BCI containing 68 electrodes was implanted onto Jerry's visual cortex and succeeded in producing phosphenes , the sensation of seeing light. The system included cameras mounted on glasses to send signals to the implant. Initially, the implant allowed Jerry to see shades of grey in a limited field of vision at a low frame-rate. This also required him to be hooked up to a two-ton mainframe , but shrinking electronics and faster computers made his artificial eye more portable and now enable him to perform simple tasks unassisted.

[ 28 ] In 1997, Philip Kennedy, a scientist and physician, created the world's first human cyborg from Johnny Ray , a Vietnam War veteran who suffered a stroke. Ray's body, as doctors called it, was " locked in ". Ray wanted his old life back so he agreed to Kennedy's experiment. Kennedy embedded an implant he designed (and named a " neurotrophic electrode ") near the injured part of Ray's brain so that Ray would be able to have some movement back in his body. The surgery went successfully, but in 2002, Ray died.

[ 29 ] In 2002, Canadian Jens Naumann , also blinded in adulthood, became the first in a series of 16 paying patients to receive Dobelle's second-generation implant, marking one of the earliest commercial uses of BCIs. The second-generation device used a more sophisticated implant enabling better mapping of phosphenes into coherent vision. Phosphenes are spread out across the visual field in what researchers call the starry-night effect. Immediately after his implant, Naumann was able to use his imperfectly restored vision to drive slowly around the parking area of the research institute.

[ 30 ] In contrast to replacement technologies, in 2002, under the heading Project Cyborg , a British scientist, Kevin Warwick , had an array of 100 electrodes fired into his nervous system to link his nervous system into the internet to investigate enhancement possibilities. With this in place, Warwick successfully carried out a series of experiments including extending his nervous system over the internet to control a robotic hand , also receiving feedback from the fingertips to control the hand's grip. This was a form of extended sensory input. Subsequently, he investigated ultrasonic input to remotely detect the distance to objects . Finally, with electrodes also implanted into his wife's nervous system, they conducted the first direct electronic communication experiment between the nervous systems of two humans.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Since 2004, British artist Neil Harbisson has had a cyborg antenna implanted in his head that allows him to extend his perception of colors beyond the human visual spectrum through vibrations in his skull.

[ 33 ] His antenna was included within his 2004 passport photograph which has been said to confirm his cyborg status.

[ 34 ] In 2012 at TEDGlobal , [ 35 ] Harbisson explained that he started to feel like a cyborg when he noticed that the software and his brain had united and given him an extra sense.

[ 35 ] Harbisson is a co-founder of the Cyborg Foundation (2004) [ 36 ] and cofounded the Transpecies Society in 2017, which is an association that empowers individuals with non-human identities and supports them in their decisions to develop unique senses and new organs.

[ 37 ] Neil Harbisson is a global advocate for the rights of cyborgs .

Rob Spence , a Toronto-based filmmaker, who titles himself a real-life "Eyeborg", severely damaged his right eye in a shooting accident on his grandfather's farm as a child.

[ 38 ] Many years later, in 2005, he decided to have his ever-deteriorating and now technically blind eye surgically removed, [ 39 ] whereafter he wore an eyepatch for some time before he later, after having played for some time with the idea of installing a camera instead, contacted professor Steve Mann at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , an expert in wearable computing and cyborg technology.

[ 39 ] Under Mann's guidance, Spence, at age 36, created a prototype in the form of the miniature camera which could be fitted inside his prosthetic eye ; an invention that would come to be named by Time magazine as one of the best inventions of 2009. The bionic eye records everything he sees and contains a 1.5 mm 2 , low-resolution video camera, a small round printed circuit board , a wireless video transmitter, which allows him to transmit what he is seeing in real-time to a computer, and a 3- volt rechargeable VARTA microbattery . The eye is not connected to his brain and has not restored his sense of vision. Additionally, Spence has also installed a laser -like LED light in one version of the prototype.

[ 40 ] Furthermore, many people with multifunctional radio frequency identification (RFID) microchips injected into a hand are known to exist. With the chips they are able to swipe cards , open or unlock doors , operate devices such as printers or, with some using cryptocurrency , buy products, such as drinks, with a wave of the hand.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] bodyNET [ edit ] bodyNET is an application of human-electronic interaction currently [ when?

] in development by researchers from Stanford University .

[ 46 ] The technology is based on stretchable semiconductor materials ( Elastronic ). According to their article in Nature , the technology is composed of smart devices , screens, and a network of sensors that can be implanted into the body, woven into the skin or worn as clothes. It has been suggested that this platform can potentially replace the smartphone in the future.

[ 47 ] Practical applications [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In medicine and biotechnology [ edit ] This section may be too long to read and navigate comfortably .

Consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings . Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page .

( November 2022 ) See also: Telemedicine In medicine, there are two important and different types of cyborgs: the restorative and the enhanced. Restorative technologies "restore lost function, organs, and limbs." [ 48 ] The key aspect of restorative cyborgization is the repair of broken or missing processes to revert to a healthy or average level of function. There is no enhancement to the original faculties and processes that were lost.

On the contrary, the enhanced cyborg "follows a principle, and it is the principle of optimal performance: maximising output (the information or modifications obtained) and minimising input (the energy expended in the process)".

[ 49 ] Thus, the enhanced cyborg intends to exceed normal processes or even gain new functions that were not originally present.

Prosthetics [ edit ] Although prostheses in general supplement lost or damaged body parts with the integration of a mechanical artifice, bionic implants in medicine allow model organs or body parts to mimic the original function more closely.

Michael Chorost wrote a memoir of his experience with cochlear implants, or bionic ears, titled Rebuilt: How Becoming Part Computer Made Me More Human .

[ 50 ] Jesse Sullivan became one of the first people to operate a fully robotic limb through a nerve - muscle graft, enabling him a complex range of motions beyond that of previous prosthetics.

[ 51 ] By 2004, a fully functioning artificial heart was developed.

[ 52 ] The continued technological development of bionic and ( bio- ) nanotechnologies begins to raise the question of enhancement, and of the future possibilities for cyborgs which surpass the original functionality of the biological model. The ethics and desirability of "enhancement prosthetics" have been debated; their proponents include the transhumanist movement , with its belief that new technologies can assist the human race in developing beyond its present, normative limitations such as aging and disease, as well as other, more general inabilities, such as limitations on speed, strength , endurance, and intelligence . Opponents of the concept describe what they believe to be biases which propel the development and acceptance of such technologies; namely, a bias towards functionality and efficiency that may compel assent to a view of human people which de-emphasizes as defining characteristics actual manifestations of humanity and personhood , in favor of definition in terms of upgrades, versions, and utility.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Retinal implants are another form of cyborgization in medicine. The theory behind retinal stimulation to restore vision for those suffering from retinitis pigmentosa and vision loss due to aging (conditions in which people have an abnormally low number of retinal ganglion cells ), is that the retinal implant and electrical stimulation would act as a substitute for the missing ganglion cells (cells which connect the eye to the brain).

While the work to perfect this technology is still being done, there have already been major advances in the use of electronic stimulation of the retina to allow the eye to sense patterns of light. A specialized camera is worn by the subject, such as on the frames of their glasses, which converts the image into a pattern of electrical stimulation. A chip located in the user's eye would then electrically stimulate the retina with this pattern by exciting certain nerve endings which transmit the image to the optic centers of the brain, and the image would then appear to the user. If technological advances proceed as planned, this technology may be used by thousands of blind people and restore vision to most of them.

A similar process has been created to aid people who have lost their vocal cords . This experimental device would do away with previously used robotic-sounding voice simulators . The transmission of sound would start with a surgery to redirect the nerve that controls the voice and sound production to a muscle in the neck, where a nearby sensor would be able to pick up its electrical signals . The signals would then move to a processor which would control the timing and pitch of a voice simulator. That simulator would then vibrate producing a multi-tonal sound that could be shaped into words by the mouth.

[ 55 ] An article published in Nature Materials in 2012 reported research on "cyborg tissues" (engineered human tissues with embedded three-dimensional mesh of nanoscale wires), with possible medical implications.

[ 56 ] In 2014, researchers from the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign and Washington University in St. Louis had developed a device that could keep a heart beating endlessly. By using 3D printing and computer modeling , these scientists developed an electronic membrane that could successfully replace pacemakers. The device uses a "spider-web like network of sensors and electrodes" to monitor and maintain a normal heart rate with electrical stimuli. Unlike traditional pacemakers that are similar from patient to patient, the elastic heart glove is made custom by using high-resolution imaging technology. The first prototype was created to fit a rabbit 's heart, operating the organ in an oxygen and nutrient-rich solution. The stretchable material and circuits of the apparatus were first constructed by Professor John A. Rogers in which the electrodes are arranged in an s-shape design to allow them to expand and bend without breaking. Although the device is only currently used as a research tool to study changes in heart rate, in the future the membrane may serve as a safeguard against heart attacks .

[ 57 ] Neural enhancement and restoration [ edit ] A brain–computer interface , or BCI, provides a direct path of communication from the brain to an external device, effectively creating a cyborg. Research into invasive BCIs, which use electrodes implanted directly into the grey matter of the brain, has focused on restoring damaged eyesight in the blind and providing functionality to paralyzed people, most notably those with severe cases, such as locked-in syndrome . This technology could enable people who are missing a limb or are in a wheelchair the power to control the devices that aid them through neural signals sent from the brain implants directly to computers or the devices. It is possible that this technology will also eventually be used with healthy people.

[ 58 ] Deep brain stimulation is a neurological surgical procedure used for therapeutic purposes. This process has aided in treating patients diagnosed with Parkinson's disease , Alzheimer's disease , Tourette syndrome , epilepsy , chronic headaches , and mental disorders . After the patient is unconscious , through anesthesia , brain pacemakers or electrodes, are implanted into the region of the brain where the cause of the disease is present. The region of the brain is then stimulated by bursts of electric current to disrupt the oncoming surge of seizures . Like all invasive procedures , deep brain stimulation may put the patient at a higher risk. However, there have been more improvements in recent years with deep brain stimulation than any available drug treatment .

[ 59 ] Pharmacology [ edit ] Automated insulin delivery systems , colloquially also known as the "artificial pancreas", are a substitute for the lack of natural insulin production by the body, most notably in Type 1 Diabetes . Currently available systems combine a continuous glucose monitor with an insulin pump that can be remote controlled, forming a control loop that automatically adjusts the insulin dosage depending on the current blood glucose level . Examples of commercial systems that implement such a control loop are the MiniMed 670G from Medtronic [ 60 ] and the t:slim x2 from Tandem Diabetes Care .

[ 61 ] Do-it-yourself artificial pancreas technologies also exist, though these are not verified or approved by any regulatory agency.

[ 62 ] Upcoming next-generation artificial pancreas technologies include automatic glucagon infusion in addition to insulin, to help prevent hypoglycemia and improve efficiency. One example of such a bi-hormonal system is the Beta Bionics iLet .

[ 63 ] In the military [ edit ] See also: § Animal cyborgs , and Supersoldier Military organizations' research has recently focused on the use of cyborg animals for the purposes of a supposed tactical advantage.

DARPA has announced its interest in developing "cyborg insects" to transmit data from sensors implanted into the insect during the pupa stage. The insect's motion would be controlled from a microelectromechanical system (MEMS) and could conceivably survey an environment or detect explosives and gas.

[ 64 ] Similarly, DARPA is developing a neural implant to remotely control the movement of sharks. The shark's unique senses would then be exploited to provide data feedback in relation to enemy ship movement or underwater explosives.

[ 65 ] In 2006, researchers at Cornell University invented [ 66 ] a new surgical procedure to implant artificial structures into insects during their metamorphic development.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] The first insect cyborgs, moths with integrated electronics in their thorax , were demonstrated by the same researchers.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] The initial success of the techniques has resulted in increased research and the creation of a program called Hybrid-Insect-MEMS (HI-MEMS). Its goal, according to DARPA's Microsystems Technology Office , is to develop "tightly coupled machine-insect interfaces by placing micro-mechanical systems inside the insects during the early stages of metamorphosis." [ 71 ] The use of neural implants has recently been attempted, with success, on cockroaches. Surgically applied electrodes were put on the insect, which was remotely controlled by a human. The results, although sometimes different, basically showed that the cockroach could be controlled by the impulses it received through the electrodes. DARPA is now funding this research because of its obvious beneficial applications to the military and other areas [ 72 ] In 2009 at the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) MEMS conference in Italy, researchers demonstrated the first "wireless" flying-beetle cyborg.

[ 73 ] Engineers at the University of California, Berkeley , have pioneered the design of a "remote-controlled beetle", funded by the DARPA HI-MEMS Program.

[ 74 ] This was followed later that year by the demonstration of wireless control of a "lift-assisted" moth-cyborg.

[ 75 ] Eventually researchers plan to develop HI-MEMS for dragonflies, bees, rats, and pigeons.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] For the HI-MEMS cybernetic bug to be considered a success, it must fly 100 metres (330 ft) from a starting point, guided via computer into a controlled landing within 5 metres (16 ft) of a specific end point. Once landed, the cybernetic bug must remain in place.

[ 76 ] In 2020, an article published in Science Robotics [ 78 ] by researchers at the University of Washington reported a mechanically steerable wireless camera attached to beetles.

[ 79 ] Miniature cameras weighing 248 mg were attached to live beetles of the Tenebrionid genera Asbolus and Eleodes . The camera wirelessly streamed video to a smartphone via Bluetooth for up to 6 hours and the user could remotely steer the camera to achieve a bug's-eye view.

[ 80 ] In sports [ edit ] See also: Cybathlon and Paralympic Games In 2016, Cybathlon became the first cyborg 'Olympics'; celebrated in Zurich, Switzerland, it was the first worldwide and official celebration of cyborg sports. In this event, 16 teams of people with disabilities used technological developments to turn themselves into cyborg athletes. There were 6 different events and its competitors used and controlled advanced technologies such as powered prosthetic legs and arms, robotic exoskeletons , bikes, and motorized wheelchairs .

[ 81 ] This was already a remarkable improvement, as it allowed disabled people to compete and showed the several technological enhancements that are already making a difference; however, it showed that there is still a long way to go. For instance, the exoskeleton race still required its participants to stand up from a chair and sit down, navigate a slalom and other simple activities such as walking over stepping stones and climbing up and down stairs. Despite the simplicity of these activities, 8 of the 16 teams that participated in the event drop off before the start.

[ 82 ] Nonetheless, one of the main goals of this event and such simple activities is to show how technological enhancements and advanced prosthetics can make a difference in people's lives. The next Cybathlon that was expected to occur in 2020, was cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic .

In art [ edit ] See also: Artificial intelligence art Cyborg artist Moon Ribas , founder of the Cyborg Foundation performing with her seismic sense implant at TED (2016) The concept of the cyborg is often associated with science fiction. However, many artists have incorporated and reappropriated the idea of cybernetic organisms into their work, using disparate aesthetics and often realising actual cyborg constructs; their works range from performances, to paintings and installations. Some of the pioneering artists who created such works are H. R. Giger , Stelarc , Orlan , Shu Lea Cheang , Lee Bul , Tim Hawkinson , Steve Mann , Patricia Piccinini . More recently, this type of artistic practice has been expanded upon by artists such as Marco Donnarumma , Wafaa Bilal , Neil Harbisson , Moon Ribas , Manel De Aguas and Quimera Rosa .

Stelarc is a performance artist who has visually probed and acoustically amplified his body. He uses medical instruments, prosthetics, robotics, virtual reality systems, the Internet and biotechnology to explore alternate, intimate and involuntary interfaces with the body. He has made three films of the inside of his body and has performed with a third hand and a virtual arm. Between 1976 and 1988 he completed 25 body suspension performances with hooks into the skin. For 'Third Ear', he surgically constructed an extra ear within his arm that was internet-enabled, making it a publicly accessible acoustical organ for people in other places.

[ 83 ] He is presently performing as his avatar from his second life site.

[ 84 ] Tim Hawkinson promotes the idea that bodies and machines are coming together as one, where human features are combined with technology to create the Cyborg. Hawkinson's piece Emoter presented how society is now dependent on technology.

[ 85 ] Marco Donnarumma is a performance artist and new media artist . In his work the body becomes a morphing language to speak critically of ritual, power and technology. For his "7 Configurations" cycle, between 2014 and 2019, he engineered and created six AI prostheses, each embodying an uncanny configuration of the machinic with the organic.

[ 86 ] The prostheses – designed together with a team of artists and scientists – are useless prostheses, paradoxical objects designed for the body, but not to enhance it, rather to subtract functions from it: a skin-cutting robot with a steel metal knife, a facial prosthesis which blocks the wearer’s gaze with a mechanical arm, and two robotic spines that function as additional limbs without a body. The prostheses have been created to act as performers with their own agency, that is, to interact with their human partners without being controlled externally. The machines are embedded with biomimetic neural networks, information processing algorithms inspired by the biological nervous system of mammals. Developed by Donnarumma in collaboration with the Neurorobotics Research Laboratory (DE), these neural networks endow the machines with artificial cognitive and sensorimotor skills.

[ 87 ] Wafaa Bilal is an Iraqi-American performance artist who had a small 10-megapixel digital camera surgically implanted into the back of his head, part of a project entitled 3rd I.

[ 88 ] For one year, beginning 15 December 2010, an image was captured once per minute 24 hours a day and streamed live to www .3rdi .me and the Mathaf: Arab Museum of Modern Art . The site also displays Bilal's location via GPS. Bilal says that the reason why he put the camera in the back of the head was to make an "allegorical statement about the things we don't see and leave behind." [ 89 ] As a professor at NYU , this project raised privacy issues, and so Bilal was asked to ensure that his camera did not take photographs in NYU buildings.

[ 89 ] Machines are becoming more ubiquitous in the artistic process itself, with computerized drawing pads replacing pen and paper, and drum machines becoming nearly as popular as human drummers. Composers such as Brian Eno have developed and used software that can build entire musical scores from a few basic mathematical parameters.

[ 90 ] Scott Draves is a generative artist whose work is explicitly described as a "cyborg mind". His Electric Sheep project generates abstract art by combining the work of many computers and people over the internet.

[ 91 ] Artists as cyborgs [ edit ] Artists have explored the term cyborg from a perspective involving imagination. Some work to make an abstract idea of technological and human-bodily union apparent to reality in an art form using varying mediums, from sculptures and drawings to digital renderings.
Artists who seek to make cyborg-based fantasies a reality often call themselves cyborg artists , or may consider their artwork "cyborg". How an artist or their work may be considered cyborg will vary depending upon the interpreter's flexibility with the term.

Scholars that rely upon a strict, technical description of a cyborg, often going by Norbert Wiener 's cybernetic theory and Manfred E. Clynes and Nathan S. Kline 's first use of the term, would likely argue that most cyborg artists do not qualify to be considered cyborgs.

[ 92 ] Scholars considering a more flexible description of cyborgs may argue it incorporates more than cybernetics.

[ 93 ] Others may speak of defining subcategories, or specialized cyborg types, that qualify different levels of cyborg at which technology influences an individual. This may range from technological instruments being external, temporary, and removable to being fully integrated and permanent.

[ 94 ] Nonetheless, cyborg artists are artists. Being so, it can be expected for them to incorporate the cyborg idea rather than a strict, technical representation of the term, [ 95 ] seeing how their work will sometimes revolve around other purposes outside of cyborgism.

[ 92 ] In body modification [ edit ] As medical technology becomes more advanced, some techniques and innovations are adopted by the body modification community. While not yet cyborgs in the strict definition of Manfred Clynes and Nathan Kline, technological developments like implantable silicon silk electronics, [ 96 ] augmented reality [ 97 ] and QR codes [ 98 ] are bridging the disconnect between technology and the body. Hypothetical technologies such as digital tattoo interfaces [ 99 ] [ 100 ] would blend body modification aesthetics with interactivity and functionality, bringing a transhumanist way of life into present day reality.

In addition, it is quite plausible for anxiety expression to manifest. Individuals may experience pre-implantation feelings of fear and nervousness. To this end, individuals may also embody feelings of uneasiness, particularly in a socialized setting, due to their post-operative, technologically augmented bodies, and mutual unfamiliarity with the mechanical insertion. Anxieties may be linked to notions of otherness or a cyborged identity.

[ 101 ] In space [ edit ] Sending humans to space is a dangerous task in which the implementation of various cyborg technologies could be used in the future for risk mitigation.

[ 102 ] Stephen Hawking , a renowned physicist, stated "Life on Earth is at the ever-increasing risk of being wiped out by a disaster such as sudden global warming, nuclear war ... I think the human race has no future if it doesn't go into space." The difficulties associated with space travel could mean it might be centuries before humans ever become a multi-planet species.

[ citation needed ] There are many effects of spaceflight on the human body . One major issue of space exploration is the biological need for oxygen. If this necessity was taken out of the equation, space exploration would be revolutionized. A theory proposed by Manfred E. Clynes and Nathan S. Kline is aimed at tackling this problem. The two scientists theorized that the use of an inverse fuel cell that is "capable of reducing CO2 to its components with the removal of the carbon and re-circulation of the oxygen ..." [ 103 ] could make breathing unnecessary. Another prominent issue is radiation exposure. Yearly, the average human on earth is exposed to approximately 0.30 rem of radiation, while an astronaut aboard the International Space Station for 90 days is exposed to 9 rem.

[ 104 ] To tackle the issue, Clynes and Kline theorized a cyborg containing a sensor that would detect radiation levels and a Rose osmotic pump "which would automatically inject protective pharmaceuticals in appropriate doses." Experiments injecting these protective pharmaceuticals into monkeys have shown positive results in increasing radiation resistance.

[ 103 ] Although the effects of spaceflight on our bodies are an important issue, the advancement of propulsion technology is just as important. With our current technology, it would take us about 260 days to get to Mars.

[ 105 ] A study backed by NASA proposes an interesting way to tackle this issue through deep sleep , or torpor . With this technique, it would "reduce astronauts' metabolic functions with existing medical procedures." [ 106 ] So far experiments have only resulted in patients being in torpor state for one week. Advancements to allow for longer states of deep sleep would lower the cost of the trip to Mars as a result of reduced astronaut resource consumption.

In cognitive science [ edit ] See also: Neuroenhancement Theorists such as Andy Clark suggest that interactions between humans and technology result in the creation of a cyborg system. In this model, cyborg is defined as a part-biological, part-mechanical system that results in the augmentation of the biological component and the creation of a more complex whole. Clark argues that this broadened definition is necessary to an understanding of human cognition. He suggests that any tool which is used to offload part of a cognitive process may be considered the mechanical component of a cyborg system. Examples of this human and technology cyborg system can be very low tech and simplistic, such as using a calculator to perform basic mathematical operations or pen and paper to make notes, or as high tech as using a personal computer or phone. According to Clark, these interactions between a person and a form of technology integrate that technology into the cognitive process in a way that is analogous to the way that a technology that would fit the traditional concept of cyborg augmentation becomes integrated with its biological host. Because all humans in some way use technology to augment their cognitive processes, Clark comes to the conclusion that we are "natural-born cyborgs." [ 107 ] Professor Donna Haraway also theorizes that people, metaphorically or literally, have been cyborgs since the late twentieth century. If one considers the mind and body as one, much of humanity is aided with technology in almost every way, which hybridizes humans with technology.

[ 108 ] Future scope and regulation of implantable technologies [ edit ] See also: Mobile security and Medical device § Regulation and oversight Given the technical scope of current and future implantable sensory / telemetric devices, such devices will be greatly proliferated, and will have connections to commercial, medical, and governmental networks. For example, in the medical sector, patients will be able to log in to their home computer, and thus visit virtual doctor's offices, medical databases, and receive medical prognoses from the comfort of their own home from the data collected through their implanted telemetric devices.

[ 109 ] However, this online network presents large security concerns because it has been proven by several U.S. universities that hackers could get onto these networks and shut down peoples' electronic prosthetics.

[ 109 ] Cyborg data mining refers to the collection of data produced by implantable devices.

These sorts of technologies are already present in the U.S. workforce as a firm in River Falls, Wisconsin , called Three Square Market partnered with a Swedish firm Biohacks Technology to implant RFID microchips (which are about the size of a grain of rice) in the hands of its employees that allow employees to access offices, computers, and even vending machines. More than 50 of the firm's 85 employees were chipped. It was confirmed that the American Food and Drug Administration approved of these implantations.

[ 110 ] If these devices are to be proliferated within society, then the question that begs to be answered is what regulatory agency will oversee the operations, monitoring, and security of these devices? According to this case study of Three Square Market, it seems that the FDA is assuming a role in regulating and monitoring these devices. It has been argued that a new regulatory framework needs to be developed so that the law keeps up with developments in implantable technologies.

[ 111 ] Cyborg Foundation [ edit ] In 2010, the Cyborg Foundation became the world's first international organization dedicated to help humans become cyborgs.

[ 112 ] The foundation was created by cyborg Neil Harbisson and Moon Ribas as a response to the growing number of letters and emails received from people around the world interested in becoming cyborgs.

[ 113 ] The foundation's main aims are to extend human senses and abilities by creating and applying cybernetic extensions to the body, [ 114 ] to promote the use of cybernetics in cultural events and to defend cyborg rights.

[ 115 ] In 2010, the foundation, based in Mataró (Barcelona), was the overall winner of the Cre@tic Awards, organized by Tecnocampus Mataró.

[ 116 ] In 2012, Spanish film director Rafel Duran Torrent, created a short film about the Cyborg Foundation. In 2013, the film won the Grand Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival 's Focus Forward Filmmakers Competition and was awarded US$100,000.

[ 117 ] In fiction [ edit ] See also: Cyberpunk and List of fictional cyborgs Cyborgs are a recurring feature of science fiction literature and other media.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Animal cyborgs [ edit ] See also: Brain implant § Research and applications , Remote control animal , and § In the military Remote-controlled rechargeable cyborg insects [ 120 ] The US-based company Backyard Brains released what they refer to as the "world's first commercially available cyborg" called the RoboRoach. The project started as a senior design project for a University of Michigan biomedical engineering student in 2010, [ 121 ] and was launched as an available beta product on 25 February 2011.

[ 122 ] The RoboRoach was officially released into production via a TED talk at the TED Global conference; [ 123 ] and via the crowdsourcing website Kickstarter in 2013, [ 124 ] the kit allows students to use microstimulation to momentarily control the movements of a walking cockroach (left and right) using a Bluetooth -enabled smartphone as the controller.

Other groups have developed cyborg insects, including researchers at North Carolina State University , [ 125 ] [ 126 ] UC Berkeley , [ 127 ] [ 128 ] and Nanyang Technological University, Singapore , [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] but the RoboRoach was the first kit available to the general public and was funded by the National Institute of Mental Health as a device to serve as a teaching aid to promote an interest in neuroscience .

[ 123 ] Several animal welfare organizations including the RSPCA [ 134 ] and PETA [ 135 ] have expressed concerns about the ethics and welfare of animals in this project. In 2022, remote controlled cyborg cockroaches functional if moving (or moved) to sunlight for recharging were presented. They could be used e.g. for purposes of inspecting hazardous areas or quickly finding humans underneath hard-to-access rubbles at disaster sites .

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] [ 120 ] [ 138 ] In the late 2010s, scientists created cyborg jellyfish using a microelectronic prosthetic that propels the animal to swim almost three times faster while using just twice the metabolic energy of their unmodified peers. The prosthetics can be removed without harming the jellyfish.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Bacterial cyborg cells [ edit ] A combination of synthetic biology , nanotechnology and materials science approaches have been used to create a few different iterations of bacterial cyborg cells.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] [ 143 ] These different types of mechanically enhanced bacteria are created with so called bionic manufacturing principles that combine natural cells with abiotic materials. In 2005, researchers from the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln created a super sensitive humidity sensor by coating the bacteria Bacillus cereus with gold nanoparticles, being the first to use a microorganism to make an electronic device and presumably the first cyborg bacteria or cellborg circuit.

[ 144 ] Researchers from the Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley published a series of articles in 2016 describing the development of cyborg bacteria capable to harvest sunlight more efficiently than plants.

[ 145 ] In the first study, the researchers induced the self-photosensitization of a nonphotosynthetic bacterium, Moorella thermoacetica , with cadmium sulfide nanoparticles, enabling the photosynthesis of acetic acid from carbon dioxide .

[ 146 ] A follow-up article described the elucidation of the mechanism of semiconductor-to-bacterium electron transfer that allows the transformation of carbon dioxide and sunlight into acetic acid.

[ 147 ] Scientists of the Department of Biomedical Engineering at the University of California, Davis and Academia Sinica in Taiwan, developed a different approach to create cyborg cells by assembling a synthetic hydrogel inside the bacterial cytoplasm of Escherichia. coli cells rendering them incapable of dividing and making them resistant to environmental factors , antibiotics and high oxidative stress .

[ 148 ] The intracellular infusion of synthetic hydrogel provides these cyborg cells with an artificial cytoskeleton and their acquired tolerance makes them well placed to become a new class of drug-delivery systems positioned between classical synthetic materials and cell-based systems.

See also [ edit ] Artificial organ Artificial skin Brain implant Brain–computer interface Biological machine Biohybrid microswimmer Biohybrid robot Biomedical engineering Bionics Biorobotics Body hacking Electronic skin Electronic tongue Electronic nose Human enhancement Hybrot Nanobiotechnology Neurorobotics Neuroprosthetics Posthuman Transhumanism Technorganic Wetware (brain) Wetware computer Wirehead (science fiction) References [ edit ] ^ a b Cyborgs and Space , in Astronautics (September 1960), by Manfred E. Clynes and American scientist and researcher Nathan S. Kline.

^ Carvalko, Joseph (2012). The Techno-human Shell-A Jump in the Evolutionary Gap. Sunbury Press. ISBN 978-1-62006-165-7.

^ a b Ramoğlu, Muhammet (1 April 2019).

"Cyborg-Computer Interaction: Designing New Senses" .

The Design Journal .

22 (sup1): 1215– 1225.

doi : 10.1080/14606925.2019.1594986 .

ISSN 1460-6925 .

S2CID 191187862 .

^ Ivana, Greguric (22 October 2021).

Philosophical Issues of Human Cyborgization and the Necessity of Prolegomena on Cyborg Ethics . IGI Global.

ISBN 978-1-7998-9233-5 .

^ "Augmented humans will feature apps for the brain and embeddable devices" .

ABC News . 16 June 2016 . Retrieved 14 November 2022 .

^ Jahankhani, Hamid; Kendzierskyj, Stefan; Chelvachandran, Nishan; Ibarra, Jaime (6 April 2020).

Cyber Defence in the Age of AI, Smart Societies and Augmented Humanity . Springer Nature.

ISBN 978-3-030-35746-7 . Retrieved 14 November 2022 .

^ D. S. Halacy. 1965.

Cyborg: Evolution of the Superman . New York: Harper and Row Publishers. p. 7.

^ Haraway, D.

2006 (1984). A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century. In The International Handbook of Virtual Learning Environments. J. Weis et al., eds.Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 117–158.

^ Penley, Constance; Ross, Andrew; Haraway, Donna (1990).

"Cyborgs at Large: Interview with Donna Haraway" .

Social Text (25/26): 8– 23.

doi : 10.2307/466237 .

JSTOR 466237 .

^ A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century Archived 14 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine by Donna Haraway ^ Chong, Benjamin Wittes and Jane (5 September 2014).

"Our Cyborg Future: Law and Policy Implications" .

Brookings . Retrieved 10 November 2022 .

^ Wejbrandt, A (2014). "Defining aging in cyborgs: A bio-techno-social definition of aging".

Journal of Aging Studies .

31 : 104– 109.

doi : 10.1016/j.jaging.2014.09.003 .

PMID 25456627 .

^ Chu, Zi; Gianvecchio, Steven; Wang, Haining; Jajodia, Sushil (2012). "Detecting Automation of Twitter Accounts: Are You a Human, Bot, or Cyborg?".

IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing .

9 (6): 811– 824.

doi : 10.1109/TDSC.2012.75 .

S2CID 351844 .

^ Sterling, Bruce. 1985.

Schismatrix . Arbor House.

^ Hans Hass: Hypercell Organisms. A new perspective of man in evolution . Hamburg 1994 English Version online ^ Lovelock, James E. (2019).

Novacene: the coming age of hyperintelligence . Bryan Appleyard. UK USA Canada Ireland Australia India New Zealand South Africa: Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-0-241-39936-1 .

^ Zehr, E. Paul (2011).

Inventing Iron Man: The Possibility of a Human Machine .

Johns Hopkins University Press . p. 5.

ISBN 978-1421402260 .

^ Vuillermet, Maryse (2004).

"Les Mystères de Lyon" . In Le Juez, Brigitte (ed.).

Clergés et cultures populaires (in French). Université de Saint-Étienne. pp.

109– 118.

ISBN 978-2862723242 . Retrieved 1 March 2016 .

^ Clute, John (12 February 2016).

"La Hire, Jean de" . In John Clute; David Langford; Peter Nicholls; Graham Sleight (eds.).

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction . Gollancz . Retrieved 1 March 2016 .

^ "Entry from OED Online" .

oed.com . Archived from the original on 24 August 2010.

^ "Cyborg:Digital Destiny and Human Possibility in the Age of the Wearable Computer" . By EyeTap . Archived from the original on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 4 July 2013 .

^ " Symposium SS: Bioelectronics—Materials, Interfaces, and Applications ." Materials Research Society. Talk number SS4.04: "Cyborgs Structured with Carbon Nanotubes and Plant and/or Fungal Cells: Artificial Tissue Engineering for Mechanical and Electronic Uses." ^ Di Giacomo, Raffaele; Maresca, Bruno; Porta, Amalia; Sabatino, Paolo; Carapella, Giovanni; Neitzert, Heinz-Christoph (2013). "Candida albicans/MWCNTS: A Stable Conductive Bio-Nanocomposite and Its Temperature-Sensing Properties".

IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology .

12 (2): 111– 114.

Bibcode : 2013ITNan..12..111D .

doi : 10.1109/TNANO.2013.2239308 .

S2CID 26949825 .

^ "Otto Bock HealthCare : a global leader in healthcare products – Otto Bock" .

ottobockus.com . Archived from the original on 30 March 2008.

^ "OPRA™ Implant System" .

^ "Integrum AB: Integrum provides an update on the clinical development..." 30 November 2022.

^ "An Osseointegrated Transfemoral Prosthesis Study Evaluating Stable Neural Signal Transmission in Patients with Transfemoral Amputations" . 24 May 2022.

^ Vision Quest: A Half Century of Artificial-Sight Research Has Succeeded. And Now This Blind Man Can See , Wired Magazine , September 2002 ^ Baker, Sherry. "Rise of the Cyborgs", Discover 29.10 (2008): 50. Science Reference Center. Web. 4 November 2012 ^ Macintyre, James "BMI: the research that holds the key to hope for millions" , The Independent , 29 May 2008 ^ Warwick, K, Gasson, M, Hutt, B, Goodhew, I, Kyberd, P, Schulzrinne, H and Wu, X: "Thought Communication and Control: A First Step using Radiotelegraphy", IEE Proceedings on Communications, 151(3), pp.185–189, 2004 ^ Warwick, K.; Gasson, M.; Hutt, B.; Goodhew, I.; Kyberd, P.; Andrews, B.; Teddy, P.; Shad, A. (2003).

"The Application of Implant Technology for Cybernetic Systems" .

Archives of Neurology .

60 (10): 1369– 73.

doi : 10.1001/archneur.60.10.1369 .

PMID 14568806 .

^ Alfredo M. Ronchi: Eculture: Cultural Content in the Digital Age . Springer (New York, 2009). p. 319 ISBN 978-3-540-75273-8 ^ Andy Miah, Emma Rich: The Medicalization of Cyberspace , Routledge (New York, 2008), p. 130 (Hardcover: ISBN 978-0-415-37622-8 Papercover: ISBN 978-0-415-39364-5 ) ^ a b "I listen to color" Archived 12 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine , TED Global , 27 June 2012.

^ *Miah, Andy / Rich, Emma.

The medicalization of cyberspace , Routledge (New York, 2008). p.130 ISBN 978-0-415-37622-8 Brooks, Richard.

"Colour-blind artist learns to paint by hearing" , The Sunday Times , 24 February 2008.

Ingram, Jay.

Daily Planet. The Ultimate Book of Everyday Science Archived 26 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine , Penguin (Canada, 2010). p.1 & p.232-235 ISBN 978-0-14-317786-9 Bryony Gordon .

"Eyes opened to sound of socks" , The Daily Telegraph , 12 January 2005.

Alfredo M. Ronchi: Eculture: Cultural Content in the Digital Age.

Springer (New York, 2009). p.319 ISBN 978-3-540-75273-8 "La veo en blanco y negro pero la oigo en colores" [ permanent dead link ] , La Contra de La Vanguardia , 10 July 2010.

"Cyborgs and Stem Cells" Archived 15 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Research TV , 18 January 2005 ^ "Neil Harbisson – Cyborg – Artist – Activist ⋆ premium-speakers.ae" .

premium-speakers.ae . Retrieved 3 June 2019 .

^ "This filmmaker replaced his eyeball with a camera" . 23 January 2016.

^ a b Ganapati, Priya (4 December 2008).

"Eye Spy: Filmmaker Plans to Install Camera in His Eye Socket" .

Wired .

^ "Eyeborg: Man Replaces False Eye with Bionic Camera" . 2010. Archived from the original on 15 June 2010.

^ "Cyborgs at work: Swedish employees getting implanted with microchips" .

The Telegraph . Associated Press. 4 April 2017 . Retrieved 9 April 2017 .

^ "Cyborgs at work: Why these employees are getting implanted with microchips" .

CBS News . 3 April 2017 . Retrieved 9 April 2017 .

^ "Sapochetti: Cyber-implants going from science fiction to reality" .

Boston Herald . 9 April 2017 . Retrieved 9 April 2017 .

^ "Bitcoin Cyborg keeps currency under his skin" . Metro US. 1 December 2014 . Retrieved 9 April 2017 .

^ Zaleski, Andrew (28 May 2016).

"This hacking trend is 'dangerous' in more ways than one" . CNBC . Retrieved 9 April 2017 .

^ Chu, Bryant; Burnett, William; Chung, Jong Won; Bao, Zhenan (21 September 2017).

"Bring on the bodyNET" .

Nature .

549 (7672): 328– 330.

Bibcode : 2017Natur.549..328C .

doi : 10.1038/549328a .

PMID 28933443 .

^ Kaser, Rachel (20 September 2017).

"Researchers think a full 'bodyNET' is the platform of the future" .

The Next Web . Retrieved 26 October 2017 .

^ Gray, Chris Hables, ed.

The Cyborg Handbook . New York: Routledge, 1995 ^ Lyotard, Jean François: The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press , 1984 ^ Chorost, Michael (2008).

"The Naked Ear" .

Technology Review .

111 (1): 72– 74.

^ Murray, Chuck (2005). "Re-wiring the Body".

Design News .

60 (15): 67– 72.

^ Haddad, Michel; et al. (2004). "Improved Early Survival with the Total Artificial Heart".

Artificial Organs .

28 (2): 161– 165.

doi : 10.1111/j.1525-1594.2004.47335.x .

PMID 14961955 .

^ Marsen, Sky (2008).

"Becoming More Than Human: Technology and the Post-Human Condition Introduction" .

Journal of Evolution & Technology .

19 (1): 1– 5.

^ Horgan, John.

"Who Wants to Be a Cyborg?" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 14 November 2022 .

^ Thurston, Bonnie. "Was blind, but now I see." 11. Christian Century Foundation, 2007. Academic Search Complete. EBSCO. Web. 8 March 2010.

^ "Merging the biological, electronic" .

Harvard Gazette . 26 August 2012.

^ "3D-printed 'electronic glove' could help keep your heart beating for ever" .

The Independent . 3 March 2014.

^ Baker, Sherry. "RISE OF THE CYBORGS." Discover 2008; 29(10): 50–57. Academic Search Complete. EBSCO. Web. 8 March 2010.

^ Gallagher, James (28 November 2011).

"Alzheimer's: Deep brain stimulation 'reverses' disease" .

BBC News .

^ "MiniMed 670G Insulin Pump System" . 22 March 2020.

^ "t:slim X2 Insulin Pump w/ Dexcom G6 CGM – Get Started!" . 22 March 2020.

^ "DIY closed loop system (artificial pancreas)" . 22 March 2020.

^ "Beta Bionics – Introducing the iLet" . 22 March 2020.

^ The military seeks to develop 'insect cyborgs' .

Washington Times (13 March 2006). Retrieved 29 August 2011.

^ Military Plans Cyborg Sharks . LiveScience (7 March 2006). Retrieved 29 August 2011.

^ Lal A, Ewer J, Paul A, Bozkurt A, " Surgically Implanted Micro-platforms and Microsystems in Arthropods and Methods Based Thereon ", US Patent Application # US20100025527, Filed on 12/11/2007.

^ Paul A., Bozkurt A., Ewer J., Blossey B., Lal A. (2006) Surgically Implanted Micro-Platforms in Manduca-Sexta, 2006 Solid State Sensor and Actuator Workshop, Hilton Head Island, June 2006, pp 209–211.

^ Bozkurt, A.; Gilmour, R.F.; Sinha, A.; Stern, D.; Lal, A. (2009). "Insect–Machine Interface Based Neurocybernetics".

IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering .

56 (6): 1727– 1733.

doi : 10.1109/TBME.2009.2015460 .

PMID 19272983 .

S2CID 9490967 .

^ Bozkurt A., Paul A., Pulla S., Ramkumar R., Blossey B., Ewer J., Gilmour R, Lal A. (2007) Microprobe Microsystem Platform Inserted During Early Metamorphosis to Actuate Insect Flight Muscle. 20th IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS 2007), Kobe, JAPAN, January 2007, pp. 405–408.

^ Bozkurt, Alper; Paul, Ayesa; Pulla, Siva; Ramkumar, Abhishek; Blossey, Bernd; Ewer, John; Gilmour, Robert; Lal, Amit (2007). "Microprobe microsystem platform inserted during early metamorphosis to actuate insect flight muscle".

2007 IEEE 20th International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) . pp.

405– 408.

doi : 10.1109/MEMSYS.2007.4432976 .

S2CID 11868393 .

^ Judy, Jack.

"Hybrid Insect MEMS (HI-MEMS)" .

DARPA Microsystems Technology Office . Archived from the original on 10 February 2011 . Retrieved 9 April 2013 .

^ Anthes, E. (17 February 2013).

"The race to create 'insect cyborgs' " .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 23 February 2013 .

^ Ornes, Stephen. "THE PENTAGON'S BEETLE BORGS." Discover 30.5 (2009): 14. Academic Search Complete. EBSCO. Web. 1 March 2010.

^ Cyborg beetles to be the US military's latest weapon . YouTube (28 October 2009). Retrieved 29 August 2011.

^ Bozkurt A, Lal A, Gilmour R. (2009) Radio Control of Insects for Biobotic Domestication. 4th International Conference of the IEEE Neural Engineering (NER'09), Antalya, Turkey.

^ a b Guizzo, Eric.

"Moth Pupa + MEMS Chip = Remote Controlled Cyborg Insect." Automan. IEEE Spectrum, 17 February 2009. Web. 1 March 2010.

^ Judy, Jack.

"Hybrid Insect MEMS (HI-MEMS)" .

DARPA Microsystems Technology Office . Archived from the original on 10 February 2011 . Retrieved 9 April 2013 .

The intimate control of insects with embedded microsystems will enable insect cyborgs, which could carry one or more sensors, such as a microphone or a gas sensor, to relay back information gathered from the target destination.

^ Science Robotics ^ Iyer, Vikram; Najafi, Ali; James, Johannes; Fuller, Sawyer; Gollakota, Shyamnath (15 July 2020).

"Wireless steerable vision for live insects and insect-scale robots" .

Science Robotics .

5 (44): eabb0839.

doi : 10.1126/scirobotics.abb0839 .

ISSN 2470-9476 .

PMID 33022605 .

S2CID 220688078 .

^ Aloimonos, Yiannis; Fermüller, Cornelia (15 July 2020).

"A bug's-eye view" .

Science Robotics .

5 (44): eabd0496.

doi : 10.1126/scirobotics.abd0496 .

ISSN 2470-9476 .

PMID 33022608 .

S2CID 220687521 .

^ "Cybathlon" .

^ Strickland, Eliza (12 October 2016).

"At the World's First Cybathlon, Proud Cyborg Athletes Raced for the Gold" .

IEEE Spectrum .

^ Extended-Body: Interview with Stelarc Archived 9 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Stanford.edu. Retrieved 29 August 2011.

^ "STELARC" .

stelarc.org . Archived from the original on 10 September 2010.

^ Tim Hawkinson . Tfaoi.com (25 September 2005). Retrieved 29 August 2011.

^ Gomez Cubero, Carlos, et al.

The Robot is Present . Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 2021.

https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frobt.2021.662249/full ^ "7 Configurations: The AI prostheses" .

marcodonnarumma.org .

^ Man Has Camera Screwed Into Head – Bing Videos . Bing.com. Retrieved 29 August 2011.

^ a b Wafaa Bilal, NYU Artist, Gets Camera Implanted In Head .

Huffington Post . Retrieved 29 August 2011.

^ Generative Music – Brian Eno .

In Motion Magazine . Retrieved 29 August 2011.

^ "This Art Is Yours" .

thisartisyours.com . Archived from the original on 11 May 2013 . Retrieved 31 May 2012 .

^ a b Tenney, Tom; " Cybernetics in Art and the Myth of the Cyborg Artist Archived 20 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine "; inc.ongruo.us; 29 December 2010; 9 March 2012.

^ Volkart, Yvonne; " Cyborg Bodies. The End of the Progressive Body: Editorial "; medienkunstnetz.de; 9 March 2012.

^ "What is a Cyborg – Cyborg Anthropology" .

cyborganthropology.com . Retrieved 16 December 2019 .

^ Taylor, Kate; "Cyborg The artist as cyborg"; theglobeandmail.com; 18 February 2011; Web; 5 March 2012. | https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/arts/the-artist-as-cyborg/article1913032/ Archived 5 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Implantable Silicon-Silk Electronics" .

^ "I Heart Chaos – Nintendo 3DS augmented reality tattoo is awesome,..." iheartchaos.com . Archived from the original on 26 April 2012 . Retrieved 23 March 2012 .

^ Noemi Tasarra-Twigg (25 July 2011).

"QR Code Tattoo for the Geek" .

ForeverGeek . Archived from the original on 10 August 2012 . Retrieved 26 July 2012 .

^ Sorrel, Charlie (20 November 2009).

"The Illustrated Man: How LED Tattoos Could Make Your Skin a Screen" .

Wired .

^ Digital Tattoo Interface , Jim Mielke, United States ^ Ihde, Don (1 September 2008). "Aging: I don't want to be a cyborg!".

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences .

7 (3): 397– 404.

doi : 10.1007/s11097-008-9096-0 .

ISSN 1568-7759 .

S2CID 144175101 .

^ "Cyborg Astronauts Needed to Colonize Space" .

Space.com . 16 September 2010.

^ a b Cyborgs and Space , The New York Times ^ "Health" .

solarstorms.org . 16 April 2017.

^ "How long would a trip to Mars take?" .

nasa.gov . Archived from the original on 20 January 2016 . Retrieved 21 May 2015 .

^ "NASA Eyes Crew Deep Sleep Option for Mars Mission" .

DNews . 10 May 2017.

^ Clark, Andy. 2004.

Natural-Born Cyborgs . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ Kotásek, Miroslav (2015).

"Artificial intelligence in science fiction as a model of the posthuman situation of mankind" (PDF) .

^ a b Carvalko, J.R. (30 September 2013). "Law and policy in an era of cyborg-assisted-life 1 : The implications of interfacing in-the-body technologies to the outer world 2 ".

2013 IEEE International Symposium on Technology and Society (ISTAS): Social Implications of Wearable Computing and Augmediated Reality in Everyday Life . p. 206.

doi : 10.1109/ISTAS.2013.6613121 .

ISBN 978-1-4799-0929-2 .

S2CID 17421383 .

^ Eastabrook, Diane (2 August 2017).

"US: Wisconsin company offers optional microchips for employees" . Al-Jazeera . Retrieved 5 November 2017 .

^ Ramanauskas, Ben (2020).

"BDSM, body modification, transhumanism, and the limits of liberalism" .

Economic Affairs .

40 (1): 85– 92.

doi : 10.1111/ecaf.12394 .

ISSN 1468-0270 .

^ García, F.C.

"Nace una fundación dedicada a convertir humanos en ciborgs" , La Vanguardia , 1 March 2011.

^ Rottenschlage, Andreas "The Sound of the Cyborg" The Red Bulletin , 1 March 2011.

^ Redacción "Una fundación se dedica a convertir humanos en ciborgs" El Comercio (Peru) , 1 March 2011.

^ Calls, Albert ""Les noves tecnologies seran part del nostre cos i extensió del cervell"" La Tribuna , 3 January 2011.

^ Martínez, Ll.

"La Fundació Cyborg s'endú el primer premi dels Cre@tic" , Avui , 20 November 2010 ^ Pond, Steve "Cyborg Foundation" wins $100K Focus Forward prize Archived 14 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Chicago Tribune , 22 January 2013 ^ Stableford, Brian ; Langford, David (2023).

"Cyborgs" . In Clute, John ; Langford, David ; Sleight, Graham (eds.).

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (4th ed.) . Retrieved 30 March 2024 .

^ Pringle, David , ed. (1996).

"Cyborgs" .

The Ultimate Encyclopedia of Science Fiction: The Definitive Illustrated Guide . Carlton. p. 41.

ISBN 1-85868-188-X .

OCLC 38373691 .

^ a b Kakei, Yujiro; Katayama, Shumpei; Lee, Shinyoung; Takakuwa, Masahito; Furusawa, Kazuya; Umezu, Shinjiro; Sato, Hirotaka; Fukuda, Kenjiro; Someya, Takao (5 September 2022).

"Integration of body-mounted ultrasoft organic solar cell on cyborg insects with intact mobility" .

npj Flexible Electronics .

6 (1): 1– 9.

doi : 10.1038/s41528-022-00207-2 .

hdl : 10356/164346 .

ISSN 2397-4621 .

Research institute press release: "Robo-bug: A rechargeable, remote-controllable cyborg cockroach" .

RIKEN via techxplore.com . Retrieved 20 October 2022 .

^ Huston, Caitlin (11 February 2010).

"Engineering seniors' work on prototypes extends beyond traditional classroom projects" . Michigan Daily . Retrieved 3 January 2014 .

^ Brains, Backyard (3 March 2011).

"Working RoboRoach Prototype Unveiled to Students of Grand Valley State University" . Backyard Brains . Retrieved 2 January 2014 .

^ a b Upbin, B. (12 June 2013).

"Science! Democracy! Roboroaches!" .

Forbes . Retrieved 1 January 2014 .

^ Backyard Brains, Inc. (10 June 2013).

"The RoboRoach: Control a living insect from your smartphone!" . Kickstarter, Inc . Retrieved 1 January 2014 .

^ "The Abstract :: North Carolina State University :: Researchers Develop Technique to Remotely Control Cockroaches" . Archived from the original on 13 January 2014 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 .

^ Greenemeier, Larry.

"Remote-Controlled Roaches to the Rescue? [Video]" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 6 December 2017 .

^ "Research Projects" .

berkeley.edu .

^ Maharbiz, Michel M.; Sato, Hirotaka (2010). "Cyborg Beetles".

Scientific American .

303 (6): 94– 99.

Bibcode : 2010SciAm.303f..94M .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican1210-94 .

PMID 21141365 .

^ "Cyborg Beetles: Hope for Future Search-and-rescue Missions" .

www.ntu.edu.sg . Archived from the original on 6 December 2017 . Retrieved 6 December 2017 .

^ Vo Doan, Tat Thang; Tan, Melvin Y.W.; Bui, Xuan Hien; Sato, Hirotaka (3 November 2017). "An Ultralightweight and Living Legged Robot".

Soft Robotics .

5 (1): 17– 23.

doi : 10.1089/soro.2017.0038 .

ISSN 2169-5172 .

PMID 29412086 .

^ Sato, Hirotaka; Vo Doan, Tat Thang; Kolev, Svetoslav; Huynh, Ngoc Anh; Zhang, Chao; Massey, Travis L.; van Kleef, Joshua; Ikeda, Kazuo; Abbeel, Pieter; Maharbiz, Michel M. (March 2015).

"Deciphering the Role of a Coleopteran Steering Muscle via Free Flight Stimulation" .

Current Biology .

25 (6): 798– 803.

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.051 .

ISSN 0960-9822 .

PMID 25784033 .

^ Vo-Doan, T. Thang; Dung, V. Than; Sato, Hirotaka (January 2022).

"A Cyborg Insect Reveals a Function of a Muscle in Free Flight" .

Cyborg and Bionic Systems .

2022 .

doi : 10.34133/2022/9780504 .

ISSN 2692-7632 .

PMC 9494732 .

PMID 36285304 .

^ Nguyen, H. Duoc; Dung, V. Than; Sato, Hirotaka; Vo-Doan, T. Thang (1 February 2023).

"Efficient autonomous navigation for terrestrial insect-machine hybrid systems" .

Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical .

376 : 132988.

arXiv : 2204.13281 .

doi : 10.1016/j.snb.2022.132988 .

ISSN 0925-4005 .

^ Wakefield, J. (10 June 2013).

"TEDGlobal welcomes robot cockroaches" . BBC News Technology . Retrieved 8 December 2013 .

^ Hamilton, A. (1 November 2013).

"Resistance is futile: PETA attempts to halt the sale of remote-controlled cyborg cockroaches" .

Time . Retrieved 8 December 2013 .

^ "Riken researchers develop rechargeable cyborg cockroach" .

Japan Today . Retrieved 10 November 2022 .

^ "How cyborg cockroaches could be used to save people trapped under earthquake rubble" .

ABC News . 22 September 2022 . Retrieved 20 October 2022 .

^ Tran-Ngoc, Phuoc Thanh; Le, Duc Long; Chong, Bing Sheng; Nguyen, Huu Duoc; Dung, Van Than; Cao, Feng; Li, Yao; Kai, Kazuki; Gan, Jia Hui; Vo-Doan, Tat Thang; Nguyen, Thanh Luan; Sato, Hirotaka (May 2023).

"Intelligent Insect–Computer Hybrid Robot: Installing Innate Obstacle Negotiation and Onboard Human Detection onto Cyborg Insect" .

Advanced Intelligent Systems .

5 (5).

doi : 10.1002/aisy.202200319 .

hdl : 10356/171072 .

ISSN 2640-4567 .

^ Kooser, Amanda.

"Scientists create cyborg jellyfish with swimming superpowers" .

CNET . Retrieved 29 January 2020 .

^ Xu, Nicole W.; Dabiri, John O. (31 January 2020).

"Low-power microelectronics embedded in live jellyfish enhance propulsion" .

Science Advances .

6 (5): eaaz3194.

Bibcode : 2020SciA....6.3194X .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aaz3194 .

ISSN 2375-2548 .

PMC 6989144 .

PMID 32064355 .

^ "Engineers Made Themselves Some Cyborg Cells" .

Popular Mechanics . 11 January 2023 . Retrieved 13 January 2023 .

^ " 'Cyborg' bacteria deliver green fuel source from sunlight" .

BBC News . 22 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 January 2023 .

^ Peplow, Mark (17 October 2005).

"Cyborg cells sense humidity" .

Nature .

doi : 10.1038/news051017-3 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

^ Berry, Vikas; Saraf, Ravi F. (21 October 2005).

"Self-Assembly of Nanoparticles on Live Bacterium: An Avenue to Fabricate Electronic Devices" .

Angewandte Chemie International Edition .

44 (41): 6668– 6673.

doi : 10.1002/anie.200501711 .

ISSN 1433-7851 .

PMID 16215974 .

S2CID 15662656 .

^ "Cyborg bacteria outperform plants when turning sunlight into useful compounds (video)" .

American Chemical Society . Retrieved 13 January 2023 .

^ Sakimoto, Kelsey K.; Wong, Andrew Barnabas; Yang, Peidong (1 January 2016).

"Self-photosensitization of nonphotosynthetic bacteria for solar-to-chemical production" .

Science .

351 (6268): 74– 77.

Bibcode : 2016Sci...351...74S .

doi : 10.1126/science.aad3317 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 26721997 .

S2CID 206642914 .

^ Kornienko, Nikolay; Sakimoto, Kelsey K.; Herlihy, David M.; Nguyen, Son C.; Alivisatos, A. Paul; Harris, Charles. B.; Schwartzberg, Adam; Yang, Peidong (18 October 2016).

"Spectroscopic elucidation of energy transfer in hybrid inorganic–biological organisms for solar-to-chemical production" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

113 (42): 11750– 11755.

Bibcode : 2016PNAS..11311750K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1610554113 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 5081607 .

PMID 27698140 .

^ Contreras-Llano, Luis E.; Liu, Yu-Han; Henson, Tanner; Meyer, Conary C.; Baghdasaryan, Ofelya; Khan, Shahid; Lin, Chi-Long; Wang, Aijun; Hu, Che-Ming J.; Tan, Cheemeng (11 January 2023).

"Engineering Cyborg Bacteria Through Intracellular Hydrogelation" .

Advanced Science .

10 (9): 2204175.

doi : 10.1002/advs.202204175 .

ISSN 2198-3844 .

PMC 10037956 .

PMID 36628538 .

S2CID 255593443 .

Further reading [ edit ] Balsamo, Anne . 1996.

Technologies of the Gendered Body: Reading Cyborg Women . Durham: Duke University Press.

Caidin, Martin . 1972.

Cyborg; A Novel . New York: Arbor House.

Clark, Andy . 2004.

Natural-Born Cyborgs . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Crittenden, Chris. 2002. "Self-Deselection: Technopsychotic Annihilation via Cyborg." Ethics & the Environment 7(2):127–152.

Flanagan, Mary, and Austin Booth, eds. 2002.

Reload: Rethinking Women + Cyberculture . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Franchi, Stefano, and Güven Güzeldere, eds. 2005.

Mechanical Bodies, Computational Minds: Artificial Intelligence from Automata to Cyborgs . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Glaser, Horst Albert and Sabine Rossbach [ de ] . 2011.

The Artificial Human . New York. ISBN 3631578083.

Gray, Chris Hables. ed. 1995.

The Cyborg Handbook . New York: Routledge.

——— 2001.

Cyborg Citizen: Politics in the Posthuman Age .

Routledge & Kegan Paul .

Grenville, Bruce, ed. 2002.

The Uncanny: Experiments in Cyborg Culture.

Arsenal Pulp Press .

Halacy, D. S. 1965.

Cyborg: Evolution of the Superman . New York: Harper & Row.

Halberstam, Judith , and Ira Livingston. 1995.

Posthuman Bodies . Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-32894-2.

Haraway, Donna . [1985] 2006. " A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century ." Pp. 103–18 in The Transgender Studies Reader , edited by S. Stryker and S. Whittle . New York: Routledge .

——— 1990.

Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature.

New York: Routledge.

Ikada, Yoshito [ ja ] .

Bio Materials: an approach to Artificial Organs Klugman, Craig. 2001. "From Cyborg Fiction to Medical Reality." Literature and Medicine 20(1):39–54.

Kurzweil, Ray . 2005.

The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology . Viking.

Mann, Steve . 2004. "Telematic Tubs against Terror: Bathing in the Immersive Interactive Media of the Post-Cyborg Age." Leonardo 37(5):372–73.

Mann, Steve, and Hal Niedzviecki . 2001.

Cyborg: Digital Destiny and Human Possibility in the Age of the Wearable Computer .

Doubleday .

ISBN 0-385-65825-7 (pbk: ISBN 0-385-65826-5 ).

Shirow, Masamune . 1991.

Ghost in the Shell . Endnotes.

Kodansha .

ISBN 4-7700-2919-5 .

Mertz, David. [1989] 2008. " Cyborgs ." International Encyclopedia of Communications . Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-19-504994-7. Retrieved 28 October 2008.

Mitchell, Kaye. 2006. "Bodies That Matter: Science Fiction, Technoculture, and the Gendered Body." Science Fiction Studies 33(1):109–28.

Mitchell, William. 2003.

Me++: The Cyborg Self and the Networked City . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Muri, Allison. 2003. " Of Shit and the Soul: Tropes of Cybernetic Disembodiment ." Body & Society 9(3):73–92.

doi : 10.1177/1357034x030093005 ; S2CID 145706404 .

—— 2006.

The Enlightenment Cyborg: A History of Communications and Control in the Human Machine, 1660–1830.

Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Nicogossian, Judith. 2011. " From Reconstruction to the Augmentation of the Human Body in Restorative Medicine and in Cybernetics [in French]" (PhD thesis).

Queensland University of Technology .

Nishime, LeiLani. 2005. "The Mulatto Cyborg: Imagining a Multiracial Future." Cinema Journal 44(2):34–49.

doi : 10.1353/cj.2005.0011 .

Rorvik, David M.

1971.

As Man Becomes Machine: the Evolution of the Cyborg . Garden City, NY: Doubleday .

Rushing, Janice Hocker, and Thomas S. Frentz. 1995.

Projecting the Shadow: The Cyborg Hero in American Film . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Smith, Marquard, and Joanne Morra, eds. 2005.

The Prosthetic Impulse: From a Posthuman Present to a Biocultural Future.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Warwick, Kevin . 2004.

I, Cyborg , University of Illinois Press.

Reference entries Elrick, George S. 1978.

The Science Fiction Handbook for Readers and Writers . Chicago: Chicago Review Press. p. 77.

Nicholls, Peter, gen. ed. 1979.

The Science Fiction Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Garden City, NY: Doubleday , p. 151.

Simpson, J.A., and E.S.C. Weiner. 1989.

The Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.), Vol. 4. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 188.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Cyborg Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Look up cyborg in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cyborgs .

Borgfest Cyborg Festival and Human Augmentation Expo Archived 2 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine Cyborg Anthropology Insect Cyborgs [ usurped ] For a public service of human augmentation (an article on human augmentation and cyborgs by Thierry Hoquet) www.corpshybride.net Doctor in Biological Anthropology working on the hybrid body, this blog gathers thoughts, pieces of art and events on the cultural and biological changes regarding the human body, the so-called hybrid body or cyborg body First Cyborg Olympics Cybathlon v t e Subfields of and cyberneticians involved in cybernetics Subfields Artificial intelligence Biological cybernetics Biomedical cybernetics Biorobotics Biosemiotics Neurocybernetics Catastrophe theory Computational neuroscience Connectionism Control theory Conversation theory Cybernetics in the Soviet Union Decision theory Emergence Engineering cybernetics Homeostasis Information theory Management cybernetics Medical cybernetics Second-order cybernetics Cybersemiotics Sociocybernetics Synergetics Cyberneticians Alexander Lerner Alexey Lyapunov Alfred Radcliffe-Brown Allenna Leonard Anthony Wilden Buckminster Fuller Charles François Genevieve Bell Margaret Boden Claude Bernard Cliff Joslyn Erich von Holst Ernst von Glasersfeld Francis Heylighen Francisco Varela Frederic Vester Charles Geoffrey Vickers Gordon Pask Gordon S. Brown Gregory Bateson Heinz von Foerster Humberto Maturana I. A. Richards Igor Aleksander Jacque Fresco Jakob von Uexküll Jason Jixuan Hu Jay Wright Forrester Jennifer Wilby John N. Warfield Kevin Warwick Ludwig von Bertalanffy Maleyka Abbaszadeh Manfred Clynes Margaret Mead Marian Mazur N. Katherine Hayles Natalia Bekhtereva Niklas Luhmann Norbert Wiener Pyotr Grigorenko Qian Xuesen Ranulph Glanville Robert Trappl Sergei P. Kurdyumov Anthony Stafford Beer Stuart Kauffman Stuart Umpleby Talcott Parsons Ulla Mitzdorf Valentin Turchin Valentin Braitenberg William Ross Ashby Walter Bradford Cannon Walter Pitts Warren McCulloch William Grey Walter v t e Robotics Main articles Outline Glossary Index History Geography Hall of Fame Ethics Laws Competitions AI competitions Types Aerobot Anthropomorphic Humanoid Android Cyborg Gynoid Claytronics Companion Automaton Animatronic Audio-Animatronics Industrial Articulated arm Domestic Educational Entertainment Juggling Military Medical Service Disability Agricultural Food service Retail BEAM robotics Soft robotics Classifications Biorobotics Cloud robotics Continuum robot Unmanned vehicle aerial ground Mobile robot Microbotics Nanorobotics Necrobotics Robotic spacecraft Space probe Swarm Telerobotics Underwater remotely-operated Robotic fish Locomotion Tracks Walking Hexapod Climbing Electric unicycle Robotic fins Navigation and mapping Motion planning Simultaneous localization and mapping Visual odometry Vision-guided robot systems Research Evolutionary Kits Simulator Suite Open-source Software Adaptable Developmental Human–robot interaction Paradigms Perceptual Situated Ubiquitous Companies ABB Amazon Robotics Anybots Barrett Technology Boston Dynamics Doosan Robotics Energid Technologies FarmWise FANUC Figure AI Foster-Miller Harvest Automation HD Hyundai Robotics Honeybee Robotics Intuitive Surgical IRobot KUKA Rainbow Robotics Starship Technologies Symbotic Universal Robotics Wolf Robotics Yaskawa Related Critique of work Powered exoskeleton Workplace robotics safety Robotic tech vest Technological unemployment Terrainability Fictional robots Category Outline v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐b666f4b‐lpvq6
Cached time: 20250815143148
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.367 seconds
Real time usage: 1.576 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10201/1000000
Revision size: 103790/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 397094/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19565/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 480901/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.814/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10750222/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1281.151      1 -total
 51.15%  655.247      1 Template:Reflist
 19.07%  244.334     29 Template:Cite_journal
 14.81%  189.713     46 Template:Cite_web
  5.80%   74.347      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  5.30%   67.898      1 Template:Cyborg
  5.19%   66.475      1 Template:Sidebar
  4.94%   63.312      1 Template:Short_description
  4.51%   57.751      8 Template:Navbox
  4.31%   55.179      9 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:20756967:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815143148 and revision id 1306032580. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cyborg&oldid=1306032580#In_fiction " Categories : Cyborgs Cybernetics Biocybernetics Biotechnology Cyberpunk themes Implants (medicine) Neurotechnology Robotics Science fiction themes Transhumanism 1960s neologisms Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from August 2020 All articles that may contain original research Wikipedia articles with style issues from October 2023 All articles with style issues Wikipedia articles with style issues from December 2021 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from June 2020 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from September 2021 Articles that may contain original research from November 2007 Articles that may be too long from November 2022 All articles that may be too long Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 14:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cyborg 54 languages Add topic

