Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The growth of the group 2 Research 3 The group disperses 4 In the media 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Via Panisperna boys 19 languages Català Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Italiano עברית Latina Magyar 日本語 Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Русский Suomi Svenska 吴语 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of scientists Enrico Fermi with four of the Via Panisperna boys in the courtyard of Rome University's Physics Institute in Via Panisperna, about 1934. From left to right: Oscar D'Agostino , Emilio Segrè , Edoardo Amaldi , Franco Rasetti and Enrico Fermi Via Panisperna boys ( Italian : i ragazzi di Via Panisperna ) is the name given to a group of young Italian scientists led by Enrico Fermi , who worked at the Royal Physics Institute of the University of Rome La Sapienza and made the famous discovery of slow neutrons in 1934. This later enabled development of the nuclear reactor and construction of the first atomic bomb .

The members of the group were Enrico Fermi, Edoardo Amaldi , Oscar D'Agostino , Ettore Majorana , Bruno Pontecorvo , Franco Rasetti and Emilio Segrè . All were physicists, except for D'Agostino, who was a chemist. Their collective nickname comes from the address of the Royal Physics Institute, located in a street of Rione Monti in the city centre named in turn after a nearby monastery, San Lorenzo in Panisperna .

The growth of the group [ edit ] Commemorative plaque The Via Panisperna in 2021; the plaque hangs to the left of the traffic sign; it refers to an entrance to the building seen side-on; behind the wall lay the Institute's garden The group grew under the supervision of the physicist, minister, senator and director of the Institute of Physics Orso Mario Corbino . Corbino recognized the qualities of Enrico Fermi and led the commission which appointed him in 1926 to one of the first three professorships in Theoretical Physics in Italy.

[ 1 ] From 1929, Fermi and Corbino dedicated themselves to the transformation of the institute into a modern research centre.

Franco Rasetti and Fermi were contemporaries, who had met as undergraduates at Pisa , and worked together in Florence .

[ 2 ] : 24, 43 The first of the Boys to join them was Emilio Segrè, who had been studying engineering. Segrè had got to know Rasetti through mountaineering and been drawn into physics by their gatecrashing the 1927 Como Conference together.

[ 2 ] : 66 As a schoolboy, Edoardo Amaldi had known Fermi through his father , a mathematician; the families had hiked together in the Dolomites . Later the director Corbino encouraged Amaldi as a young engineering student to switch to physics.

[ 2 ] : 67 Ettore Majorana had also been an engineering student; he switched to physics after his mathematical ability was recognised by Segrè, who helped him gain an interview with Fermi.

[ 2 ] : 69 Oscar D'Agostino became involved because he was a chemist; he had been the assistant to Giulio Trabacchi, with whom the group collaborated because he had a supply of radium.

[ 2 ] : 95,97 Pontecorvo joined the group later (1934); he came to Rome as a postgraduate to work with Rasetti, a family friend.

[ 2 ] : 102 Research [ edit ] The first version of their research laboratory was dedicated chiefly to atomic and molecular spectroscopy . Later they moved towards experimental studies of the atomic nucleus . Research included the bombarding of various elements with neutrons , generated by irradiating beryllium with alpha particles emitted by the radioactive gas radon , obtained from radium .

[ 3 ] The neutrons induced reactions in the target's nuclei, resulting in the generation of other elements, often radioactive isotopes .

A key discovery, partly by chance, was that neutrons slowed down by hydrogen nuclei were far more likely to be captured by the nuclei.

[ 2 ] : 103 Five of the Boys patented this idea, which was crucial in harnessing nuclear power. Their long-delayed financial reward was modest.

[ 2 ] : 104, 286 On the theoretical side, the work of Ettore Majorana and Fermi advanced the understanding of the structure of the atomic nucleus and the forces acting within it.

[ 4 ] In 1933 and 1934 they published the fundamental theory of beta decay .

The work on neutron-induced radioactivity involved a degree of cooperation unusual at the time, and the later papers had five authors. The roles were not strictly delineated, but D'Agostino was the specialist chemist, Amaldi was responsible for the electronics, and Segrè obtained the elements to be irradiated.

[ 2 ] : 97 The working atmosphere involved a camaraderie and playfulness exemplified by the nicknames bestowed on one another. Fermi was "Il Papa" (the Pope), because of his infallibility. Rasetti, his right-hand man, was "Cardinal Vicario". Even higher in this ecclesiastical hierarchy, the nickname of Corbino was "Padreterno" (God Almighty), for his ability to miraculously generate funds and positions. Majorana was "Il Gran Inquisitore" (The Grand Inquisitor), because of his critical manner. Segrè's judgemental disposition earned him the nickname "Basilisco" after the legendary Basilisk . Amaldi was "Fanciulletto" (young boy) because of his cherubic face. Pontecorvo was "Cucciolo" (puppy dog).

[ 2 ] : 68, 102 Another key component of the collaborative atmosphere was the masterful impromptu talks that Fermi delivered every afternoon on topics of interest to their research.

[ 2 ] : 67 The group disperses [ edit ] By 1935 the group had dispersed and only Fermi and Amaldi continued work together: Rasetti was away for a year in the U.S.; Segrè had a professorship in Palermo , D'Agostino had a job elsewhere in Rome, Pontecorvo was in Paris.

[ 2 ] : 107,108 Majorana had become reclusive and in 1938 would disappear in unexplained circumstances.

[ 2 ] : 117 Subsequently, the Italian racial laws that targeted people of Jewish descent caused further emigration. (Segrè and Pontecorvo were Jewish, as was Fermi's wife .) On 6 December 1938, Fermi left Rome with his family for Stockholm to receive the Nobel Prize . From there, they emigrated permanently to the U.S.

[ 2 ] : 122 D'Agostino and Amaldi were the only ones who remained in Italy.

After the war, Fermi's and Segrè's involvement in the development of the atomic bomb may have caused some strain in their relations with Rasetti, who had refused to participate.

[ 2 ] : 248 They were limited in discussing nuclear physics with their former colleagues because the new discoveries often remained classified.

[ 2 ] : 280 In the media [ edit ] The film director Gianni Amelio told their story in a TV movie which was enlarged as a film, I ragazzi di via Panisperna (1989).

The building in Via Panisperna, situated on the Viminale hill, is within the complex of the Ministry of the Interior. It now houses the Enrico Fermi Museum (CREF) devoted to the history of nuclear physics.

References [ edit ] ^ Segrè, Emilio (1970).

Enrico Fermi, Physicist .

University of Chicago Press . p.

45 .

ISBN 0-226-74473-6 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Segrè, G.; Hoerlin, B. (2016).

The pope of physics: Enrico Fermi and the birth of the atomic age . New York: Henry Holt.

ISBN 9781627790055 .

^ "Radon-beryllium neutron source used by E. Fermi & associates, 1933-34" . Smithsonian . Retrieved 15 June 2022 .

^ Brink, David (5 March 2007).

"The story of Majorana's exchange force" .

Proceedings of Science .

37 (2): 002.

doi : 10.22323/1.037.0002 .

Further reading [ edit ] La scienza. Molecole, atomi, particelle.

Vol. 12. La biblioteca di Repubblica. Rome, La Repubblica-UTET, 2005.

External links [ edit ] (in Italian) Enrico Fermi and the Via Panisperna Boys from the Museum of Physics of "La Sapienza" University in Rome v t e History of physics ( timeline ) Classical physics Astronomy timeline Electromagnetism timeline Electrical engineering Maxwell's equations Fluid mechanics timeline Aerodynamics Field theory Gravitational theory timeline Material science timeline Metamaterials Mechanics timeline Variational principles Optics Spectroscopy Thermodynamics timeline Energy Entropy Perpetual motion Modern physics Computational physics timeline Condensed matter timeline Superconductivity Cosmology timeline Big Bang theory General relativity tests Geophysics Nuclear physics Fission Fusion Power Weapons Quantum mechanics timeline Atoms Molecules Quantum field theory Subatomic physics timeline Special relativity timeline Lorentz transformations tests Recent developments Quantum information timeline Loop quantum gravity Nanotechnology String theory On specific discoveries Cosmic microwave background Graphene Gravitational waves Subatomic particles timeline Higgs boson Neutron Speed of light By periods Copernican Revolution Golden age of cosmology Golden age of physics Medieval Islamic world Astronomy Noisy intermediate-scale quantum era By groups Harvard Computers The Martians Oxford Calculators Via Panisperna boys Women in physics Scientific disputes Bohr–Einstein Chandrasekhar–Eddington Galileo affair Leibniz–Newton Joule–von Mayer Shapley–Curtis Relativity priority Special relativity General relativity Transfermium Wars Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Via_Panisperna_boys&oldid=1288798209 " Categories : Italian nuclear physicists Sapienza University of Rome Enrico Fermi Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from January 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Articles with Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 20:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Via Panisperna boys 19 languages Add topic

