Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Major issues Toggle Major issues subsection 1.1 Developed countries 1.2 Developing countries 2 Education Toggle Education subsection 2.1 Australia 2.2 Pertaining to the US 2.2.1 Pre-requisites 2.2.2 Law school 2.2.3 Post law school 2.3 Pertaining to other countries 2.3.1 Post law school 2.3.1.1 General requirements 2.3.1.2 In Africa 3 Taxation by jurisdiction 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Tax law 37 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Winaray Wolof 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area of law "Tax code" redirects here. For the alphanumeric code used in the UK, see Tax code (PAYE) .

The Internal Revenue Code is the primary statutory basis of federal tax law in the United States. The Code of Federal Regulations is the Treasury Department's regulatory interpretation of the federal tax laws passed by Congress, which carry the weight of law if the interpretation is reasonable. Tax treaties and case law in U.S. Tax Court and other federal courts constitute the remainder of tax law in the United States.

Part of a series on Taxation An aspect of fiscal policy Policies Economic justice Government revenue Property tax equalization Tax revenue Non-tax revenue Tax law Tax bracket Flat tax Tax threshold Taxation as theft Tax shift Tax cut Tax advantage Tax incentive Tax reform Double taxation Tax harmonization Tax competition Voluntary taxation Representation Economics General Theory Price effect Excess burden Tax efficiency Tax incidence Laffer curve Optimal tax Fiscal illusion Theories Optimal capital income taxation Distribution of Tax Tax rate Flat Progressive Regressive Proportional Collection Economic nexus in the United States Revenue service Revenue stamp Tax assessment Taxable income Tax lien Tax refund Tax shield Tax residence Tax preparation Tax protester Tax investigation Tax collector Tax withholding Private tax collection Noncompliance Legal tax avoidance Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) Double Irish Single Malt CAIA Dutch Sandwich Estate planning Fuel dye Repatriation tax avoidance Share repurchase Tariff engineering Tax credit Tax deduction Tax exemption Taxpayer groups Tax holiday Tax inversion Tax farming Tax patent Tax shelter Illegal tax evasion Tax amnesty Black market Debtors' prison Tax exile Smuggling Tax resistance Transfer mispricing Unreported employment Locations Tax havens Corporate havens Offshore financial centres (OFCs) Offshore magic circle Conduit and sink OFCs Financial centres Financial Secrecy Index Major examples Ireland as a tax haven Ireland v. Commission Leprechaun economics Liechtenstein tax affair Luxembourg Leaks Offshore Leaks Paradise Papers Panama Papers Swiss Leaks United States as a tax haven Panama as a tax haven Types Direct Indirect Per unit Ad valorem Aviation Airport improvement Landing Solidarity Capital gains Expatriation Consumption Departure Hotel Sales Stamp Television Tourist Value-added Digital goods Dividend Environmental tax Carbon Eco-tariff Landfill Natural resources consumption Severance Steering Stumpage Excise Alcohol Cigarette Fat Meat Sin Sugary drink Tobacco General Georgist Gift Gross receipts Hidden Hypothecated Income Inheritance (estate) Land value Luxury On childlessness Payroll Pigouvian Property Resource rent Single Stealth Surtax Turnover Use User charge / fee Congestion Fuel Road / GNSS Toll Vehicle miles traveled Corporate profit Excess profits Windfall Negative (income) Wealth International Financial transaction tax ATTAC Currency transaction tax European Union Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base (CCCTB) Global minimum corporate tax rate Robin Hood tax Tobin tax Spahn tax Tax equalization Tax treaty Exchange of Information Permanent establishment Transfer pricing European Union FTT Foreign revenue rule Trade Custom Duty Tariff Import Export Tariff war Free trade Free-trade zone Trade agreement ATA Carnet Research Academic Mihir A. Desai Dhammika Dharmapala James R. Hines Jr.

Ronen Palan Joel Slemrod Gabriel Zucman Advocacy groups Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP) Oxfam (UK) Tax Foundation (US) Tax Justice Network (TJN) Tax Policy Center (US) Religious Church tax Eight per thousand Teind Tithe Fiscus Judaicus Leibzoll Temple tax Tolerance tax Jizya Kharaj Khums Nisab Zakat By country All Countries List of countries by tax rates Tax revenue to GDP ratio Tax rates in Europe Individual Countries Albania Algeria Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brazil Bulgaria BVI Canada China Colombia Croatia Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Lithuania Malta Morocco Namibia Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Palestine Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Russia South Africa Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tanzania United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Business portal Money portal v t e Taxation by country Albania Algeria Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Brazil British Virgin Islands Canada China Colombia Denmark France Germany Greece Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Lithuania Malta Namibia Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Palestine Peru Philippines Poland Russia South Africa Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Tanzania United Kingdom United States Uruguay European Union List of countries by tax rates Tax revenue as % of GDP v t e Tax law or revenue law is an area of legal study in which public or sanctioned authorities, such as federal, state and municipal governments (as in the case of the US) use a body of rules and procedures (laws) to assess and collect taxes in a legal context. The rates and merits of the various taxes, imposed by the authorities, are attained via the political process inherent in these bodies of power, and not directly attributable to the actual domain of tax law itself.

[ 1 ] Tax law is part of public law. It covers the application of existing tax laws on individuals, entities and corporations, in areas where tax revenue is derived or levied, e.g. income tax, estate tax, business tax, employment/payroll tax, property tax, gift tax and exports/imports tax.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] There have been some arguments that consumer law is a better way to engage in large-scale redistribution than tax law because it does not necessitate legislation and can be more efficient, given the complexities of tax law.

[ 3 ] : 213 Major issues [ edit ] Primary taxation issues differ among various countries, although similarities might exist.

Developed countries [ edit ] Taxes can fail to raise sufficient revenue to cover government spending.

[ 4 ] Taxes are generally complex and can be viewed as benefitting high income earners more than they do to lower income earners (in the payment of relatively less tax).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Tax evasion and avoidance occur, leading to reduced government revenue.

[ 6 ] Taxes can produce poor desired outcomes (lower productivity and provide less incentive for businesses to grow).

[ 4 ] Taxes can curb economic growth through inefficiency, e.g. corporate taxes/hurdles that could impede smaller entities to grow.

[ 4 ] Taxation can be viewed as disproportionate, as in the case of the taxation of capital gains versus labor income, in which investors generally pay less tax on investment income vs workers who proportionally pay more on their wages.

[ 7 ] [ 5 ] Taxes can remain questionable in achieving desired goals, such the Ecotax which is primarily intended to promote environmentally friendly activities via economic incentives.

[ 8 ] Definitions of tax law can be confusing to laypeople and even attorneys who specialize in other areas of law.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Developing countries [ edit ] Taxes in developing economies can be hard to standardize since most workers work in small, and often unregulated enterprises.

[ 11 ] Tax systems without sound establishments and competent administration to run and manage them can be burdensome and inefficient.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Tax systems without reliable data are hard to regulate and change.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Tax systems tend to have the rich bear a heavier burden of taxation.

[ 11 ] Education [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Tax law education is a specialisation of accountants, tax agents, and lawyers. Accountants are required by either CPA Australia to complete a course in law of taxation and law of financial services. There is a legal obligation to complete taxation law and commercial law for registration as a tax agent with the Tax Practitioner's Board. Law students are not typically required to complete a unit in tax law, but may opt to take it as an elective in Australian universities.

Pertaining to the US [ edit ] Pre-requisites [ edit ] completion of a bachelor's degree - students contemplating tax law might have to consider majoring in economics, accounting or finance.

[ 13 ] sitting for Law School Admission Test (LSAT).

Law school [ edit ] In law school, the students take foundational courses from "constitutional law to civil procedures." [ 13 ] At this level, law students can take more specialized courses in taxation, such as "limited partnerships and income taxes, business liquidations and acquisitions." [ 13 ] Upon completion, the law students graduate with a Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree—which is sufficient for admission to an LL.M. in Taxation.

[ 13 ] Post law school [ edit ] JD graduates may then enroll in a Master of Laws in Taxation (LL.M.), a one-year program. Other concentrations available to students include: estate planning or business taxation.

[ 13 ] The Bar exam.

Pertaining to other countries [ edit ] Post law school [ edit ] JD graduates enroll in a Master of Laws (LL.M) program, as is seen in Canada, United Kingdom, Australia, and the Netherlands.

General requirements [ edit ] A bachelor's degree - required for entry into law school.

Law School Admission Test (LSAT) - Required for law school admission in United States, Canada and a growing number of countries. J.D. (Juris Doctor) or First degree in law.

The Juris Doctor (JD) program is offered by only a number of countries. These include: United States, Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, Japan, Philippines, Singapore and the United Kingdom. The courses vary in duration of years, curriculum and whether or not further training is required, depending on which country the program is in.

In Africa [ edit ] Most African countries use the British legal education curriculum in their law educational system to train lawyers.

[ 14 ] Overall, legal education, across African countries, starts at the university level as an undergraduate course although a few universities have promulgated a law degree as a graduate program "akin to [that] … in the United States, Canada, and India." [ 14 ] In most African countries, a law degree does not necessarily qualify one to practice as a lawyer. Further post-graduate practical training is required.

[ 14 ] Graduates earn an undergraduate law degree, viz. the Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.), via a four-year program (as in Malawi, Kenya, Zambia, and most of South African law universities). Subsequently, graduates with the Bachelor of Laws seek to earn the Master of Laws or greater in order to become practitioners of the law. Some law institutions offer tracks to a Master of Philosophy (M.Phil.), a Doctor of Philosophy degree (Ph.D.), or a Doctor of Laws degree (LL.D.) with emphasis on tax law.

[ 14 ] A list of tax faculty ranked by publication downloads is maintained by Paul Caron at TaxProf Blog.

[ 15 ] Taxation by jurisdiction [ edit ] Africa Taxation in South Africa Taxation in Tanzania Americas Taxation in Argentina Taxation in Canada Taxation in Colombia Taxation in the British Virgin Islands Taxation in Peru Taxation in the United States Asia Taxation in China (* Taxation in the People's Republic of China ) Taxation in India Taxation in Iran Taxation in the Palestinian territories Europe Taxation in the European Union Taxation in Azerbaijan Taxation in Bulgaria Taxation in France Taxation in Germany Taxation in the Republic of Ireland Taxation in the Netherlands Taxation in Poland Taxation in Portugal Taxation in Russia Taxes in Spain Taxation in the United Kingdom Oceania Taxation in Australia Taxation in New Zealand See also [ edit ] Corporate law Corporate tax References [ edit ] ^ a b Houtte & McLure, Baron Jean M.J. van & Charles E. (13 June 2011).

"Tax law" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 6 October 2020 .

^ "Tax Law - Guide to Taxation Law" .

HG.org Legal Resources .

^ Van Loo, Rory (2019-11-01).

"Broadening Consumer Law: Competition, Protection, and Distribution" .

Notre Dame Law Review .

95 (1): 211.

^ a b c d Krupkin & Gale, Aaron and William G. (29 September 2016).

"Major tax issues in 2017" .

Brookings Institution .

^ a b Steverman, Ben (12 September 2017).

"Why American Workers Pay Twice as Much in Taxes as Wealthy Investors" .

Bloomberg .

^ SLEMROD & YITZHAKI, JOEL & SHLOMO (2002).

Handbook of Public Economics . Elsevier Science B. V. pp. 1425, Chapter 22.

^ Block & McBride, David & William (27 June 2012).

"Why Capital Gains are taxed at a Lower Rate" .

The Tax Foundation .

^ "Ecotax championed, contested and still marginal in EU" .

France 24 . 7 September 2019.

^ West's tax law dictionary : definitions of terms, words, and phrases used in modern American tax law ISBN 0-314-11335-5 ^ Black's law dictionary: definitions of the terms and phrases of American and English jurisprudence, ancient and modern OCLC 1025894 ^ a b c d Tanzi & Zee, Vito & Howell.

"Tax Policy for Developing Countries" .

International Monetary Fund .

^ a b Carnahan, Michael (28 January 2015).

"Taxation Challenges in Developing Countries" .

Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies .

2 : 169– 182.

doi : 10.1002/app5.70 .

S2CID 154105543 .

^ a b c d e "Tax Lawyer: Educational Requirements and Career Summary" .

Study.com . Retrieved 14 September 2019 .

^ a b c d Manteaw, Samuel O.

"Legal Education in Africa: What Type of Lawyer Does Africa Need" .

McGeorge Law Review .

39 (4): 919 to 928 – via Scholarly Commons (2016).

^ Caron, Paul (January 28, 2016).

"SSRN Tax Professor Rankings" .

TaxProf Blog .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Tax law at Wikimedia Commons v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tax_law&oldid=1305387841 " Categories : Tax law Public law Taxation-related lists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 19:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tax law 37 languages Add topic

