Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology and similar groups 2 Comintern policy: 1934–1939 Toggle Comintern policy: 1934–1939 subsection 2.1 Germany 2.2 France 2.3 Great Britain 2.4 United States 2.5 End of popular fronts 2.6 Critics and defenders of policy 3 Soviet bloc Toggle Soviet bloc subsection 3.1 Soviet republics 4 List of popular fronts Toggle List of popular fronts subsection 4.1 Popular fronts in non-communist countries 4.2 Popular fronts in post-Soviet countries 5 List of national fronts Toggle List of national fronts subsection 5.1 In current communist countries 5.2 In former communist countries 5.3 In other countries 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Popular front 30 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Galego 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Coalition of different political groupings For other uses, see Popular Front (disambiguation) .

The neutrality of the style of writing in this article is disputed .

Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( November 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A popular front cartoon showing a worker, intellectual and peasant trampling on a swastika-bearing snake in the Romanian leftist and anti-fascist newspaper Cuvântul Liber , 1935 Part of the Politics Series Party politics Political spectrum Left-wing Far-left Centre-left Centre Centre-left Radical centre Centre-right Right-wing Centre-right Far-right Syncretism Major ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Christian democracy Communism Conservatism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Green politics Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Monarchism Nationalism Populism Progressivism Classical radicalism Republicanism Social democracy Socialism Syncretism Third Way Types Bloc party Elite party Cartel party Competitive Catch-all party Entrepreneurial party Ethnic party Fraternal party Major party / Minor party Mass party Ruling party / Opposition party Rump party Parliamentary opposition Party of power Official party status Single-issue party Transnational / International Leaders and organization Backbencher Caucus Caucus chair Frontbencher Lead candidate Leader of the Opposition Majority leader Minority leader Political faction Parliamentary leader Party chair Party leader Party spokesperson Party secretary Shadow cabinet Whip Internal elections Primary election Leadership election Open list Party convention/conference Leadership convention Party discipline Conscience vote Crossing the floor Party discipline Party line Party-line vote Party switching Whip Party systems One-party Dominant-party Two-party Multi-party Non-partisan Coalitions between parties Parliamentary group Divided government Coalition government Confidence and supply Consensus government Cordon sanitaire Grand coalition Hung parliament Majority government Minority government National unity government Rotation government Tech-Trad Alliance Lists of political parties Ruling parties by country Political parties by region Banned political parties Politics portal v t e A popular front is "any coalition of working-class and middle-class parties", including liberal and social democratic ones, "united for the defense of democratic forms" against "a presumed Fascist assault".

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] More generally, it is "a coalition especially of leftist political parties against a common opponent".

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] However, other alliances such as the Popular Front of India have used the term, and not all leftist or anti-fascist coalitions use the term "popular front".

The term was first used in the mid-1930s in Europe by communists concerned over the rapid growth of fascist movements in Italy and Germany, which they sought to combat by coalescing with non-communist political groupings they had previously attacked as enemies. Temporarily successful popular front governments were formed in France , Spain , and Chile in 1936.

[ 2 ] Terminology and similar groups [ edit ] When communist parties came to power after World War II in the People's Republic of China, and the countries of Central , and Eastern Europe , it was common to do so at the head of a "front" (such as the United Front and Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference in China, the National Front in Czechoslovakia , the Front of National Unity in Poland , the Democratic Bloc in East Germany , etc.) containing several ostensibly-noncommunist parties. While it was the communist party—not the fronts—that held power in these countries, the alleged coalitions gave the Party the ability to maintain that it did not have a monopoly on power in that country.

Main article: Communist front Another use of the word "front" in connection with communist activity was " Communist front ".  This phrase used "front" not in the sense of a political movement "linking divergent elements to achieve common objectives", [ 5 ] but as a facade "used to mask" the identity/true character/activity of "the actual controlling agent", [ 5 ] (examples being the World Federation of Democratic Youth , International Union of Students , World Federation of Trade Unions , Women's International Democratic Federation , and the World Peace Council ). Communist front was a label frequently applied to political organizations opposed by anti-communists during the Cold War .

The strategy of creating or taking over organizations that would then claim to be expressions of popular will, and not manipulation by the Soviet Union or communist movement, was first suggested by Vladimir Lenin . These would not be political coalitions seeking power in opposition to fascist movements, but groups designed to spread the Marxist–Leninist message in places where the Communist party was either illegal or distrusted by many of the people the party wanted to reach.

[ 6 ] It was used from the 1920s through the 1950s, and accelerated during the popular front period of the 1930s. Eventually there were large numbers of front organizations.

Comintern policy: 1934–1939 [ edit ] Cover of an American communist pamphlet from the Popular Front that used patriotic themes under the slogan "Communism is the Americanism of the 20th Century." Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e The international communism , in the form of the Communist International (Comintern), the international communist organization created by the Russian Communist Party in the wake of the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution , went through a number of ideological strategies to advance proletarian revolution . Its 1922 congress called for a " United Front " (the "Second Period") after it became clear that proletarian revolution would not sweep aside capitalism in the rest of the world, [ 7 ] whereby the minority of workers who supported communist revolution would join forces against the bourgeoisie with workers outside the communist parties.

[ 8 ] This was followed by the " Third Period " starting in mid-1928, which posited that there was no need for coalitions with non-communists because capitalism was collapsing and  so militant policies should be rigidly maintained, [ 9 ] : 395–6 As the Nazi Party came to power in 1933 in Germany , and annihilated one of the more successful communist movements in that country, it became clear fascism was both on the rise and saw Communism as an enemy to be destroyed, and that opposition to fascism was disorganized and divided.

[ 1 ] A new, less extreme policy was called for whereby Communists would form political coalitions with non-Communist socialists and even democratic non-socialists – "liberals, moderates, and even conservatives" – in "popular fronts" against fascism.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Germany [ edit ] Until early 1933, the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) was regarded as the world's most successful communist party in terms of membership and electoral results. As a result, the Communist International , or Comintern, expected national communist parties to base their political style on the German example. That approach, known as the "class against class" strategy, or the " Third Period ", expected that the economic crisis and the trauma of war would increasingly radicalise public opinion and that if the communists remained aloof from mainstream democratic politics, they would benefit from the populist mood and be swept to power. As such, non-communist socialist parties were denounced as " social fascist ".

After a series of financial crises in 1926 , 1929 and 1931, public opinion in Europe was certainly radicalising but not to the benefit of left-wing anticapitalist parties. In the weeks that followed Hitler's rise to power in February 1933, the German Communist Party and the Comintern clung rigidly to their view that the Nazi triumph would be brief and that it would be a case of "after Hitler –  our turn"; however, as the brutality of the Nazi government became clear and there was no sign of its collapse, communists began to sense that there was a need for a radical alteration of their stance, especially as Adolf Hitler had made it clear that he regarded the Soviet Union as an enemy state.

In several countries over the previous years, a sense had grown within elements of the Communist Parties that the German model of "class against class" was not the most appropriate way to succeed in their national political contexts and that it was necessary to build some alliance to prevent the greater threat of autocratic nationalist governments; however, figures such as Henri Barbé and Pierre Célor in France and José Bullejos and Adama in Spain, who advocated greater flexibility by co-operating loyally with social-democratic parties and possibly even left-wing capitalist parties, were removed from positions of power. Predecessors to the Popular Front had existed, such as in the (later-renamed) World Committee Against War and Imperialism , but they sought not to co-operate with other parties as equals but instead to draw potential sympathisers into the orbit of the communist movement, which caused them to be denounced by the leaders of other left-wing associations.

It was thus not until 1934 when Georgi Dimitrov , who had humiliated the Nazis with his defence against charges of involvement in the Reichstag fire became the general secretary of the Comintern, and its officials became more receptive to the approach. Official acceptance of the new policy was first signalled in a Pravda article of May 1934, which commented favourably on socialist-communist collaboration.

[ 10 ] The reorientation was formalised at the Comintern's Seventh Congress in July 1935 and reached its apotheosis with the proclamation of a new policy: "The People's Front Against Fascism and War". Communist parties were now instructed to form broad alliances with all antifascist parties with the aim of securing social advance at home as well as a military alliance with the Soviet Union to isolate the fascist dictatorships. The "popular fronts" thus formed proved to be successful politically in forming governments in France, Spain and China but not elsewhere.

[ 11 ] France [ edit ] Main article: Popular Front (France) SFIO demonstration in response to the 6 February 1934 crisis. A sign reads "Down with fascism." In France, the collapse of a leftist government coalition of social-democrats and left-liberal republicans , followed by the far-right riots , which brought to power an autocratic right-wing government , changed the equation. To resist a slippery slope of encroachment towards authoritarianism , socialists were now more inclined to operate in the street and communists to co-operate with other antifascists in Parliament. In June 1934, Léon Blum 's socialist French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) signed a pact of united action with the French Communist Party . By October, the Communist Party had begun to suggest that the republican parties that had not sided with the nationalist government might also be included, and it accepted the offer the next July after the French government tilted even further to the right .

In May 1935, France and the Soviet Union signed a defensive alliance , and in August 1935, the 7th World Congress of the Comintern officially endorsed the Popular Front strategy.

[ 12 ] In the elections of May 1936 , the Popular Front won a majority of parliamentary seats (378 deputies against 220), and Blum formed a government.

[ 10 ] In Fascist Italy , the Comintern advised an alliance between the Italian Communist Party and the Italian Socialist Party , but the latter rejected the idea.

Great Britain [ edit ] Main article: Popular Front (UK) There were attempts in Great Britain to found a popular front, against the National Government 's appeasement of Nazi Germany , between the Labour Party , the Liberal Party , the Independent Labour Party , the Communist Party and even rebellious elements of the Conservative Party under Winston Churchill , but they failed mainly because of opposition from within the Labour Party, which was seething with anger over communist efforts to take over union locals. In addition, the incompatibility of liberal and socialist approaches also caused many Liberals to be hostile.

[ 13 ] United States [ edit ] Communist Party campaign headquarters in the Bronx, New York during the 1937 elections , displaying candidates of the CPUSA and American Labor Party side by side.

The Communist Party of the United States of America (CPUSA) had been quite hostile to the New Deal until 1935, but it suddenly reversed positions and tried to form a popular front with the New Dealers.

[ 14 ] It sought a joint Socialist-Communist ticket with Norman Thomas 's Socialist Party of America in the 1936 presidential election , but the Socialists rejected the overture. The communists also then offered support to Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal . The Popular Front saw the Communist Party taking a very patriotic and populist line, later called Browderism .

The Popular Front has been summarized by historian Kermit McKenzie as: ...An imaginative, flexible program of strategy and tactics, in which Communists were permitted to exploit the symbols of patriotism, to assume the role of defenders of national independence, to attack fascism without demanding an end to capitalism as the only remedy, and, most important, to enter upon alliances with other parties, on the basis of fronts or on the basis of a government in which Communists might participate.

[ 15 ] McKenzie asserted that to be a mere tactical expedient, with the broad goals of communists for the overthrow of capitalism through revolution remaining unchanged.

[ 15 ] Cultural historian Michael Denning has challenged the Communist Party-centric view of the US popular front, saying that the sympathetic non-members ( "fellow-travelers" ) in the US actually composed the majority of the movement. In his view, Communist party membership was only one (optional) element of leftist US culture at the time.

[ 16 ] End of popular fronts [ edit ] Part of a series on Stalinism Concepts Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-revisionism Collectivization Cult of personality Five-year plans Great Break Korenizatsiia Marxism–Leninism New Soviet man Popular front Self-criticism Socialism in one country Socialist realism Soviet patriotism Stakhanovite Transformation of nature Vanguardism People Stalin Andreyeva Andreyev Berman Bierut Beria Ceaușescu Chervenkov Choibalsan Dimitrov Dugin Firin Foster Frinovsky Frenkel Kaganovich Kalinin Kim Kirov Khrulyov Khrushchev Kolmogorov Kotkin Kosygin Kryuchkov Kuybyshev Malenkov Merkulov Molotov Ochab Ordzhonikidze Petrovsky Pollitt Raikhman Rákosi Rosengolts Serov Sholokhov Thälmann Ulbricht Vyshinsky Voznesensky Yagoda Yenukidze Yezhov Yaroslavsky Zyuganov Theoretical works About the anti-Soviet elements Dialectical and Historical Materialism Dizzy with Success Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR Falsifiers of History Foundations of Leninism History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Marxism and the National Question History Stalinist Era First five-year plan Great Break Collectivisation Industrialisation Great Purge Moscow trials Azerbaijan repressions Mongolia repressions Spanish Civil War World War II Soviet atomic bomb project Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Cominform Chinese Communist Revolution First Indochina War Korean War Doctors' plot Death and funeral of Stalin De-Stalinization 20th Congress of the Communist Party Khrushchev Thaw Parties Communist Party of Great Britain (Marxist–Leninist) All-Union Communist Party Bolsheviks Albanian Party of Labour Communist Party of Germany Communist Party of Greece Italian Marxist–Leninist Party CARC Party Communist Party of New Zealand Romanian Communist Party Workers' Party of Korea Communist Party of the Russian Federation National Bolshevik Party The Other Russia Stalin Bloc – For the USSR American Communist Party (2024) Related topics Anti-Stalinist left Joseph Stalin's rise to power Stalin and antisemitism Stalin Society Stalinist architecture Neo-Stalinism Anti-Soviet agitation Authoritarian socialism Comparison to Nazism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Juche Maoism National communism Red fascism Sino–Albanian split Sino–Soviet split Soviet–Albanian split Soviet–Yugoslav split Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Soviet Union portal v t e The period suddenly came to an end with another abrupt reversal of Soviet and Communist policy, when the Soviet Union signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact with Nazi Germany in August 1939, dividing Central and Eastern Europe into German and Soviet spheres of influence, and leading to the Soviet takeover of the Baltic Republics and Finland .

[ 17 ] Comintern parties then turned from a policy of anti-fascism to one of advocating peace with Germany, maintaining that World War II (until Germany invaded the Soviet Union and the Communist party line reversed yet again) was not a fight against Nazi aggression, but "the Second Imperialist War".

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Many party members quit the party in disgust at the agreement between Hitler and Stalin, but many communists in France and other countries refused to enlist in their countries' forces until June 1941 since until then, Stalin was not at war with Hitler.

[ citation needed ] Critics and defenders of policy [ edit ] Leon Trotsky and his far-left supporters roundly criticised the strategy. Trotsky believed that only united fronts could ultimately be progressive and that popular fronts were useless because they included bourgeois forces such as liberals. Trotsky also argued that in popular fronts, working-class demands are reduced to their bare minimum, and the ability of the working class to put forward its own independent set of politics is compromised. That view is now common to most Trotskyist groups.

Left communist groups also oppose popular fronts, but they came to oppose united fronts as well.

In a book written in 1977, the eurocommunist leader Santiago Carrillo offered a positive assessment of the Popular Front. He argued that in Spain, despite the excesses attributable to the passions of civil war, the period of coalition government in Republican areas "contained in embryo the conception of an advance to socialism with democracy, with a multi-party system, parliament, and liberty for the opposition".

[ 20 ] Carrillo, however criticised the Communist International for not taking the Popular Front strategy far enough, especially since French communists were restricted to supporting Blum's government from without, rather than becoming full coalition partners.

[ 21 ] Soviet bloc [ edit ] After World War II , most Central and Eastern European countries were ruled by coalitions between several different political parties that voluntarily chose to work together. By the time that the countries in what became the Eastern Bloc had developed into Marxist–Leninist states, the non-communist parties had pushed out those members not willing to do the communists' bidding and were taken over by fellow travellers . As a result, the front had turned into a tool of the communists. The non-communist parties were required to accept the communist party's " leading role " as a condition of their continued existence.

For example, East Germany was ruled by a "National Front" of all parties and movements within Parliament ( Socialist Unity Party of Germany , Liberal Party , Farmers' Party , Youth Movement , Trade Union Federation etc.). At legislative elections, voters were presented with a single list of candidates from all parties.

[ 22 ] The People's Republic of China's United Front is perhaps the best known example of a communist-run popular front in modern times. It is nominally a coalition of the Chinese Communist Party and eight minor parties. Though all parties had origins in independent parties prior to the Chinese Civil War , noncommunists eventually splintered out to join the Nationalists, and the parties remaining in Mainland China allied with either Communist Party sympathizers or, in some cases, actual members.

[ 23 ] Soviet republics [ edit ] In the republics of the Soviet Union , between around 1988 and 1992 (when the USSR had dissolved , and the republics were all independent), the term "Popular Front" had quite a different meaning. It referred to movements led by members of the liberal-minded intelligentsia (usually themselves members of the local Communist Party), in some republics small and peripheral but in others broad-based and influential. Officially, their aim was to defend perestroika against reactionary elements within the state bureaucracy, but over time, they began to question the legitimacy of their republics' membership of the Soviet Union. It was their initially cautious tone that gave them considerable freedom to organise and to gain access to the mass media. In the Baltic republics , they soon became the dominant political force and gradually gained the initiative from the more radical dissident organisations established earlier by moving their republics towards greater autonomy and then independence. They also became the main challengers to the communist parties' hegemony in Byelorussia , Moldavia , Ukraine , Armenia and Azerbaijan . A Popular Front was established in Georgia but remained marginal, compared to the dominant dissident-led groups, since the 9 April tragedy had radicalised society and so it was unable to play the compromise role of similar movements. In the other republics, such organisations existed but never posed a meaningful threat to the incumbent party and economic elites.

[ 24 ] List of popular fronts [ edit ] Popular fronts in non-communist countries [ edit ] The French Front populaire and the Spanish Frente Popular popular fronts of the 1930s are the most notable ones.

Popular Front (UK) , an unofficial electoral alliance from 1936 to 1939 between the Communist Party of Great Britain , supporters of the Labour Party , the Liberal Party and the Independent Labour Party and anti-appeasers in the Conservative Party .

Popular Front (France) , left-wing anti-fascist coalition in France in the 1930s, was led by Léon Blum 's French Section of the Workers' International but also included communists and social democrats .

New Popular Front , a broad left-wing electoral alliance in France launched on 10 June 2024.

Popular Front (Spain) , an electoral coalition formed in Spain in 1936 before the Spanish Civil War , led by the Republican Left but also included communists , socialists and regional nationalists.

Popular Front (Chile) Frente popular , an electoral and political left-wing coalition in Chile from 1937 to February 1941.

[ 25 ] People's Democratic Front (Indonesia) Popular Democratic Front (Italy) Fronte Democratico Popolare , a coalition of communists and socialists for the 1948 Italian parliamentary election .

Palestine Liberation Organization , formed in 1964 as a confederation of Palestinian nationalist groups opposed to Israel 's occupation of their homeland and led by Fatah .

[ 26 ] Unidad Popular , a coalition of left wing, socialist and communist political parties in Chile that stood behind the successful candidacy of Salvador Allende for the 1970 Chilean presidential election .

Tripartite Alliance , a political alliance formed between the African National Congress , South African Communist Party and the Congress of South African Trade Unions in 1985.

Popular Front (Burkina Faso) , a political alliance that was formed in 1987 by President Blaise Compaoré and organised pro-government leftist parties.

United Progressive Alliance , a coalition of leftist and centre-left parties in India formed in 2004 and led by the Indian National Congress .

Broad Front (Uruguay) , a coalition of centre-left and left-wing parties that started to rule Uruguay in 2005.

[ 27 ] Broad Front (Peru) , a coalition of left-wing parties founded in 2013.

Grand Alliance (Bangladesh) , a leftist political alliance that includes the left-wing Awami League , the socialist Jatiya Samajtantrik Dal and the communist Workers Party .

With the Strength of the People , an electoral coalition formed by Brazil 's Workers' Party and including social democrats , communists , socialists and other groups.

Popular Front (Tunisia) Front populaire pour la réalisation des objectifs de la révolution , formed in Tunis in October 2012 as part of the Arab Spring .

Great Patriotic Pole , an electoral coalition formed in 2012 to unite various left-wing parties in support of Hugo Chávez and led by the United Socialist Party of Venezuela .

[ 28 ] Kansanrintamahallitus [ fi ] (Popular Bloc Coalition) is and was a coalition in Finnish parliamentary politics, mainly made up of the Agrarian Centre Party , Social Democrats and the communist Finnish People's Democratic League .

[ note 1 ] [ 30 ] United Alliance Nicaragua Triumphs an electoral coalition formed in 2006 led by the Sandinista National Liberation Front .

Popular fronts in post-Soviet countries [ edit ] These are non-socialist parties unless indicated otherwise.

The following movements were part of glasnost and perestroika during the 1980s Republic Main nationalist movement (foundation date) Russian SFSR Democratic Russia (1990) Ukrainian SSR People's Movement of Ukraine (Narodnyi Rukh Ukrajiny) (November 1988) Byelorussian SSR Belarusian Popular Front (October 1988), Renewal ( Andradzhen'ne ) (June 1989) Uzbek SSR Unity (Birlik) (November 1988) Kazakh SSR Nevada Semipalatinsk Movement (February 1989) Georgian SSR Committee for National Salvation (October 1989) Azerbaijan SSR Azerbaijani Popular Front Party Azərbaycan Xalq Cəbhəsi Partiyası ; (July 1988) Lithuanian SSR Reform Movement of Lithuania (Lietuvos Persitvarkymo Sąjūdis) (June 1988) Moldavian SSR Popular Front of Moldova Frontul Popular din Moldova ; (May 1989) Latvian SSR Popular Front of Latvia Latvijas Tautas fronte ;(July 1988) Kirghiz SSR Openness (Ashar) (July 1989) Tajik SSR Openness (Ashkara) (June 1989) Armenian SSR Karabakh movement (February 1988) Turkmen SSR Unity (Agzybirlik) (January 1990) Estonian SSR Popular Front of Estonia ( Eestimaa Rahvarinne ) (April 1988) Autonomous Republic Main nationalist movement (foundation date) South Ossetian AO Adamon Nykhaz (1988) Tatar ASSR Tatar Public Center (Tatar İctimağí Üzäge) (February 1989) Checheno-Ingush ASSR All-National Congress of the Chechen People (November 1990) Abkhaz ASSR Unity (Aidgylara) (December 1988) [ 31 ] These were established after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991: All-Russia People's Front Общероссийский народный фронт , created in 2011 by Prime Minister Vladimir Putin to provide United Russia with "new ideas, new suggestions and new faces" and intended to be a coalition between the ruling party and numerous non- United Russia nongovernmental organizations.

List of national fronts [ edit ] It has been suggested that this section be split out  into another article titled Bloc party . ( Discuss ) (June 2025) In current communist countries [ edit ] People's Republic of China, the United Front led by the Chinese Communist Party Socialist Republic of Vietnam , the Vietnamese Fatherland Front led by the Communist Party of Vietnam (succeeded the North Vietnamese Fatherland Front of 1955 to 1977 and two ' Viet Cong ' fronts in South Vietnam), with its origins tracing back to the Viet Minh front.

Lao People's Democratic Republic , the Lao Front for National Construction , led by the Lao People's Revolutionary Party In former communist countries [ edit ] People's Socialist Republic of Albania –  the Democratic Front , led by the Party of Labour of Albania , which succeeded the National Liberation Front of 1942 to 1945 Democratic Republic of Afghanistan –  the National Front , led by the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan People's Republic of Bulgaria –  the Fatherland Front , led by the Bulgarian Communist Party People's Republic of the Congo –  the Défense Civile and then the United Democratic Forces , led by the Congolese Party of Labour Czechoslovak Socialist Republic –  the National Front , led by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia German Democratic Republic –  the Democratic Bloc and then the National Front , led by the Socialist Unity Party of Germany People's Revolutionary Government (Grenada) –  the People's Alliance, led by the New Jewel Movement Hungarian People's Republic –  the National Independence Front [ hu ] led by the Hungarian Communist Party , replaced in 1949 by the Hungarian Independence People's Front, led by the Hungarian Working People's Party , and replaced by the Patriotic People's Front in 1954, which, after 1956, was led by the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party ) Democratic Kampuchea / People's Republic of Kampuchea –  the National United Front of Kampuchea led by the Communist Party of Kampuchea which was dissolved in 1976, in 1979 the Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation led by the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party while the deposed CPK formed the Patriotic and Democratic Front of the Great National Union of Kampuchea in exile.

Democratic People's Republic of Korea – Democratic Front for the Reunification of Korea , led by the Workers' Party of Korea (originated from the United Democratic National Front of 1946 to 1949), was originally founded in 1948 when North Korea was a Marxist–Leninist state. Since 1992, all Marxist references were deprecated in favor of Juche and it was dissolved in 2024.

Polish People's Republic –  the Democratic Bloc led by the Polish United Workers' Party , replaced by the Front of National Unity in 1952 and then by the Patriotic Movement for National Rebirth in 1983 Socialist Republic of Romania –  the National Democratic Front, renamed People's Democratic Front led by the Romanian Communist Party and replaced in 1968 by the Socialist Unity Front, later renamed the Socialist Democracy and Unity Front People's Democratic Republic of Yemen –  the Unified Nationalist Front Political Organization led by the National Liberation Front before merging into the Yemeni Socialist Party in 1978 SFR Yugoslavia –  the National Front of Yugoslavia, led by the Communist Party of Yugoslavia and replaced by the Socialist Alliance of Working People of Yugoslavia in 1945 In other countries [ edit ] Ba'athist Syria –  the National Progressive Front (Syria) , a political alliance formed in 1972 that united parties supporting the ruling Syrian government, led by the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party .

[ 32 ] Ba'athist Iraq –  the National Progressive Front (Iraq) , a political alliance formed in 1974 that united pro-government parties led by the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party .

See also [ edit ] Socialism portal Communism portal Third Period United front Entryism Notes [ edit ] ^ There are varying definitions for a Popular Front in Finland, both historically and in modern use.
For example, Aimo Kaarlo Cajander's III Cabinet of the Agrarian Union, Social Democrats, National Progressives(Liberals) and the Swedish Folks Party was called the first "Red-Brown Coalition"(Punamulta), a coalition where the two largest parties were the Agrarian Union/Centre Party and the Social Democrats, but the coalition could have the National Progressives(Liberals) and/or the Swedish Folks Party supporting the coalition. 
Post WW2 however, as the Communist SKDL became a large player in the parliament of Finland, there started to form a three-way coalition between the Agrarian Union/Centre Party, Social Democrats and the Communists, by format the actual "Popular Bloc", such as Mauno Pekkala's Cabinet or Mauno Koivisto's I Cabinet. 
What makes the definition more confusing is that in 2019 Antti Rinne's government was formed of the Social Democrats, Centre Party (Agrarians), Greens, Left Alliance (Left/far-left parties) and the Swedish Folks party. Rinne himself called the new 5-party coalition a "New Red-Brown Coalition", but many in the media called it a "New Popular Bloc" [ 29 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c "popular front European coalition" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 15 October 2021 .

^ a b c "Popular Front" .

Oxford Reference . Retrieved 16 October 2021 .

^ "popular front" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 16 October 2021 .

^ Barrett, James R. (7 September 2009).

"Rethinking the Popular Front" .

Rethinking Marxism a Journal of Economics, Culture & Society .

21 (4): 531– 550.

doi : 10.1080/08935690903145671 .

S2CID 143043228 . Retrieved 16 October 2021 .

^ a b "front noun" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 16 October 2021 .

^ Draper, Theodore (2003).

American Communism and Soviet Russia (2nd ed.). New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers. p. 172.

ISBN 9780765805317 .

OCLC 51505513 .

^ Worley, Matthew (2000).

"Left Turn: A Reassessment of the Communist Party of Great Britain in the Third Period, 1928-33" .

Twentieth Century British History .

11 (4): 353– 378.

doi : 10.1093/tcbh/11.4.353 .

^ Fourth Congress of the Communist International (1922).

"Theses on Comintern Tactics" .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2008 . Retrieved 20 February 2008 .

^ Kozlov, Nicholas N.; Weitz, Eric D. (1989). "Reflections on the Origins of the 'Third Period': Bukharin, the Comintern, and the Political Economy of Weimar Germany".

Journal of Contemporary History .

24 (3): 387– 410.

doi : 10.1177/002200948902400301 .

JSTOR 260667 .

S2CID 144906375 .

^ a b 1914-1946: Third Camp Internationalists in France during World War II, libcom.org ^ Archie Brown, The Rise and Fall of Communism (2009) pp 88-100.

^ The Seventh Congress, Marxist Internet Archive ^ Joyce, Peter (Autumn 2000).

"The Liberal Party and the Popular Front: An assessment of the arguments over progressive unity in the 1930s" (PDF) .

Journal of Liberal History (28).

^ Frank A. Warren (1993).

Liberals and Communism: The "Red Decade" Revisited . Columbia UP. pp.

237– 38.

ISBN 9780231084444 .

^ a b Kermit E. McKenzie, Comintern and World Revolution, 1928-1943: The Shaping of a Doctrine.

London and New York: Columbia University Press, 1964; p. 159.

^ Denning, Michael (2010).

The cultural front : the laboring of American culture in the twentieth century ([2010] ed.). London: Verso.

ISBN 978-1844674640 .

^ "German-Soviet Nonaggression Pact" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 5 November 2021 .

^ García, Hugo; Yusta, Mercedes; Tabet, Xavier (2016).

Rethinking Antifascism: History, Memory and Politics, 1922 . Berghahn Books. p. 189.

ISBN 9781785331398 . Retrieved 5 November 2021 .

^ Haynes, John E. (December 2000).

"Did Communism Give Peace a Bad Name? (Book review)" .

H-Net online . Retrieved 5 November 2021 .

^ Santiago Carrillo, Eurocommunism and the State . London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1977; p. 128.

^ Carrillo, Eurocommunism and the State , pp. 113–114.

^ Kindell, Alexandra; Demers, Elizabeth S., eds. (2014).

Encyclopedia of Populism in America: A Historical Encyclopedia . Abc-Clio. p. 542.

ISBN 9781598845686 .

^ Judicial politics as state-building, Zhu, Suli, Pp. 23–36 in Stéphanie Balme and Michael W. Dowdle (eds.), Building Constitutionalism in China.New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

^ Wheatley, Jonathan.

Georgia from National Awakening to Rose Revolution , pp. 31, 45. Ashgate Publishing, 2005, ISBN 0-7546-4503-7 .

^ David R. Corkill, "The Chilean Socialist Party and The Popular Front 1933-41." Journal of Contemporary History 11.2 (1976): 261-273.

in JSTOR ; John R. Stevenson, The Chilean Popular Front (University of Pennsylvania Press, 1942).

^ Hilal, Jamil.

"The Palestinian Left and the Multi-Layered Challenges Ahead | The Institute for Palestine Studies" .

oldwebsite.palestine-studies.org . Rosa Luxemburg Foundation . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

^ Hennigan, Tom (29 November 2014).

"Uruguay set to return left-wing Broad Front movement to power" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

^ "Venezuelan opposition leaders jailed, accused of planning escape while under house arrest | CBC News" .

CBC . Associated Press . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

^ Karvonen, Kyösti (12 May 2019).

"Uusi kansanrintama vai uusi punamulta? – Suomi kaartaa vasemmalle" .

Kaleva.fi .

^ "Antti Rinne: Tämä on uusi punamulta" (in Finnish). 5 August 2019 . Retrieved 5 January 2022 .

^ Tsygankov, Andrei P.

Russia's Foreign Policy: Change and Continuity in National Identity , p. 46. Rowman & Littlefield, 2006, ISBN 0-7425-2650-X .

^ "الجبهة الوطنية التقدمية" .

pnf.org.sy . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Graham, Helen, and Paul Preston, eds.

The Popular Front in Europe (1989).

Haslam, Jonathan. "The Comintern and the Origins of the Popular Front 1934–1935." Historical Journal 22#3 (1979): 673–691.

Horn, Gerd-Rainer.

European Socialists Respond to Fascism: Ideology, Activism and Contingency in the 1930s.

(Oxford University Press, 1997).

Mates, Lewis.

"The United Front and the Popular Front in the North-east of England, 1936-1939." PhD dissertation, 2002.

Priestland, David.

The Red Flag: A History of Communism (2010) pp 182–233.

Vials, Christopher.

Haunted by Hitler: Liberals, the Left, and the Fight against Fascism in the United States.

(U of Massachusetts Press, 2014).

v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Popular_front&oldid=1304307498 " Categories : Popular fronts 1930s neologisms Comintern Communist terminology History of socialism Political terminology Hidden categories: CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with minor POV problems from November 2020 All articles with minor POV problems Use dmy dates from January 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Articles to be split from June 2025 All articles to be split This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 07:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Popular front 30 languages Add topic

