Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The main thesis 2 Versions of the theory 3 Political implication 4 Neo-Trotskyist theory 5 Market anarchism 6 Eurocommunism 7 Criticism 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents State monopoly capitalism 18 languages Azərbaycanca বাংলা Dansk Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 پښتو Română Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marxist theory Part of a series on State monopoly capitalism Terms Coercive monopoly Corporate personhood Corporate welfare Government-granted monopoly Intellectual property License Limited liability Regulatory capture Regulation Subsidy Tariff Ideas Advocacy group Lobbying Theory Conflict of interest Principal–agent problem Rent-seeking Issues Agricultural subsidy Corporatism Military–industrial complex Military-entertainment complex Ideologies Protectionism See also Crony capitalism Neo-corporatism State capitalism v t e Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The theory of state monopoly capitalism (also referred as stamocap ) [ 1 ] was initially a Marxist thesis popularised after World War II .

Lenin had claimed in 1916 that World War I had transformed laissez-faire capitalism into monopoly capitalism , but he did not publish any extensive theory about the topic. The term refers to an environment where the state intervenes in the economy to protect larger monopolistic or oligopolistic businesses from threats.  
As conceived by Lenin in his pamphlet of the same name, the theory aims to describe the final historical stage of capitalism, of which he believed the Imperialism of that time to be the highest expression.

[ 2 ] The main thesis [ edit ] The main Marxist–Leninist thesis is that big business, having achieved a monopoly or cartel position in most markets of importance, fuses with the government apparatus. State monopoly capitalism protected monopolistic economics from competition by smaller firms.

[ 3 ] Lenin insists in The State and Revolution (1917) that state monopoly capitalism is not a development beyond capitalism but a manifestation of it, countering liberal and social-democratic politicians who characterised this economic development as state socialism , [ 4 ] for example with regard to the so-named State Socialism initiatives in the German Empire .

Versions of the theory [ edit ] Different versions of this idea were elaborated by economists of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (e.g., Eugen Varga ), East Germany's Socialist Unity Party , the French Communist Party (e.g., Paul Boccara ), the Communist Party of Great Britain (e.g., Ben Fine and Laurence Harris ), and the American Communist Party of the USA (e.g., Victor Perlo ).

Political implication [ edit ] Ever since monopoly capital took over the world, it has kept the greater part of humanity in poverty, dividing all the profits among the group of the most powerful countries. The standard of living in those countries is based on the extreme poverty of our countries.

— Che Guevara , 1965 [ 5 ] The strategic political implication of the theory for Marxist-Leninists, towards the end of the Joseph Stalin era and afterwards, was that the labour movement should form a people's democratic alliance under the leadership of the Communist Party with the progressive middle classes and small business, against the state and big business (called "monopoly" for short). Sometimes this alliance was also called the "anti-monopoly alliance".

[ citation needed ] Neo-Trotskyist theory [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section's factual accuracy is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced .

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In neo-Trotskyist theory, however, such an alliance was rejected as being based either on a false strategy of popular fronts , or on political opportunism , said to be incompatible either with a permanent revolution or with the principle of independent working class political action.

[ citation needed ] The state in Soviet-type societies was redefined by the neo-Trotskyists as being also state-monopoly capitalist. There was no difference, in their view, between the West and the East in this regard. Consequently, some kind of anti-bureaucratic revolution was said to be required, but different Trotskyist groups quarreled about what form such a revolution would need to take, or could take.

[ citation needed ] Some Trotskyists [ who?

] believed the anti-bureaucratic revolution would happen spontaneously, inevitably and naturally, others believed it needed to be organised - the aim being to establish a society owned and operated by the working class. According to the neo-Trotskyists, the Communist Party could not play its leading role, because it did not represent the interests of the working class.

[ citation needed ] Market anarchism [ edit ] Market anarchists typically criticize neoliberal forces for inconsistent or hypocritical application of neoliberal theory regarding stamocap (State monopoly capitalism); that in those inconsistencies exist the basis of continued selective state-guaranteed privileges for the plutocratic neoliberal elite.

[ 6 ] Eurocommunism [ edit ] The concept was to a large extent either modified or abandoned in the era of eurocommunism , because it came to be believed that the state apparatus could be reformed to reflect the interests of the working majority. In other words, the fusion between the state and big business postulated earlier was not so tight that it could not be undone by a mass movement from below, under the leadership of the Communist Party (or its central committee).

[ citation needed ] Criticism [ edit ] When Varga introduced the theory, orthodox Stalinist economists attacked it as incompatible with the doctrine that state planning was a feature only of socialism, and that "under capitalism anarchy of production reigns." [ 7 ] Critics of the theory (e.g., Ernest Mandel and Leo Kofler ) claimed that: the theory wrongly implied that the state could somehow overrule inter-capitalist competition , the laws of motion of capitalism and market forces generally, supposedly cancelling out the operation of the law of value .

[ citation needed ] the theory lacked any sophisticated account of the class basis of the state , and the real linkages between governments and elites. It postulated a monolithic structure of domination which in reality did not exist in that way.

[ citation needed ] the theory failed to explain the rise of neo-liberal ideology in the business class, which claims precisely that an important social goal should be a reduction of the state's influence in the economy.

[ citation needed ] However, neoliberalism does not oppose making states subservient to the aims of large corporations, in what is known as government-granted monopoly .

[ citation needed ] the theory failed to show clearly what the difference was between a socialist state and a bourgeois state, except that in a socialist state, the Communist Party (or, rather, its central committee) played the leading political role. In that case, the class-content of the state itself was defined purely in terms of the policy of the ruling political party (or its central committee).

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Capitalism Capitalist mode of production Crony capitalism Government-granted monopoly Late capitalism Left-libertarianism Marxism Monopoly Capital Neoliberalism State capitalism Supercapitalism White monopoly capital References [ edit ] ^ Fuchs, Christian (2017).

"Donald Trump: A critical theory-perspective on authoritarian capitalism" .

TripleC .

15 (1): 1– 72.

doi : 10.31269/triplec.v15i1.835 .

^ Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich (June 1916), Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism , retrieved November 29, 2019 ^ Coleman, Janet; Conolly, Willam; Miller, David; Ryan, Alan, eds. (1991). The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Political Thought (reprinted ed.). Wifey/Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 9780631179443 ^ Lenin, Vladimir (1917). "Chapter IV: Supplementary Explanations by Engels".

The State and Revolution .

The latter must be emphasized because the erroneous bourgeois reformist assertion that monopoly capitalism or state-monopoly capitalism is no longer capitalism, but can now be called "state socialism" and so on, is very common.

^ At the Afro-Asian Conference in Algeria by Che Guevara, Delivered at the Second Economic Seminar of Afro-Asian Solidarity in Algiers, Algeria - on February 24, 1965 ^ "The Iron Fist Behind the Invisible Hand: Corporate Capitalism As a State-Guaranteed System of Privilege" by Kevin A. Carson ^ The Case of Eugene Varga Raya Dunayevskaya 1949 Further reading [ edit ] Guy Ankerl, Beyond Monopoly Capitalism and Monopoly Socialism. Cambridge MA, Schenkman, 1978, ISBN 0-87073-938-7 Nikolai Bukharin , Imperialism and World Economy .

Gerd Hardach, Dieter Karras and Ben Fine, A short history of socialist economic thought.

, pp. 63–68.

Bob Jessop, The capitalist state .

Charlene Gannage, "E. S. Varga and the Theory of State Monopoly Capitalism", in Review of Radical Political Economics 12(3), Fall 1980, pages 36–49.

Johnn Fairley, French Developments in the Theory of State Monopoly Capitalism , in: Science and Society ; 44(3), Fall 1980, pages 305-25.

Keitha S. Fine, The French communist party: the theory of state monopoly capitalism and the practice of class politics, 1958-1978 . Phd Thesis, Tufts University, 1979.

Ernest Mandel , Late Capitalism , pp. 515–522.

Ernest Mandel, Historical Materialism and the Capitalist State .

Paul Boccara et al., Le Capitalisme Monopoliste d'Etat . Paris: Editions Sociales, 1971 (2 vols).

G. N. Sorvina et al., "The Role of the State in the System of State Monopoly Capitalism", in: The Teaching of Political Economy: A Critique of Non Marxian Theories . Moscow: Progress, 1984, pages 171-179.

Ben Fine & Laurence Harris, Re-reading Capital.

Jacques Valier, Le Parti Communiste Francais Et Le Capitalisme Monopoliste D'Etat , 1976 External links [ edit ] The Age of Monopoly-Finance Capital by John Bellamy Foster , Monthly Review , February 2010 Authority control databases : National Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=State_monopoly_capitalism&oldid=1293282430 " Categories : Marxist theory Capitalism Monopoly (economics) Marxist terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2021 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2021 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references Accuracy disputes from April 2024 All accuracy disputes All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 20:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents State monopoly capitalism 18 languages Add topic

