Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Composers 3 Musical style and forms 4 Manuscript sources 5 Burgundian composers 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Burgundian School 13 languages Català Español Esperanto Français Galego Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 15th century European composers Composer Guillaume Dufay (left) and Gilles Binchois (right), Martin le Franc , "Champion des Dames" Part of a series on Renaissance music Overview Composers / Transition to Baroque Movements and schools Burgundian Franco-Flemish English Votive Colorist Florentine Camerata Roman Venetian English Virginalist English Madrigal Major figures Du Fay Binchois Ockeghem Busnois Tinctoris Josquin Tallis Zarlino Palestrina Lasso Byrd Victoria Monteverdi Major forms Anthem Chanson Madrigal Mass Motet ← Medieval music Baroque music → v t e The Burgundian School was a group of composers active in the 15th century in what is now northern and eastern France , Belgium , and the Netherlands , centered on the court of the Dukes of Burgundy . The school inaugurated the music of Burgundy .

The main names associated with this school are Guillaume Dufay , Gilles Binchois , Antoine Busnois and (as an influence), the English composer John Dunstaple . The Burgundian School was the first phase of activity of the Franco-Flemish School , the central musical practice of the Renaissance in Europe.

Background [ edit ] In late Medieval and early Renaissance Europe, cultural centers tended to move from one place to another due to changing political stability and the presence of either the spiritual or temporal power, for instance the Pope , Anti-pope or the Holy Roman Emperor .  In the 14th century, the main centers of musical activity were northern France , Avignon , and Italy , as represented by Guillaume de Machaut and the ars nova , the ars subtilior , and Landini respectively; Avignon had a brief but important cultural flowering because it was the location of the Papacy during the Western Schism .  When France was ravaged by the Hundred Years' War (1337–1453), the cultural center migrated farther east, to towns in Burgundy and the Low Countries , known then collectively as the Netherlands .

[ 1 ] During the reign of the House of Valois , Burgundy was the most powerful and stable political division in western Europe, and added, a bit at a time, Flanders , Brabant , Holland , Luxembourg , Alsace and Lorraine . Especially during the reigns of Philip the Good (1419–1467) and Charles the Bold (1467–1477), this entire area, loosely known as Burgundy, was a center of musical creativity.  Most of the musical activity did not take place in what is modern-day Burgundy, which has its capital in Dijon (even though the Dukes of Burgundy maintained an administrative center there).  The main centers of music-making were Brussels , Bruges , Lille , and Arras , as well as smaller towns in that same general area.

[ 1 ] Musicians from the region came to Burgundy to study and further their own careers as the reputation of the area spread. The Burgundian rulers were not merely patrons of the arts, but took an active part:  Charles the Bold himself played the harp , and composed chansons and motets (although none have survived with reliable attribution).  The worldly dukes also encouraged the composition of secular music to a degree seen only rarely before in European music history, a characteristic which itself defines the Burgundian epoch as a Renaissance phenomenon.

[ 2 ] This migration of musical culture east from Paris to Burgundy also corresponds with the conventional (and by no means universally accepted) division of music history into Medieval and Renaissance ; while Guillaume de Machaut is often considered to be one of the last Medieval composers, Dufay is often considered to be the first significant Renaissance composer.

Charles the Bold was killed in 1477 in the Battle of Nancy , during one of his attempts to add territory to his empire. After his death, music continued to flourish as before, but the region was split politically, with the duchy of Burgundy being absorbed into France, and most of the Low Countries becoming part of the holdings of the Spanish Habsburgs .  Both the French court and the Habsburgs were patrons of music; however, a French style began to diverge from that of the Low Countries, especially in secular music, and in the period after 1500.

Composers [ edit ] The history of Burgundian music began with the organization of the chapel in 1384; twenty years later, it rivaled the famous establishment at Avignon in splendor.  Names associated with this early phase of Burgundian music include Johannes Tapissier and Nicolas Grenon , who carried the tradition across to the next phase of the chapel, when it was reorganized in 1415.  Other early composers there were Hugo and Arnold de Lantins , both of whom Dufay later met in Italy.

Of all the names associated with the Burgundian School, the most famous was Guillaume Dufay , who was probably the most famous composer in Europe in the 15th century.  He wrote music in many of the forms which were current, music which was melodic, singable and memorable (more than half of his sacred music consists of simple harmonizations of plainsong , for example).  Contemporary with Dufay were composers such as Gilles Binchois , who was at the Burgundian court between approximately 1430 and 1460, and Hayne van Ghizeghem , a composer, singer and soldier who may have been killed in the last military campaign of Charles the Bold.

After the death of Dufay in 1474, the most prominent Burgundian musician was Antoine Busnois , who was also a prolific composer of chansons, and who possibly wrote the famous L'homme armé tune.

Musical style and forms [ edit ] Burgundian cadence on D; note the parallel fourths between upper voices.

[ 3 ] Play ⓘ Burgundian composers favored secular forms, at least while they worked in Burgundian lands; much sacred music survives, especially from those composers who spent time in Italy, for example in the papal choir.  The most prominent secular forms used by the Burgundians were the four formes fixes ( rondeau , ballade , virelai , and bergerette ), all generically known as chansons .  Of the four, the rondeau was by far the most popular; at any rate more rondeaux have survived than any other form.  Most of the rondeaux were in three voices, and in French, though there are a few in other languages.  In most of the rondeaux, the uppermost voice (the "superius") was texted, and the other voices were most likely played by instruments.  The bergerette was developed by the Burgundians themselves; it was like a virelai, but shorter, having only one stanza.

Most of the composers also wrote sacred music in Latin; this was to remain true for the next several generations.  They wrote both masses and motets , as well as cycles of Magnificats .  During the period, the mass transformed from a group of individual sections written by different composers, often using a head-motif technique, to unified cycles based on a cantus firmus . Dufay, Binchois, Busnois, Reginald Liebert and others all wrote cyclic masses.  One of the favorite tunes used as a cantus firmus was the renowned l'homme armé , which was set not only by the Burgundians but by composers of subsequent centuries; indeed it was the most common tune used as a basis for mass composition in all of music history, with more than forty surviving masses featuring the melody.  David Fallows writes of it in the New Grove : "It is hard to think of any other melody in the history of music that has yielded so much music of the highest quality." [ 4 ] During the period the motet transformed from the isorhythmic model of the 14th century to the smoothly polyphonic , sectional composition seen in the work of the later Burgundians such as Busnois.  In the motets, as well as the masses and other sacred music, a common musical technique employed was fauxbourdon , a harmonization of an existing chant in parallel 6-3 chords, occasionally ornamented to prevent monotony.  Composition using fauxbourdon allowed sung text to be clearly understood, but yet avoided the plainness of simple chant. Burgundian motets tended to be in Latin, written for three voices with the top voice being the most important. An example of a Burgundian motet is Quam pulchra es , written by Dunstaple in the early 15th century.

Instrumental music was also cultivated at the Burgundian courts, often for dancing.  A peculiarity of the Burgundian instrumental style is that the dukes preferred music for loud instruments ( trumpets , tambourins , shawms , bagpipes ) and more of this survives than for other current instruments such as the lute or the harp.  In contemporary practice, the loud instruments would usually play from an elevated location, such as a balcony, while the other instruments would play closer to the dancers.

[ 1 ] Instrumental forms included the basse danse , or bassadanza , which was a ceremonial dance of a rather dignified character, and relatively slow tempo.  Typically it was in a duple meter subdivided into threes (in modern notation, 6/8), and often the dance would be immediately followed by a quick dance, the tordion or pas de Brabant .

[ 5 ] The Burgundian School was the first generation of what is sometimes known as the Netherlands School , several generations of composers spanning 150 years who composed in the polyphonic style associated with the mainstream of Renaissance practice.  Later generations, which were no longer specifically associated with either the court or the region of Burgundy but were interlinked by adjacent geography and by common musical practice, included such names as Johannes Ockeghem , Jacob Obrecht , Josquin des Prez , Adrian Willaert and Orlandus Lassus .

Manuscript sources [ edit ] There are approximately 65 manuscript sources which contain music by Burgundian composers.  The most prominent of these include: Canonici Manuscript (containing music from around 1400 to 1440).  This manuscript is at the Bodleian Library in Oxford, England ; it is named after a previous owner, Matteo Luigi Canonici, an 18th-century Venetian Jesuit.  It has 380 compositions in all, including works by 60 composers.  Both sacred and secular music are well represented in this collection.

Laborde Chansonnier (containing music mainly composed during the reign of Charles the Bold, 1467–1477).  It is named after the Marquis de Laborde, and is presently at the Library of Congress in Washington, DC.  It has 106 pieces of music in all.

Mellon Chansonnier (containing music from approximately 1440 to 1477).  It is named after Paul Mellon , who gave it to Yale University ; currently it is in the Beinecke Library there.  It has 57 compositions, and includes some non-Burgundian music as well (for example, works by contemporary English and Italian composers) Dijon Chansonnier (containing music from approximately 1470 to 1475).  Some of the music is by composers not normally associated with the Burgundian school, such as Ockeghem, Loyset Compère , and Johannes Tinctoris .  It is at the public library in Dijon, and contains 161 pieces of music in all.

El Escorial Chansonnier (containing music from about 1430 to 1445).  It is in the Biblioteca del Monasterio, El Escorial , V.III.24, and is commonly referred to as EscA.  It contains a total of 62 compositions, only one of which is attributed (to Gilles Binchois ), although many of the rest have been assigned to Binchois, Dunstaple, Dufay, and others, on stylistic grounds.

[ 6 ] Burgundian composers [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Johannes Tapissier (c.1370 – c.1410) Guillaume Dufay (?1397–1474) Jean Cousin (b. before 1425, d. after 1475) Hugo de Lantins (fl. c.1430) Arnold de Lantins (fl. c.1430) Johannes Legrant fl. c. 1420–1440 Guillaume Legrant fl. 1405–1449 Reginaldus Libert (fl. c.1425–1435) Gilles Binchois (c.1400–1460) Johannes Brassart (c.1400–1455) Hayne van Ghizeghem (c.1445 – c.1480) Pierre Fontaine (c.1380 – c.1450) Nicolas Grenon (c. 1375 – 1456) Gilles Joye (1424/1425–1483) Robert Morton (c.1430 – c.1479) Antoine Busnois (c.1430 – 1492) Guillaume le Rouge ( fl.

1450–1465) Adrien Basin (fl. 1457–1476) Jacobus Vide (fl. 1405–1433) Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Wright, Grove ^ Reese, pp. 4–8 ^ White, John D. (1976).

The Analysis of Music , pp.129–130.

ISBN 0-13-033233-X .

^ David Fallows. "L'homme armé." In Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online, http://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/subscriber/article/grove/music/16553 (accessed July 22, 2010).

^ Gleason, pp. 101–102.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Gleason, 95–96 [ full citation needed ] References [ edit ] Craig Wright, "Burgundy", in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , ed. Stanley Sadie.  20 vol.  London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1980.

ISBN 1-56159-174-2 Gustave Reese , Music in the Renaissance .  New York, W.W. Norton & Co., 1954.

ISBN 0-393-09530-4 Harold Gleason and Warren Becker, Music in the Middle Ages and Renaissance (Music Literature Outlines Series I).  Bloomington, Indiana.  Frangipani Press, 1986.

ISBN 0-89917-034-X Further reading [ edit ] Walter H. Kemp, Burgundian Court Song in the Time of Binchois:  The Anonymous Chansons of El Escorial, MS V.III.24 .  Oxford, Clarendon Press.  1990.

Wright, Craig (2001).

"Burgundy" .

Grove Music Online . Revised by David Fallows . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.04366 .

(subscription, Wikilibrary access, or UK public library membership required) v t e Burgundian School Composers Adrien Basin Arnold de Lantins Gilles Binchois Antoine Busnois Johannes Cesaris Jean Cousin Pierre Fontaine Hayne van Ghizeghem Nicolas Grenon Gilles Joye Reginaldus Libert Clement Liebert Robert Morton Guillaume le Rouge Johannes Tapissier Jacobus Vide Uncertain Hugo de Lantins Johannes Legrant Influences Guillaume Du Fay John Dunstaple Related Music of Burgundy Franco-Flemish School v t e Composition schools American Five Ars antiqua Ars nova Ars subtilior Bologna Boston Boston Six Burgundian Cologne Colorist Darmstadt English Madrigal English Pastoral English Virginalist English Votive Franco-Flemish Frankfurt Group Ears Open Society Generación del 51 Giovane scuola Grupo de los ocho Grupo de los cuatro Grupo de renovación musical Grupo renovación Khrennikov's Seven Manchester Mannheim The Mighty Five Neapolitan New German New Jewish Neue Einfachheit Ny Enkelhed New York Notre Dame Oeldorf Group Roman Saint Martial Les Six Sonic Arts Union The Turkish Five Venetian Viennese Viennese preclassicism [ de ] First Second Vox Saeculorum Wandelweiser West Coast v t e Renaissance music List of Renaissance composers Early (1400–1470) Alexander Agricola Gilles Binchois Antoine Busnois Loyset Compère Guillaume Du Fay John Dunstaple Walter Frye Heinrich Isaac Jean Japart Johannes Martini Johannes Ockeghem Leonel Power Johannes Tinctoris Gaspar van Weerbeke Oswald von Wolkenstein Middle (1470–1530) Martin Agricola Antoine Brumel Thomas Crecquillon Antonius Divitis Costanzo Festa Antoine de Févin Clément Janequin Cristóbal de Morales Jean Mouton Jacob Obrecht Josquin des Prez Pierre de la Rue John Taverner Philippe Verdelot Adrian Willaert Late (1530) Jacques Arcadelt William Byrd Antonio de Cabezón Jacobus Clemens Andrea Gabrieli Nicolas Gombert Claude Goudimel Francisco Guerrero Claude Le Jeune Orlando di Lasso Vicente Lusitano Pierre de Manchicourt Hans Neusidler Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina Costanzo Porta Cipriano de Rore Thomas Tallis Christopher Tye Tomás Luis de Victoria Giaches de Wert Mannerism and Transition to Baroque c.1600 Gregorio Allegri Thomas Campion John Cooper John Dowland Girolamo Frescobaldi Alfonso Fontanelli Giovanni Gabrieli Carlo Gesualdo Orlando Gibbons Hans Leo Hassler Alonso Lobo Luzzasco Luzzaschi Giovanni de Macque Luca Marenzio Claudio Monteverdi Thomas Morley Jacopo Peri Michael Praetorius Philippe Rogier Heinrich Schütz Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck Composition schools Burgundian Colorists English Madrigal School English Virginalist School English Votive Style Florentine Camerata Franco-Flemish Roman Venetian Musical forms Carol Intermedio Madrigal Magnificat Mass Offertory Pavane Traditions British Cyprus Elizabethan France Germany Italy Netherlands Poland Portugal Spain Music publishing Hieronymus Andreae Andrea Antico Pierre Attaingnant Vittorio Baldini Jacob Bathen Valerio Dorico Antonio Gardano Ottaviano Petrucci Petrus Phalesius the Elder Girolamo Scotto Tielman Susato Thomas Vautrollier Background Early music Renaissance Art Architecture Dance Literature Philosophy ← Medieval music Baroque music → Category Portal v t e Valois Burgundy Dukes Family tree Philip the Bold John the Fearless Philip the Good Charles the Bold Mary the Rich Events Battle of Roosebeke, 1382 Crusade of Nicopolis, 1396 Battle of Othée, 1408 Armagnac–Burgundian Civil War, 1407-1435 Assassination of Louis I, Duke of Orléans, 1407 Cabochien Revolt, 1413 Assassination of John the Fearless, 1419 Treaty of Troyes, 1420 Congress of Arras, 1435 Hook and Cod wars, 1417-1490 Battle of Brouwershaven, 1426 Siege of Deventer, 1456 Revolt of Ghent, 1449–53 Siege of Oudenaarde 1452 Battle of Bazel, 1452 Battle of Gavere, 1453 Feast of the Pheasant, 1454 War of the Common Weal, 1465 Battle of Montlhéry, 1465 Treaty of Conflans, 1465 Wars of Liège, 1465-1468 Battle of Montenaken, 1465 Battle of Brustem, 1467 Treaty of Péronne, 1468 First Utrecht Civil War, 1470-1474 Burgundian Wars, 1474–1477 Battle of Héricourt, 1474 Siege of Neuss, 1474-75 Battle on the Planta, 1475 Battle of Grandson, 1476 Battle of Morat, 1476 Battle of Nancy, 1477 War of the Burgundian Succession, 1477-1482 Battle of Guinegate, 1479 Treaty of Arras, 1482 Second Utrecht Civil War, 1481-1483 Battle of Westbroek, 1481 Siege of Utrecht, 1483 Treaty of Senlis, 1493 Domains Margraviate of Antwerp County of Artois Duchy of Bavaria-Straubing Duchy of Brabant Duchy of Burgundy County of Burgundy County of Charolais County of Eu County of Flanders Frisian freedom Duchy of Guelders County of Hainaut County of Holland Bishopric of Liège Duchy of Limburg Duchy of Lothier Duchy of Luxembourg County of Namur County of Nevers Duchy of Rethel Bishopric of Utrecht County of Zeeland County of Zutphen Institutions Cross of Burgundy Burgundian School Great Privilege Estates-General Order of the Golden Fleece Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Burgundian_School&oldid=1244623365 " Categories : Composition schools Renaissance music Franco-Flemish music European court festivities Duchy of Burgundy Arts in the court of Philip the Good Music organisations based in Belgium Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2020 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2012 All articles needing additional references Interlanguage link template forcing interwiki links This page was last edited on 8 September 2024, at 04:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Burgundian School 13 languages Add topic

