Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Key research 3 Contemporary biocultural anthropology 4 Reception and criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Biocultural anthropology 6 languages العربية Čeština Español فارسی پښتو Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific exploration of the relationships between human biology and culture Biocultural anthropology can be defined in numerous ways. It is the scientific exploration of the relationships between human biology and culture .

[ 1 ] "Instead of looking for the underlying biological roots of human behavior, biocultural anthropology attempts to understand how culture affects our biological capacities and limitations." [ 1 ] History [ edit ] Physical anthropologists throughout the first half of the 20th century viewed this relationship from a racial perspective; that is, from the assumption that typological human biological differences lead to cultural differences.

[ 2 ] After World War II the emphasis began to shift toward an effort to explore the role culture plays in shaping human biology. The shift towards understanding the role of culture to human biology led to the development of Dual inheritance theory in the 1960s. In relation to, and following the development of Dual-inheritance theory, biocultural evolution was introduced and first used in the 1970s.

[ 3 ] Key research [ edit ] Biocultural approaches to human biology have been utilized since at least 1958 when American Biological Anthropologist Frank B. Livingstone contributed early research explaining the linkages among population growth, subsistence strategy, and the distribution of the sickle cell gene in Liberia.

[ 4 ] Human adaptability research in the 1960s focused on two biocultural approaches to fatigue: functional differentiation of skeletal muscles associated with various movements, and human adaptability to modern living involving different work types.

[ 5 ] "What's Cultural about Biocultural Research," Written by William W. Dressler , connects the cultural perspective of biocultural anthropology to "cultural consonance" which is defined as "a model to assess the approximation of an individuals behavior compared to the guiding awareness of his or her culture.

[ 6 ] This research has been used to examine outcomes in blood pressure, depressive symptoms, body composition, and dietary habits.

[ 6 ] Dr. Romendro Khongsdier's approach to the study of human variation and evolution.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] "Building a New Biocultural Synthesis" by Alan H. Goodman and Thomas L. Leatherman.

[ 2 ] "New Directions in Biocultural Anthropology" edited by Molly Zuckerman and Debra Martin uses various case studies from around the world to understand how biocultural anthropology can be used to understand the relationship between biology and culture in both past and present populations.

Contemporary biocultural anthropology [ edit ] Biocultural methods focus on the interactions between humans and their environment to understand human biological adaptation and variation .

[ 9 ] Contemporary biocultural anthropologists view culture as having several key roles in human biological variation: Culture is a major human adaptation, permitting individuals and populations to adapt to widely varying local ecologies .

Characteristic human biological or biobehavioral features, such as a large frontal cortex and intensive parenting compared to other primates, are viewed in part as an adaptation to the complex social relations created by culture.

[ 10 ] Culture shapes the political economy , thereby influencing what resources are available to individuals to feed and shelter themselves, protect themselves from disease, and otherwise maintain their health.

[ 2 ] Culture shapes the way people think about the world, altering their biology by influencing their behavior (e.g., food choice) or more directly through psychosomatic effects (e.g., the biological effects of psychological stress ).

[ 11 ] While biocultural anthropologists are found in many academic anthropology departments, usually as a minority of the faculty, certain departments have placed considerable emphasis on the "biocultural synthesis".  Historically, this has included Emory University , the University of Alabama , UMass Amherst (especially in biocultural bioarchaeology ) [6] [7] , and the University of Washington [8] , each of which built Ph.D.

programs around biocultural anthropology; Binghamton University , which has a M.S.

program in biomedical anthropology; Oregon State University , University of Kentucky and others.

Paul Baker , an anthropologist at Penn State whose work focused upon human adaptation to environmental variations, is credited with having popularized the concept of "biocultural" anthropology as a distinct subcategory of anthropology in general.

[ 12 ] Khongsdier argues that biocultural anthropology is the future of anthropology because it serves as a guiding force towards greater integration of the subdisciplines .

[ 13 ] Reception and criticism [ edit ] This section may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the section . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Modern anthropologists, both biological and cultural , have criticized the biocultural synthesis, generally as part of a broader critique of " four-field holism " in U.S. anthropology (see anthropology main article). Typically such criticisms rest on the belief that biocultural anthropology imposes holism upon the biological and cultural subfields without adding value, or even destructively.  For instance, contributors in the edited volume Unwrapping the Sacred Bundle: Reflections on the Disciplining of Anthropology [ 14 ] argued that the biocultural synthesis, and anthropological holism more generally, are artifacts from 19th century social evolutionary thought that inappropriately impose scientific positivism upon cultural anthropology .

Some departments of anthropology have fully split, usually dividing scientific from humanistic anthropologists, such as Stanford's highly publicized 1998 division into departments of "Cultural and Social Anthropology" and "Anthropological Sciences". Underscoring the continuing controversy, this split is now being reversed over the objections of some faculty.

[ 15 ] Other departments, such as at Harvard , have distinct biological and sociocultural anthropology "wings" not designed to foster cross subdisciplinary interchange.

Biocultural research has shown to contain a few challenges to the researcher.  "In general we are much more experienced in measuring the biological than the cultural. It is also difficult to precisely define what is meant by constructs such as socioeconomic status, poverty, rural, and urban. Operationalizing key variables so that they can be measured in ways that are enthnographically valid as well as replicable. Defining and measuring multiple causal pathways." [ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Biocultural evolution Cultural neuroscience Evolutionary anthropology Sociocultural anthropology References [ edit ] ^ a b "Principles of Biocultural Anthropology" .

spot.colorado.edu . Archived from the original on 2018-07-02 . Retrieved 2016-10-13 .

^ a b c Goodman, Alan H.; Thomas L. Leatherman, eds. (1998).

Building A New Biocultural Synthesis . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-472-06606-3 .

^ "Biocultural Evolution–An Overview" .

The Biocultural Evolution Blog . 2013-05-22 . Retrieved 2016-12-20 .

^ a b Dufour, Darna L. (2006-01-01). "Biocultural approaches in human biology".

American Journal of Human Biology .

18 (1): 1– 9.

doi : 10.1002/ajhb.20463 .

ISSN 1042-0533 .

PMID 16378343 .

S2CID 23008131 .

^ Mascie-Taylor, C. G. Nicholas; Yasukouchi, Akira; Ulijaszek, Stanley (2010-03-17).

Human Variation: From the Laboratory to the Field . CRC Press.

ISBN 9781420084740 .

^ a b "medanth - Cultural Consonance" .

medanth.wikispaces.com . Archived from the original on 2018-02-04 . Retrieved 2016-12-20 .

^ "Bio-culture approach" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-01-22.

^ Chakraborty, Raja; Bose, Kaushik; Khongsdier, Romendro; Bisai, Samiran (August 2009).

"Obesity" .

Obesity Research & Clinical Practice .

3 (3): 141– 148.

doi : 10.1016/j.orcp.2009.03.003 .

PMID 24345584 .

S2CID 1210643 .

^ "Biocultural Anthropology - Anthropology - Oxford Bibliographies - obo" . Retrieved 2016-12-20 .

^ Geary, David C.; Flinn, Mark V. (2001). "The evolution of human parental behavior and the human family".

Parenting: Science and Practice .

1 (1): 5– 61.

doi : 10.1207/S15327922PAR011&2_2 .

^ Hruschka, Daniel J.; Lende, Daniel H.; Worthman, Carol M. (2005). "Biocultural dialogues: Biology and culture in Psychological Anthropology".

Ethos .

33 : 1– 19.

doi : 10.1525/eth.2005.33.1.001 .

^ Bindon, James R. (2007). "Biocultural linkages — cultural consensus, cultural consonance, and human biological research".

Collegium Antropologicum .

31 (1): 3– 10.

PMID 17600914 .

^ Khongsdier, R. (2007). "Biocultural approach: The essence of anthropological study in the 21st century".

Anthropologist .

3 : 39– 50.

^ Segal, Daniel A. (2005). Sylvia J. Yanagisako; James Clifford; Ian Hodder; Rena Lederman; Michael Silverstein (eds.).

Unwrapping the Sacred Bundle: Reflections on the Disciplining of Anthropology . Duke University Press. Archived from the original on 2007-09-03 . Retrieved 2019-06-09 .

introduction: [1] Archived 2007-08-09 at the Wayback Machine reviews: [2] [3] [4] [5] ^ Anthropology departments instructed to form combined unit External links [ edit ] Essays [9] by Prof. Jack Kelso v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biocultural_anthropology&oldid=1305491272 " Categories : Anthropology Sociobiology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2018 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 10:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biocultural anthropology 6 languages Add topic

