Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Miskawayh 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Magyar مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Português Qaraqalpaqsha Русский سرائیکی سنڌي کوردی Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Persian philosopher and historian ( 932–1030) Ibn Miskawayh مُسکویه Personal life Born 932 Parandak, ( Ziyarid Iran ) Died 1030 Ray , ( Kakuyid Iran ) [ 1 ] Era Islamic Golden Age Region Iran Main interest(s) History , Theology , medicine , ethics and philosophy Notable work(s) Kitab al hayawan (The book of animal life) تهذيب الأخلاق (Ethical Instruction) Al-Fawz al-Asghar Tajarib al-umam (Experiences of Nations) Religious life Religion Islam Muslim leader Influenced by Adurbad-e Mahrspandan , al-Kindi [ citation needed ] Influenced Nasir al-Din Tusi , Mulla Sadra Ibn Miskuyah ( Persian : مُسْکُـوْيَه Muskūyah, 932–1030), ( Arabic : مِسْكَوَيْه، أبو علي محمد بن أحمد بن يعقوب مسكويه الرازي) full name Abū ʿAlī Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Yaʿqūb Miskawayh al-Rāzī [ 2 ] was a Persian [ 3 ] chancery official of the Buyid era , and philosopher and historian from Parandak, Iran . As a Neoplatonist , his influence on Islamic philosophy is primarily in the area of ethics . He was the author of the first major Islamic work on philosophical ethics entitled the Refinement of Character ( تهذيب الأخلاق Tah dh īb al - A kh lāq ), focusing on practical ethics, conduct, and the refinement of character. He separated personal ethics from the public realm, and contrasted the liberating nature of reason with the deception and temptation of nature. Miskawayh was a prominent figure in the intellectual and cultural life of his time.

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Miskawayh was born in Rey , then under Ziyarid control. Miskawayh may have been a Zoroastrian convert to Islam , but it seems more likely that it was one of his ancestors who converted.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] During his early career, he spent his life in Baghdad , where he served as the secretary of Muhallabi, the vizier of the Buyid emir Mu'izz al-Dawla . He was fluent enough in Middle Persian to have translated some pre-Islamic texts in that language into Arabic.

[ citation needed ] After a long service to the Buyids of Iraq, Miskawayh moved to the court of Rukn al-Dawla , where he spent seven years working there with the Buyid vizier Abu 'l-Fadl ibn al-'Amid . In 966, a group of ghazi marched towards the Library of Rey, but Miskawayh managed to save it.

[ 3 ] After the death of Abu'l-Fadl ibn al-'Amid in 970, Miskawayh continued to serve the latter's son, Abu'l-Fath. In 975, he, along with him, left for Baghdad .

He later worked as a secretary and librarian for a sequence of viziers, including 'Adud al-Dawla . Some contemporary sources associated him with the Brethren of Purity , claiming that some of his writings were used in the compilation of the Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity .

[ 5 ] Miskawayh died in 1030 at Ray , [ 1 ] then under Kakuyid control.

Works [ edit ] Al-Fawz al-Akbar ( الفوز الأكبر ) - 'The Greatest Victory' contains a Neoplatonic description of the evolution of the soul. The work states that creation begins with God, with the intellect being the first existence to emanate from him. A series of emanations from the intellect results in a chain of being , starting with minerals and proceeding through vegetables, animals, and humans, which results in a cyclic spiritual evolution back to the source of man's creation: God.

[ 6 ] The Indian Islamic scholar Muhammad Hamidullah compared Miskawayh's views to Darwinian evolutionary thought.

[ 7 ] Tajārib al-Umam ( كتاب تجارب الأمم ) - 'Experiences of Nations' is one of the first eyewitness chronicles of contemporary events by a Muslim historian . Miskawayh, as an official under the Buyid vizier al-Muhallabi, had access to the internal happenings of the court. The chronicle is a universal history from the beginning of Islam, but it cuts off near the end of the reign of 'Adud al-Dawla.

Tahdhib al'Akhlaq wa Tathir al'Araq ( تهذيب الأخلاق و تطهير الأعراق ) - 'Refinement of Morals and Cleansing of Ethics' his major work in the field of philosophy treats principally the philosophy of ethics and was written for students.

Kitab al-Hikma al-Khalida ( كتاب الحكمة الخالدة ) - 'Book of Eternal Wisdom' is an Arabic translation from the Persian work Eternal Wisdom ( Persian : جاویدان خرد ).

[ 3 ] One manuscript is titled Book of Literatures of the Arabs and Persians ( كتاب آداب العرب والفرس ).

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] List of Muslim historians List of Shia Muslims References [ edit ] ^ a b Britannica, The Editors of Encyclopaedia. "Ibn Miskawayh". Encyclopedia Britannica, 1 Jan. 2023, https://www.britannica.com/biography/Ibn-Miskawayh . Accessed 12 May 2023.

^ Bosworth, C. E.

; van Donzel, E.; Heinrichs, W. P.; et al., eds. (1993).

Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. 7: Mif-Naz (2nd ed.). Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp.

143– 144.

ISBN 9004094199 . Retrieved 19 August 2015 .

^ a b c d e f "Miskawayh" at Encyclopædia Iranica ^ Arkoun, M.

(1993). "Miskawayh". In H. A. R. Gibb (ed.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam . Vol. 7 (New ed.). Leiden—New York: E.J. Brill. pp.

143a – 144b .

ISBN 978-90-04-15610-4 .

^ Nasr, Hossein (1993).

An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-1-4384-1419-5 .

, page = 26 ^ Mohamed, Yasein (2000).

"The Cosmology of Ikhwan al-Safa', Miskawayh and al-Isfahâni" .

Islamic Studies .

39 (4): 10– 15.

JSTOR 23076118 .

^ Adamec, Ludwig W. (2017).

Historical Dictionary of Islam . Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group. pp.

290– 291.

ISBN 978-1442277236 .

[These books] state that God first created matter and invested it with energy for development. Matter, therefore, adopted the form of vapour which assumed the shape of water in due time. The next stage of development was mineral life. Different kinds of stones developed in course of time. Their highest form being mirjan (coral). It is a stone which has in it branches like those of a tree. After mineral life evolves vegetation. The evolution of vegetation culminates with a tree which bears the qualities of an animal. This is the date-palm. It has male and female genders. It does not wither if all its branches are chopped but it dies when the head is cut off. The date-palm is therefore considered the highest among the trees and resembles the lowest among animals. Then is born the lowest of animals. It evolves into an ape. This is not the statement of Darwin. This is what Ibn Miskawayh states and this is precisely what is written in the Epistles of Ikhwan al-Safa. The Muslim thinkers state that ape then evolved into a lower kind of a barbarian man. He then became a superior human being. Man becomes a saint, a prophet. He evolves into a higher stage and becomes an angel. The one higher to angels is indeed none but God. Everything begins from Him and everything returns to Him.

Sources [ edit ] Bosworth, C. E.

(2002).

"Meskawayh, Abu' Ali Aḥmad" .

Encyclopædia Iranica, online edition . New York.

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Emami, Abu'l-Qassem; Umar, Suheyl (2008).

"Abū ʿAlī Miskawayh" . In Madelung, Wilferd ; Daftary, Farhad (eds.).

Encyclopaedia Islamica Online . Brill Online.

ISSN 1875-9831 .

Ibn Miskawayh, Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad (1329).

Kitāb Tahdhīb al-akhlāq wa-taṭhīr al-aʻrāq (in Arabic).

Cairo : al-Maṭbaʻah al-Ḥusaynīyah.

Ibn Miskawaih, Ahmad ibn Muhammad (1917) [1909].

Caetani , Leone (ed.).

The Tajârib al-umam; or, History of Ibn Miskawayh (in Arabic). Vol. 5&6. London: Luzac.

v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah v t e Alchemy in the medieval Islamic world Alchemists 8th century pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana 9th century Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) 10th century Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya Maslama al-Qurṭubī Abū Manṣūr al-Muwaffaq al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) 11th century pseudo-Avicenna al-Khawārizmī al-Kāthī al-Muʿizz ibn Bādīs Aḥmad ibn ʿImād al-Dīn Ibn al-Wāfid (pharmacist) 12th century al-Ṭughrāʾī Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Artephius 13th century al-Simāwī Ibn al-Bayṭār (pharmacist) Abū l-ʿAbbās al-Nabātī (pharmacist) Ḥasan al-Rammāḥ (engineer) 14th century al-Jildakī Ibn al-Rassām Abū l-Ashbā ibn Tammām Concepts Takwin Philosopher's stone al-iksīr Alembic Athanor Works Book of Mercy Books of the Balances al-Burhān fī asrār ʿilm al-mīzān Masāʾil Khālid li-Maryānus al-rāhib Emerald Tablet Five Hundred Books al-ʿIlm al-muktasab fī zirāʿat al-dhahab Mifthāḥ al-ḥikma ( Clavis sapientiae ) al-Miṣbāḥ fī ʿilm al-miftāḥ Nabataean Agriculture One Hundred and Twelve Books Seventy Books Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Turba Philosophorum Nihāyat al-rutba fī ṭalab al-ḥisba (al-Nabarawi) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Miskawayh&oldid=1295153278 " Categories : 932 births 1030 deaths 10th-century Arabic-language writers 10th-century Iranian historians 10th-century Iranian philosophers 11th-century Arabic-language writers 11th-century Iranian historians 11th-century Iranian philosophers Alchemists of the medieval Islamic world Historians under the Buyid dynasty Buyid officials Medieval Islamic philosophers Iranian historians of Islam People from Ray, Iran 10th-century Shia Muslims 11th-century Shia Muslims Iranian Arabic-language writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 Pages using infobox religious biography with unsupported parameters Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Miskawayh 35 languages Add topic

