Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Seafloor hydrothermal circulation 2 Volcanic and magma related hydrothermal circulation 3 Deep crust Toggle Deep crust subsection 3.1 Hydrothermal ore deposits 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Hydrothermal circulation 21 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Circulation of water driven by heat exchange "Hydrothermal" redirects here. For use in geochemistry/mineralogy, see Hydrothermal synthesis .

Hydrothermal circulation in its most general sense is the circulation of hot water ( Ancient Greek ὕδωρ, water , [ 1 ] and θέρμη, heat [ 1 ] ). Hydrothermal circulation occurs most often in the vicinity of sources of heat within the Earth's crust . In general, this occurs near volcanic activity, [ 2 ] but can occur in the shallow to mid crust along deeply penetrating fault irregularities or in the deep crust related to the intrusion of granite , or as the result of orogeny or metamorphism . Hydrothermal circulation often results in hydrothermal mineral deposits .

Seafloor hydrothermal circulation [ edit ] Hydrothermal circulation in the oceans is the passage of the water through mid-oceanic ridge systems.

The term includes both the circulation of the well-known, high-temperature vent waters near the ridge crests, and the much-lower-temperature, diffuse flow of water through sediments and buried basalts further from the ridge crests.

[ 3 ] The former circulation type is sometimes termed "active", and the latter "passive".  In both cases, the principle is the same: Cold, dense seawater sinks into the basalt of the seafloor and is heated at depth whereupon it rises back to the rock-ocean water interface due to its lesser density.  The heat source for the active vents is the newly formed basalt, and, for the highest temperature vents, the underlying magma chamber.  The heat source for the passive vents is the still-cooling older basalts.  Heat flow studies of the seafloor suggest that basalts within the oceanic crust take millions of years to completely cool as they continue to support passive hydrothermal circulation systems.

Hydrothermal vents are locations on the seafloor where hydrothermal fluids mix into the overlying ocean.

[ 4 ] Perhaps the best-known vent forms are the naturally occurring chimneys referred to as black smokers .

[ 4 ] Volcanic and magma related hydrothermal circulation [ edit ] Taal Volcano Main Crater Lake , where hydrothermal circulating convection cells exist Hydrothermal circulation is not limited to ocean ridge environments. Hydrothermal circulating convection cells can exist in any place an anomalous source of heat, such as an intruding magma or volcanic vent, comes into contact with the groundwater system where permeability allows flow.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] This convection can manifest as hydrothermal explosions , geysers , and hot springs , although this is not always the case.

[ 5 ] Hydrothermal circulation above magma bodies has been intensively studied in the context of geothermal projects where many deep wells are drilled into the system to produce and subsequently re-inject the hydrothermal fluids.  The detailed data sets available from this work show the long term persistence of these systems, the development of fluid circulation patterns, histories that can be influenced by renewed magmatism, fault movement, or changes associated with hydrothermal brecciation and eruption sometimes followed by massive cold water invasion.  Less direct but as intensive study has focused on the minerals deposited especially in the upper parts of hydrothermal circulation systems.

Understanding volcanic and magma-related hydrothermal circulation means studying hydrothermal explosions, geysers, hot springs, and other related systems and their interactions with associated surface water and groundwater bodies.

[ 5 ] A good environment to observe this phenomenon is in volcanogenic lakes where hot springs and geysers are commonly present.

[ 5 ] The convection systems in these lakes work through cold lake water percolating downward through the permeable lake bed, mixing with groundwater heated by magma or residual heat, and rising to form thermal springs at discharge points.

[ 5 ] The existence of hydrothermal convection cells and hot springs or geysers in these environments depends not only on the presence of a colder water body and geothermal heat but also strongly depends on a no-flow boundary at the water table.

[ 5 ] These systems can develop their own boundaries.  For example the water level represents a fluid pressure condition that leads to gas exsolution or boiling that in turn causes intense mineralization that can seal cracks.

Deep crust [ edit ] Hydrothermal also refers to the transport and circulation of water within the deep crust, in general from areas of hot rocks to areas of cooler rocks. The causes for this convection can be: Intrusion of magma into the crust Radioactive heat generated by cooled masses of granite Heat from the mantle Hydraulic head from mountain ranges, for example, the Great Artesian Basin Dewatering of metamorphic rocks, which liberates water Dewatering of deeply buried sediments Hydrothermal circulation, in particular in the deep crust, is a primary cause of mineral deposit formation and a cornerstone of most theories on ore genesis .

Hydrothermal ore deposits [ edit ] During the early 1900s, various geologists worked to classify hydrothermal ore deposits that they assumed formed from upward-flowing aqueous solutions.

Waldemar Lindgren (1860–1939) developed a classification based on interpreted decreasing temperature and pressure conditions of the depositing fluid. His terms: "hypothermal", "mesothermal", "epithermal" and "teleothermal", expressed decreasing temperature and increasing distance from a deep source.

[ 7 ] Recent studies retain only the epithermal label.  John Guilbert's 1985 revision of Lindgren's system for hydrothermal deposits includes the following: [ 8 ] Ascending hydrothermal fluids, magmatic or meteoric water Porphyry copper and other deposits, 200–800 °C, moderate pressure Igneous metamorphic, 300–800 °C, low to moderate pressure Cordilleran veins, intermediate to shallow depths Epithermal, shallow to intermediate, 50–300 °C, low pressure Circulating heated meteoric solutions Mississippi Valley-type deposits , 25–200 °C, low pressure Western US uranium , 25–75 °C, low pressure Circulating heated seawater Oceanic ridge deposits , 25–300 °C, low pressure See also [ edit ] Volcanogenic massive sulfide ore deposit Geothermal gradient Hydrothermal synthesis References [ edit ] ^ a b Liddell, H.G. & Scott, R. (1940).

A Greek-English Lexicon. revised and augmented throughout by Sir Henry Stuart Jones. with the assistance of. Roderick McKenzie.

Oxford: Clarendon Press.

^ Donoghue, Eleanor; Troll, Valentin R.; Harris, Chris; O'Halloran, Aoife; Walter, Thomas R.; Pérez Torrado, Francisco J. (15 October 2008).

"Low-temperature hydrothermal alteration of intra-caldera tuffs, Miocene Tejeda caldera, Gran Canaria, Canary Islands" .

Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research .

176 (4): 551– 564.

Bibcode : 2008JVGR..176..551D .

doi : 10.1016/j.jvolgeores.2008.05.002 .

ISSN 0377-0273 .

^ Wright, John; Rothery, David A. (1998), "Hydrothermal circulation in oceanic crust" , The Ocean Basins: Their Structure and Evolution , Elsevier, pp.

96– 123, doi : 10.1016/b978-075063983-5/50006-0 , ISBN 978-0-7506-3983-5 , retrieved 11 February 2021 ^ a b German, C.R.; Seyfried, W.E. (2014), "Hydrothermal Processes" , Treatise on Geochemistry , Elsevier, pp.

191– 233, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-08-095975-7.00607-0 , ISBN 978-0-08-098300-4 , retrieved 11 February 2021 ^ a b c d e f Bayani Cardenas, M.; Lagmay, Alfredo Mahar F.

; Andrews, Benjamin J.; Rodolfo, Raymond S.; Cabria, Hillel B.; Zamora, Peter B.; Lapus, Mark R. (January 2012).

"Terrestrial smokers: Thermal springs due to hydrothermal convection of groundwater connected to surface water: SPRINGS DUE TO HYDROTHERMAL CONVECTION" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

39 (2): n/a.

doi : 10.1029/2011GL050475 .

^ Donoghue, Eleanor; Troll, Valentin R.; Harris, Chris; O'Halloran, Aoife; Walter, Thomas R.; Pérez Torrado, Francisco J. (October 2008).

"Low-temperature hydrothermal alteration of intra-caldera tuffs, Miocene Tejeda caldera, Gran Canaria, Canary Islands" .

Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research .

176 (4): 551– 564.

Bibcode : 2008JVGR..176..551D .

doi : 10.1016/j.jvolgeores.2008.05.002 .

^ W. Lindgren, 1933, Mineral Deposits , McGraw Hill, 4th ed.

^ Guilbert, John M. and Charles F. Park, Jr., 1986, The Geology of Ore Deposits , Freeman, p. 302 ISBN 0-7167-1456-6 v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hydrothermal_circulation&oldid=1296769859 " Categories : Geological processes Physical oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2025 This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 04:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hydrothermal circulation 21 languages Add topic

