Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Notable artists 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Return to order 5 languages Deutsch Français Italiano Nederlands 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia European art movement For the US traditionalist Catholic campaign, see American Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family and Property .

Pablo Picasso , 1921, Head of a woman , pastel on paper, 65.1 x 50.2 cm, Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York The Return to Order ( French : retour à l'ordre ) was a European art movement following the First World War that rejected the extreme avant-garde art of the years up to 1918 and emphasized the classical ideals of order and rationality. The movement is often thought to be a reaction to the war, though strands of the Return to Order began before its outbreak, such as the Noucentista movement in Spain.

Futurism , which had praised machinery, dynamism, violence and war, was rejected by most of its adherents. The return to order was associated with a revival of classicism and representational painting. Among the many artists who participated in the movement were notable figures in modernism such as Picasso and Braque , Matisse , Cezanne , Renoir , and much of the Italian Futurists .

Artists of the Return to Order placed high emphasis on the classical ideals of rationality, quality of line, illusionism and order, in opposition to the preceding decades of irrationality and emotional turbulence which characterised the artworks of the avant-garde. Although taking classicism as its foundational inspiration, artists were keen to re-interpret the essence of classical art through the lens of modernism, and a link was often made between the idealism of the classical period and the “Plastic-like” art of the modern era. Many of the works made during the period display modernist tendencies alongside classical subjects and techniques.

This change of direction was reflected and encouraged by the magazine Valori plastici published in Italian and French from 1918 to 1922.  The term return to order to describe this renewed interest in tradition is said to derive from Le rappel à l'ordre , a book of essays by the poet and artist Jean Cocteau published in 1926.

Notable artists [ edit ] Pablo Picasso Andre Derain Georges Braque Salvador Dalí Giorgio de Chirico Mariano Andreu Felice Casorati Pierre-Auguste Renoir Paul Cézanne Gallery [ edit ] Painting by Renoir that displays an emphasis on line and clarity Pablo Picasso, Example of the classical principles of art during the return to order.

Painting of a landscape with family, Marino Andreu "The Seamstresses", Massimo Campigli, 1925. Displays elements of modernism alongside classical aspects.

A portrait by Felice Casorati, displaying very strong elements of classical influence.

Still Life by Le Corbusier, 1920, which blends the geometric cubist style with classical techniques of shading and representation, as well as order and clarity.

Still Life by Andre Derain, a forerunner of the fauvist movement.

See also [ edit ] Arts portal Corrente di Vita Novecento Italiano Scuola Romana Crystal Cubism Purism Neoclassicism References [ edit ] Tate Gallery International Herald Tribune On Classic Ground v t e Novecento Italiano Artists Giacomo Balla Anselmo Bucci Pompeo Borra Aldo Carpi Carlo Carrà Felice Casorati Giorgio de Chirico Raffaele De Grada Fortunato Depero Antonio Donghi Ercole Drei Leonardo Dudreville Guido Farina Achille Funi Virgilio Guidi Achille Lega Betto Lotti Gian Emilio Malerba Arrigo Renato Marzola Arturo Martini Guido Marussig Pietro Marussig Francesco Messina Giuseppe Migneco Giuseppe Montanari Giorgio Morandi Giovanni Muzio Roberto Narducci Ubaldo Oppi René Paresce Ugo Piatti Gio Ponti Gino Severini Mario Sironi Arturo Tosi Mario Tozzi Adolfo Wildt Related "900", Cahiers d'Italie et d'Europe Return to order Margherita Sarfatti Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Return_to_order&oldid=1275238909 " Categories : 20th century in art Neoclassical movements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 21:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Return to order 5 languages Add topic

