Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Employment 2 Diversification 3 Regulation 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Private sector 34 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית Kiswahili Livvinkarjala مصرى Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Private industry ) Economic sector not under state control Economic sectors Three-sector model Primary sector ( raw materials ) Secondary sector ( goods manufacturing ) Tertiary sector ( services ) Additional sectors Quaternary sector (information services) Quinary sector (human services) Theorists AGB Fisher Colin Clark Jean Fourastié Sectors by ownership Business sector Private sector Public sector Voluntary sector v t e The private sector is  the part of the economy which is  owned by private groups, usually as a means of establishment for profit or non profit , rather than being owned by the government .

Employment [ edit ] The private sector employs most of the workforce in some countries. In private sector, activities are guided by the motive to earn money, i.e. operate by capitalist standards.

A 2013 study by the International Finance Corporation (part of the World Bank Group ) identified that 90 percent of jobs in developing countries are in the private sector.

[ 1 ] Diversification [ edit ] In free enterprise countries, such as the United States , the private sector is wider, and the state places fewer constraints on firms. In countries with more government authority, such as China , the public sector makes up most of the economy.

[ 2 ] Regulation [ edit ] States   legally regulate the private sector.

Businesses operating within a country must comply with the laws in that country. In some cases, usually involving multinational corporations that can pick and choose their suppliers and locations based on their perception of the regulatory environment, local state regulations have resulted in uneven practices within one company. For example, workers in one country may benefit from strong labour unions , while workers in another country have very weak laws supporting labour unions, even though they work for the same employer. In some cases, industries and individual businesses choose self-regulation by applying higher standards for dealing with their workers, customers, or the environment than the minimum that is legally required of them.

[ 3 ] There can be negative effects from the private sector. In the early 1980s, the Corrections Corporation of America pioneered the idea of running prisons for a profit. Today, corporate-run prisons hold eight percent of America's inmates. Since it is from the private sector, their main priority is not rehabilitation, but profit. This has resulted in many human rights violations across the United States.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Economics portal Company law – Body of law that governs businesses Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Free enterprise – Form of market-based economy Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Private enterprise – Business which is not publicly traded Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Private law – Civil legal system involving relationships between individuals Private military company – Company providing armed combat or security services Private school – School that is not dependent upon the state Private sector development – Term in the international development industry Private sector involvement – Cut in the value of private sector's holdings of debt Privatization – Transferring something from the public sphere to the private Public economics – Study of government economic and fiscal policy Public-private partnership – Government/private company partnership Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Public sector – Public part of the economy Three-sector model – Model in economics Voluntary sector – Social activity undertaken by non-governmental nonprofit organizations; "third sector" References [ edit ] ^ "IFC Jobs Study : Assessing Private Sector Contributions to Job Creation and Poverty Reduction" . January 2013.

^ Rouse, Margaret (August 2013).

"What is private sector? - Definition from WhatIs.com" .

Tech Target . Retrieved July 16, 2017 .

^ Haufler, Virginia (2013-01-25).

A Public Role for the Private Sector: Industry Self-Regulation in a Global Economy . Carnegie Endowment.

ISBN 9780870033377 .

^ Bauer, Shane. "Private prisons are shrouded in secrecy. I took a job as a guard to get inside-then things got crazy."Mother Jones. N.p., 06 June 2017. Web. 10 June 2017.

Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Private_sector&oldid=1285221940 " Categories : Private sector Economic sectors Capitalism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 12 April 2025, at 12:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Private sector 34 languages Add topic

