Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Early career 3 In Vienna 4 In London 5 United States and Canada 6 Selected works 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Karl Polanyi 39 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Corsu Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economist, philosopher and historian (1886–1964) The native form of this personal name is Polányi Károly . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

Karl Polanyi Polanyi, c.

1918 Born 25 October 1886 Vienna , Austria-Hungary Died 23 April 1964 (1964-04-23) (aged 77) Pickering, Ontario , Canada Spouse Ilona Duczynska ​ ( m.

1923) ​ Children Kari Polanyi Levitt Relatives Michael Polanyi (brother) John Polanyi (nephew) Eva Zeisel (niece) Academic background Influences Robert Owen , Bronisław Malinowski , G. D. H. Cole , Richard Tawney , Richard Thurnwald , Karl Marx , Aristotle , Karl Bücher , Heinrich Schurtz , Ferdinand Tönnies , Adam Smith , Alfred Radcliffe-Brown , Werner Sombart , Max Weber , György Lukács , Carl Menger Academic work Discipline Economic sociology , economic history , economic anthropology , Philosophy School or tradition Historical school of economics Notable ideas Embeddedness , Double Movement , fictitious commodities , economistic fallacy , the formalist–substantivist debate ( substantivism ) Influenced Fred L. Block , Margaret Somers , Kari Polanyi Levitt Part of a series on Economic , applied , and development anthropology Basic concepts Barter Commodification Cultural capital Debt Embeddedness Finance Gift economy Inalienable possessions Limited good Reciprocity Redistribution Value Wealth Singularization (commodity pathway) Social capital Spheres of exchange Provisioning systems Hunting-gathering Moral economy Nomadic pastoralism Pastoralism Peasant economics Shifting cultivation Case studies Prestations Kula ring Moka exchange Potlatch Gifting Gifting remittances Organ gifting Shell money Provisioning Aché people (hunter-gatherers) Batek people Colonialism and development The Anti-Politics Machine Europe and the People Without History Political economy Jim Crow economy Related articles Anthropology of development Critique of political economy Culture of poverty Formalist–substantivist debate The Great Transformation Heritage commodification Nutritional anthropology Original affluent society Peasant economics Political economy State formation Major theorists Paul Bohannan Alexander Chayanov Stanley Diamond Raymond Firth Maurice Godelier David Graeber Jane I. Guyer Keith Hart Marvin Harris Bronisław Malinowski Marcel Mauss Sidney Mintz Karl Polanyi Marshall Sahlins Heinrich Schurtz Harold K. Schneider Eric Wolf Social and cultural anthropology v t e Karl Paul Polanyi ( / p oʊ ˈ l æ n j i / ; Hungarian : Polányi Károly [ˈpolaːɲi ˈkaːroj] ; 25 October 1886 – 23 April 1964) [ 1 ] was an Austro-Hungarian economic anthropologist , economic sociologist , and politician, [ 2 ] best known for his book The Great Transformation , which questions the conceptual validity of self-regulating markets.

[ 3 ] In his writings, Polanyi advances the concept of the Double Movement , which refers to the dialectical process of marketization and push for social protection against that marketization. He argues that market-based societies in modern Europe were not inevitable but historically contingent. Polanyi is remembered best as the originator of substantivism , a cultural version of economics, which emphasizes the way economies are embedded in society and culture. This opinion is counter to mainstream economics but is popular in anthropology , economic history , economic sociology and political science .

Polanyi's approach to the ancient economies has been applied to a variety of cases, such as Pre-Columbian America and ancient Mesopotamia , although its utility to the study of ancient societies in general has been questioned.

[ 4 ] Polanyi's The Great Transformation became a model for historical sociology . His theories eventually became the foundation for the economic democracy movement.

Polanyi was active in politics, and helped found the National Citizens' Radical Party in 1914, serving as its secretary. He fled Hungary for Vienna in 1919 when the right-wing authoritarian regime of Admiral Horthy seized power. He fled Vienna for London in 1933 when Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany and fascism was on the ascendancy in Austria. After years of unsuccessfully seeking employment at universities in the United Kingdom, he moved to the United States in 1940 where he joined the faculty at Bennington College and later taught at Columbia University .

Early life [ edit ] Karl Polanyi was born in Vienna and raised in Budapest by a German‑speaking Jewish family assimilating into the secular middle class.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] His younger brother was Michael Polanyi , a philosopher , and his niece was Eva Zeisel , a world-renowned ceramist .

[ 7 ] He was born in Vienna , at the time the capital of the Austro-Hungarian Empire .

[ 8 ] His father, Mihály Pollacsek , was a railway entrepreneur. Mihály never changed the name Pollacsek , and is buried in the Jewish cemetery in Budapest. Mihály died in January 1905, which was an emotional shock to Karl, and he commemorated the anniversary of Mihály's death throughout his life.

[ 9 ] Karl and Michael Polanyi's mother was Cecília Wohl . The name change to Polanyi was made by Karl and his siblings.

Polanyi was well educated despite the ups and downs of his father's fortune, and he immersed himself in Budapest 's active intellectual and artistic scene. Polanyi studied at the Minta Gymnasium .

[ 10 ] Early career [ edit ] Polanyi founded the radical and influential Galileo Circle while at the University of Budapest , a club which would have far reaching effects on Hungarian intellectual thought. During this time, he was actively engaged with other notable thinkers, such as György Lukács , Oszkár Jászi , and Karl Mannheim . Polanyi graduated from Budapest University in 1912 with a doctorate in Law . In 1914, he helped found the National Citizens' Radical Party of Hungary and served as its secretary .

[ citation needed ] Polanyi was a cavalry officer in the Austro-Hungarian Army in World War I , in active service at the Russian Front and hospitalized in Budapest. Polanyi supported the republican government of Mihály Károlyi and its Social Democratic regime. The republic was short-lived, with socialist Béla Kun toppling the Karolyi government to create the Hungarian Soviet Republic . Polanyi left Hungary for Vienna in order to undergo medical treatment. During this time, the Kun government was replaced by the right-wing authoritarian regime of Admiral Horthy .

[ 11 ] As a consequence, Polanyi left Hungary permanently.

[ 6 ] [ 11 ] In Vienna [ edit ] From 1924 to 1933, he was employed as a senior editor of the prestigious Der Österreichische Volkswirt ( The Austrian Economist ) magazine. It was at this time that he first began criticizing the Austrian school of economics , who he felt created abstract models which lost sight of the organic, interrelated reality of economic processes. Polanyi himself was attracted to Fabianism and the works of G. D. H. Cole . It was also during this period that Polanyi grew interested in Christian socialism .

He married the communist revolutionary Ilona Duczyńska , of Polish-Hungarian background. Their daughter Kari Polanyi Levitt carried on the family tradition of economic academic research.

In London [ edit ] Polanyi was asked to resign from Der Oesterreichische Volkswirt because the liberal publisher of the journal could not keep on a prominent socialist after the accession of Hitler to office in January 1933 and the suspension of the Austrian parliament by the rising tide of clerical fascism in Austria. He left for London in 1933, where he earned a living as a journalist and tutor and obtained a position as a lecturer for the Workers' Educational Association in 1936. His lecture notes contained the research for what later became The Great Transformation . However, he would not start writing this work until 1940, when he moved to Vermont to take up a position at Bennington College . Polanyi had for many years sought employment at British universities but was unsuccessful.

[ 6 ] The book was published in 1944, to great acclaim.

[ 12 ] In it, Polanyi described the enclosure process in England and the creation of the contemporary economic system at the beginning of the 19th century.

[ citation needed ] United States and Canada [ edit ] Polanyi joined the staff of Bennington College in 1940, teaching a series of five timely lectures on the "Present Age of Transformation".

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The lectures "The Passing of the 19th Century", [ 15 ] "The Trend Towards an Integrated Society", [ 16 ] "The Breakdown of the International System", [ 17 ] "Is America an Exception?", [ 18 ] and "Marxism and the Inner History of the Russian Revolution" [ 19 ] took place during the early stages of World War II. Polanyi participated in Bennington's Humanism Lecture Series (1941) [ 20 ] and Bennington College 's Lecture Series (1943) where his topic was " Jean Jacques Rousseau : Or Is a Free Society Possible?" [ 21 ] After the war, Polanyi received a teaching position at Columbia University (1947–1953). However, his wife, Ilona Duczyńska (1897–1978), had a background as a former communist , which made gaining an entrance visa in the United States impossible. As a result, they moved to Canada , and Polanyi commuted to New York City. In the early 1950s, Polanyi received a large grant from the Ford Foundation to study the economic systems of ancient empires.

Having described the emergence of the modern economic system, Polanyi now sought to understand how "the economy" emerged as a distinct sphere in the distant past. His seminar at Columbia drew several famous scholars and influenced a generation of teachers, resulting in the 1957 volume Trade and Market in the Early Empires . Polanyi continued to write in his later years and established a new journal entitled Coexistence . In Canada he lived in Pickering, Ontario , where he died in 1964.

Selected works [ edit ] "Socialist Accounting" (1922) "The Essence of Fascism" (1933–1934); article [ 22 ] The Great Transformation (1944) "Universal Capitalism or Regional Planning?", The London Quarterly of World Affairs , vol. 10 (3) (1945) Trade and Market in the Early Empires (1957, edited and with contributions by others) Dahomey and the Slave Trade (1966) George Dalton (ed), Primitive, Archaic, and Modern Economics: Essays of Karl Polanyi (New York: Doubleday & Company, 1968); collected essays and selections from his work.

Harry W. Pearson (ed.), The Livelihood of Man (Academic Press, 1977) Karl Polanyi, For a New West: Essays, 1919–1958 (Polity Press, 2014), ISBN 978-0745684444 Gareth Dale (ed), Karl Polanyi : The Hungarian Writings (Manchester University Press, 2016) See also [ edit ] Michael Polanyi (brother) John Polanyi (nephew) Eva Zeisel (cousin) Notes [ edit ] ^ Encyclopædia Britannica (Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. 2003) vol 9. p. 554 ^ "Karl Polanyi | Hungarian politician | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 3 August 2022 .

^ "Karl Polanyi" .

Oxford Reference . Retrieved 26 July 2021 .

^ Silver 2007 .

^ Dale 2016 , pp. 11, 17–18.

^ a b c Ferguson, Donna (23 June 2024).

" 'The greatest thinker you've never heard of': expert who explained Hitler's rise is finally in the spotlight" .

The Observer .

ISSN 0029-7712 .

^ Harrod 2012 .

^ Dale 2016 .

^ Dale 2016 , p. 13.

^ Adelman, Jeremy (2017).

"Polanyi, the Failed Prophet of Moral Economics" .

Boston Review .

^ a b "The Elusive Karl Polanyi" .

Dissent Magazine . 2017.

^ Melegh, Attila ; Szelényi, Iván (2016).

"Polanyi Revisited. Introduction" .

Intersections. EEJSP .

2 (2): 4– 10.

doi : 10.17356/IEEJSP.V2I2.246 .

^ Polanyi, Karl (1940).

Karl Polanyi: Five Lectures on The Present Age of Transformation-Lecture Series Listing of Topics (Speech). Five Lectures on The Present Age of Transformation. Bennington College: Bennington College.

hdl : 11209/8502 .

^ Leigh, Robert D. (25 September 1940), "Letter from President Robert Devore Leigh to Peter Drucker", Letter , Bennington College, hdl : 11209/5449 ^ Polanyi, Karl (1940).

The Passing of 19th Century Civilization (Lecture #1 of 5) (Speech). Bennington College.

hdl : 11209/8514 .

^ Polanyi, Karl (1940).

The Trend Towards an Integrated Society (Lecture #2 of 5) (Speech). Bennington College.

hdl : 11209/8515 .

^ Polanyi, Karl (1940).

The Breakdown of the International System (Lecture #3 of 5) (Speech). Bennington College.

hdl : 11209/8516 .

^ Polanyi, Karl (1940).

Is America an Exception? (Lecture #4 of 5) (Speech). Bennington College.

hdl : 11209/8517 .

^ Polanyi, Karl (1940).

Marxism and the Inner History of the Russian Revolution (Speech). Bennington College.

hdl : 11209/8518 .

^ Boas, George; Fergusson, Francis; Patterson, Margaret; Chapman, Dwight; Hardman, Yvette; Kouwenhoven, John; Luening, Otto; Polanyi, Karl; Stein, Peg; Truman, David; Smith, Bradford; Whittinghill, Maurice (April 1941), Bennington College Humanism-Lecture Series Listing of Speakers and Topics , Bennington College, hdl : 11209/8501 ^ Polanyi, Karl; Fergusson, Francis; Mendershausen, Horst; d'Estournelles, Paul; Drucker, Peter F.; Hanks, Lucien; Forbes, John D. (1943), Bennington College Lecture Series, 1943 – Lecture Series Listing of Speakers and Topics , Bennington College, hdl : 11209/8499 ^ Polanyi, Karl (1935). Lewis, John; Polanyi, Karl; Kitchin, Donald K. (eds.).

"The Essence of Fascism" .

Christianity and the Social Revolution . London: Victor Gollancz Limited. pp.

359– 394.

References [ edit ] Library resources about Karl Polanyi Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Karl Polanyi Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Block, Fred (2008).

"Polanyi's Double Movement and the Reconstruction of Critical Theory" .

Revue Interventions économiques [En ligne] .

38 (38).

doi : 10.4000/interventionseconomiques.274 .

Dale, Gareth (2010), Karl Polanyi: The Limits of the Market , Polity, ISBN 978-0-7456-4072-3 Dale, Gareth (2016), Reconstructing Karl Polanyi , Pluto Press, ISBN 978-0745335186 Dale, Gareth (2016).

Karl Polanyi : a life on the left . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-17608-8 .

OCLC 948826672 .

Harrod, Tanya (15 January 2012).

"Eva Zeisel obituary" .

The Guardian .

McRobbie, Kenneth, ed. (1994), Humanity, Society and Commitment: On Karl Polanyi , Black Rose Books Ltd., ISBN 1-895431-84-0 McRobbie, Kenneth; Polanyi-Levitt, Kari, eds. (2000), Karl Polanyi in Vienna: The Contemporary Significance of The Great Transformation , Black Rose Books Ltd., ISBN 1-55164-142-9 Mendell, Marguerite; Salée, Daniel (1991), The Legacy of Karl Polanyi: Market, State, and Society at the End of the Twentieth Century , St. Martins Press, ISBN 0-312-04783-5 Polanyi-Levitt, Kari, ed. (1990), The Life and Work of Karl Polanyi: A Celebration , Black Rose Books Ltd., ISBN 0-921689-80-2 Silver, Morris (2007).

"Redistribution and Markets in the Economy of Ancient Mesopotamia: Updating Polanyi" .

Antiguo Oriente .

5 : 89– 112.

Stanfield, J. Ron (1986), The Economic Thought of Karl Polanyi: Lives and Livelihood , Macmillan, ISBN 0-333-39629-4 Further reading [ edit ] Robert Kuttner , "The Man from Red Vienna" (review of Gareth Dale, Karl Polanyi: A Life on the Left , Columbia University Press , 381 pp.), The New York Review of Books , vol. LXIV, no. 20 (21 December 2017), pp. 55–57. "In sum, Polanyi got some details wrong, but he got the big picture right. Democracy cannot survive an excessively free market ; and containing the market is the task of politics . To ignore that is to court fascism ." (Robert Kuttner, p. 57.) External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Karl Polanyi .

Karl Polanyi Digital Archive The Karl Polanyi Institute of Political Economy – The Karl Polanyi Institute of Political Economy at Concordia University web site.

Karl Polanyi Wiki Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time (1944) Review Essay by Anne Mayhew, College of Arts and Sciences, University of Tennessee Profile on Karl Polanyi – On the History of Economic Thought Website The free market is an impossible utopia (2014-07-18), The Washington Post . A conversation with Fred Block and Margaret Somers on their book, The Power of Market Fundamentalism: Karl Polanyi’s Critique (Harvard University Press, 2014). The book argues that the ideas of Karl Polanyi are crucial to help understand economic recessions and their aftermath.

[1] – Why Two Karls Are Better Than One: Integrating Polyani and Marx in a Critical Theory of the Current Crisis by Nancy Fraser Ferguson, Donna (23 June 2024).

" 'The greatest thinker you've never heard of': expert who explained Hitler's rise is finally in the spotlight" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 23 June 2024 .

Works by or about Karl Polanyi at the Internet Archive v t e Guild socialism Concepts Direct democracy Economic democracy Guilds Workers' control Workers' self-management Workplace democracy People G. D. H. Cole S. G. Hobson Arthur Penty Karl Polanyi Lionel Robbins Bertrand Russell R. H. Tawney Rafael Uribe Uribe Ernst Wigforss Organisations National Guilds League Fabian Society Blue Labour Related topics Anarcho-syndicalism Council communism Corporatism Distributism Libertarian socialism Market socialism Mutualism (economic theory) National syndicalism Socialism Syndicalism v t e Historical school of economics Economists Karl Bücher Johann Gustav Droysen Bruno Hildebrand Georg Friedrich Knapp Karl Knies Étienne Laspeyres Friedrich List Karl Polanyi Leopold von Ranke Wilhelm Roscher Gustav von Schmoller Joseph Schumpeter Werner Sombart Heinrich von Treitschke Adolph Wagner Max Weber Contributions Creative destruction Disenchantment Double movement Economistic fallacy Embeddedness Enlightened absolutism Fictitious commodities Ideal type Innovation economics Iron cage Laspeyres price index Life chances Methodenstreit Methodological individualism Monopoly on violence National innovation system Philosophy of identity Protestant work ethic Rationalization Schumpeterian rent Social action Substantivism Theory of Bureaucracy Theory of business cycles Three-component theory of stratification Tripartite classification of authority Verstehen Wagner's law Werturteilsstreit v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Archaeology Data Service Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Karl_Polanyi&oldid=1303982872 " Categories : 1886 births 1964 deaths 20th-century anthropologists 20th-century Hungarian economists 20th-century essayists 20th-century Hungarian historians 20th-century Hungarian philosophers Jews from Austria-Hungary Burials at Kerepesi Cemetery Economic historians Historical school economists Columbia University faculty Hungarian anthropologists Hungarian Christian socialists Hungarian essayists Hungarian expatriates in Austria Hungarian nobility Hungarian socialists Hungarian sociologists Jewish historians Jewish philosophers Jewish sociologists Jewish anthropologists Liberal socialism People from Pickering, Ontario Philosophers of culture Philosophers of economics Philosophers of history Philosophers of social science Polányi family Social philosophers Socialist economists Writers from Vienna Jewish emigrants from Austria after the Anschluss to the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles with hCards Articles containing Hungarian-language text Pages with Hungarian IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 07:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Karl Polanyi 39 languages Add topic

