Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uses of the term 2 Speculation 3 Illustrations Toggle Illustrations subsection 3.1 Banking 3.2 Public stocks 3.3 Housing and Fixed Capital 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Fictitious capital 8 languages العربية Español Français Հայերեն Português Русский Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marxist Doctrine Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Fictitious capital (German: fiktives Kapital ) is a concept used by Karl Marx in his critique of political economy . It is introduced in chapter 25 of the third volume of Capital .

[ 1 ] Fictitious capital contrasts with what Marx calls "real capital", which is capital actually invested in physical means of production and workers, and "money capital", which is actual funds being held. The market value of fictitious capital assets (such as stocks and securities) varies according to the expected return or yield of those assets in the future, which Marx felt was only indirectly related to the growth of real production. Effectively, fictitious capital represents "accumulated claims, legal titles, to future production" [ 2 ] and more specifically claims to the income generated by that production.

Fictitious capital could be defined as a capitalisation on property ownership . Such ownership is real and legally enforced, as are the profits made from it, but the capital involved is fictitious; it is "money that is thrown into circulation as capital without any material basis in commodities or productive activity".

[ 3 ] Fictitious capital could also be defined as "tradeable paper claims to wealth ", although tangible assets may themselves under certain conditions also be vastly inflated in price .

[ 4 ] In terms of mainstream financial economics , fictitious capital is the net present value of expected future cash flows.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Uses of the term [ edit ] Marx saw the origin of fictitious capital in the development of the credit system and the joint-stock system.

"The formation of a fictitious capital is called capitalisation." [ 7 ] It represents a claim to property rights or income. Such claims can take many forms, for example, a claim on future government tax revenue or a claim issued against a commodity that remains, as yet, unsold. The stocks, shares and bonds issued by companies and traded on stock markets are also fictitious capital.

A company may raise (non-fictitious) capital by issuing stocks, shares and bonds. This capital may then be used to generate surplus value , but once this capital is set in motion, the claims held by the owners of the share certificate, etc., are simply "marketable claims to a share in future surplus value production". The stock market "is a market for fictitious capital. It is a market for the circulation of property rights as such".

[ 8 ] Since the value of these claims does not function as capital, is merely a claim on future surplus, "the capital-value of such paper is...wholly illusory... The paper serves as title of ownership which represents this capital.

The stocks of railways, mines, navigation companies, and the like, represent actual capital, namely, the capital invested and functioning in such enterprises, or the amount of money advanced by the stockholders for the purpose of being used as capital in such enterprises...; but this capital does not exist twice, once as the capital-value of titles of ownership (stocks) on the one hand and on the other hand as the actual capital invested, or to be invested, in those enterprises." The capital "exists only in the latter form", while the stock or share "is merely a title of ownership to a corresponding portion of the surplus-value to be realised by it".

[ 7 ] The formation of fictitious capital is, for Marx, linked to the wider contradiction between the financial system in capitalism and its monetary basis. Marx writes: "With the development of interest-bearing capital and the credit system, all capital seems to double itself, and sometimes treble itself, by the various modes in which the same capital, or perhaps even the same claim on a debt, appears in different forms in different hands. The greater portion of this 'money-capital' is purely fictitious. All the deposits, with the exception of the reserve fund, are merely claims on the banker, which, however, never exist as deposits." [ 7 ] The expansion of the credit system can, in periods of capitalist expansion, be beneficial for the system; but in periods of economic crisis and uncertainty, capitalists tend, Marx argues, to look to the security of the "money-commodity" (gold) as the ultimate measure of value. Marx tends to assume the convertibility of paper money into gold. However, the modern system of inconvertible paper money, backed by the authority of states, poses greater problems. Here, in periods of crisis, "the capitalist class appears to have a choice between devaluing money or commodities, between inflation or depression. In the event that monetary policy is dedicated to avoiding both, it will merely end up incurring both".

[ 9 ] The term is also used by the economist Cédric Durand as the title of a 2017 book, Fictitious Capital: How Finance Is Appropriating Our Future . The book argues government intervention allows fictitious capital to "assume proportions incompatible with the real production potential of economies," leading inevitably to crises such as the Great Recession .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Speculation [ edit ] Profit can be made purely from trading in a variety of financial claims existing only on paper. This is an extreme form of the fetishism of commodities in which the underlying source of surplus-value in exploitation of labour power is disguised. Indeed, profit can be made by using only borrowed capital to engage in (speculative) trade, not backed up by any tangible asset.

The price of fictitious capital is governed by a series of complex determinants. In the first instance they are governed by the "present and anticipated future incomes to which ownership entitles the holder, capitalised at the going rate of interest".

[ 12 ] But fictitious capital is also the object of speculation. The market value of such assets can be driven up and artificially inflated, purely as a result of supply and demand factors which can themselves be manipulated for profit. The inflated value can just as rapidly be punctured if large amounts of capital are withdrawn.

[ 13 ] Illustrations [ edit ] Banking [ edit ] Marx cites the case of a Mr Chapman who testified before the British Bank Acts Committee in 1857: "though in 1857 he was himself still a magnate on the money market, [Chapman] complained bitterly that there were several large money capitalists in London who were strong enough to bring the entire money market into disorder at a given moment and in this way fleece the smaller money dealers most shamelessly. There were supposed to be several great sharks of this kind who could significantly intensify a difficult situation by selling one or two million pounds worth of Consols and in this way taking an equivalent sum of banknotes (and thereby available loan capital) out of the market. The collaboration of three big banks in such a manoeuvre would suffice to turn a pressure into a panic." [ 14 ] Marx added that: "The biggest capital power in London is of course the Bank of England, but its position as a semi-state institution makes it impossible for it to assert its domination in so brutal a fashion. Nonetheless, it too is sufficiently capable of looking after itself... Inasmuch as the Bank issues notes that are not backed by the metal reserve in its vaults, it creates tokens of value that are not only means of circulation, but also forms additional - even if fictitious - capital for it , to the nominal value of these fiduciary notes, and this extra capital yields it an extra profit." [ 15 ] Public stocks [ edit ] Marx writes: "To the extent that the depreciation or increase in value of this paper is independent of the movement of value of the actual capital that it represents, the wealth of the nation is just as great before as after its depreciation or increase in value.

"The public stocks and canal and railway shares had already by the 23rd of October, 1847, been depreciated in the aggregate to the amount of £114,752,225." (Morris, Governor of the Bank of England, testimony in the Report on Commercial Distress, 1847-48 [No. 3800].) "Unless this depreciation reflected an actual stoppage of production and of traffic on canals and railways, or a suspension of already initiated enterprises, or squandering capital in positively worthless ventures, the nation did not grow one cent poorer by the bursting of this soap bubble of nominal money-capital." [ 7 ] Housing and Fixed Capital [ edit ] In 2024, Elliot Goodell Ugalde argued that the misalignment between housing's exchange value and its soaring market prices indicates the presence of fictitious capital and can be contextualized within the framework of Marx's Labour Theory of Value (LTOV) as explored in his analysis of Vancouver’s housing crisis. According to Goodell Ugalde, this phenomenon reflects a fundamental contradiction within capitalist systems, particularly when applied to housing as a commodity. Housing, unlike typical commodities, is tethered to land—a finite resource that resists the traditional dynamics of supply and demand economics.

In Marxist terms, the exchange value of housing, which derives from the socially necessary labor time required for its production, should theoretically dictate its price under normal market conditions. However, in speculative housing markets like Vancouver , the detachment between exchange value and market price becomes starkly evident. The perpetual increase in market prices, even for unoccupied units, reflects the formation of fictitious capital—an inflation of asset values that bears little relation to the actual productive value of the underlying commodity. This inflation is driven by speculative investments and property hoarding, practices that exploit the appreciating nature of land-linked commodities.

Goodell Ugalde’s argument is further reinforced by the observation that housing markets dominated by monopolistic or oligopolistic entities manipulate supply to sustain high market prices. The strategic withholding of properties, a practice aligned with Marx's theory of absolute rent , creates artificial scarcity that drives up rental costs irrespective of actual demand. This manipulation underscores the failure of orthodox economic frameworks, which assume that increasing supply will naturally stabilize or reduce prices.

By framing housing within Marx's critique of capitalist contradictions, Goodell Ugalde highlights the systemic issues inherent in treating housing as a commodity subject to market forces. Unlike other commodities, housing's market price often appreciates over time, incentivizing capital accumulation without the risk of overproduction crises that typically afflict other goods. This dynamic encourages speculative bubbles, further inflating prices and exacerbating the housing affordability crisis.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Capital (economics) Capital accumulation Economic bubble Money creation Speculation Stock market bubble Non-fungible token References [ edit ] ^ Marx, Karl .

Capital, volume 3 .

^ Karl Marx, Capital: Volume 3 , Pelican edition, p. 599.

^ Harvey, David (2006).

Limits to Capital . London: Verso. p.

95 .

ISBN 978-1-84467-095-6 .

^ Itoh, Makoto ; Lapavitsas, Costas (1998).

Political Economy of Money and Finance . London and Basingstoke: Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-312-21164-6 .

^ Bichler, Shimshon ; Nitzan, Jonathan (July 2010).

"Systemic Fear, Modern Finance and the Future of Capitalism" (PDF) . Jerusalem and Montreal.

^ Nitzan, Jonathan ; Bichler, Shimshon (2009).

Capital as Power: A Study of Order and Creorder . RIPE Series in Global Political Economy. New York and London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415496803 .

^ a b c d Marx, Karl (1894).

"Capital, volume 3, chapter 29" . Retrieved 26 June 2008 .

^ Harvey, David (2006).

Limits to Capital . London: Verso. p.

276 .

ISBN 978-1-84467-095-6 .

^ Harvey, David (2006).

Limits to Capital . London: Verso. pp.

294–296 .

ISBN 978-1-84467-095-6 .

^ "Nonfiction Book Review: Fictitious Capital: How Finance Is Appropriating Our Future" . Publishers Weekly . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ Durand, Cédric (2017).

Fictitious Capital: How Finance Is Appropriating Our Future . Verso.

ISBN 978-1-78478-719-6 .

^ Harvey, David (2006).

Limits to Capital . London: Verso. pp.

276–277 .

ISBN 978-1-84467-095-6 .

^ Michael Hudson , "From Marx to Goldman Sachs: The Fictions of Fictitious Capital, and the Financialization of Industry".

Critique. A journal of socialist theory , Vol. 38, No. 3, August 2010, pp. 419-444.

[1] ^ Marx, Karl .

Capital, volume 3 . Penguin. p. 674.

^ Marx, Karl .

Capital, volume 3 . Penguin. pp.

674– 675.

^ Goodell Ugalde, Elliot.

“In Defence Of Marx’s Labour Theory Of Value: Vancouver’s Housing ‘Crisis.” Cultural Logic: A Journal of Marxist Theory and Practice, 26 (2024): 69-101. University of British Columbia Press.

v t e Types of capital By form Academic Accumulation of capital Circulating / Floating Cultural Cross-cultural Educational Financial Fixed Human Individual Information Intangible Intellectual Natural Organizational Physical Political Public Reputation Sexual Social Symbolic Venture Working By term Liquid (short) vs.

Patient (long) Marxist analytical Constant Variable Fictitious Marxist historical Monopoly Financial capital Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fictitious_capital&oldid=1272640679 " Categories : Marxian economics Capital (economics) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2018 This page was last edited on 29 January 2025, at 17:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fictitious capital 8 languages Add topic

