Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Species 2 Gallery 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Strangler fig 11 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español Français 日本語 Norsk bokmål Runa Simi Русский Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ficus watkinsiana on Syzygium hemilampra , Australia Strangler fig is the common name for a number of tropical and subtropical plant species in the genus Ficus , including those that are commonly known as banyans .

Species [ edit ] Some of the more well-known species are: Ficus altissima – southern China and tropical Asia Ficus aurea – Florida, the Caribbean and Central America Ficus benghalensis – Indian subcontinent Ficus benjamina – tropical and subtropical Asia to northern Australia Ficus burtt-davyi – southeastern Africa Ficus citrifolia – Florida and tropical America Ficus craterostoma – tropical and southern Africa Ficus henneana – northern and eastern Australia Ficus macrophylla – eastern Australia and Lord Howe Island Ficus microcarpa - southeast Asia to Australia Ficus obliqua – Maluku Islands , Papuasia , northern Australia and southwestern Pacific Ficus tinctoria – Indian subcontinent and southern China to northern Australia and southwestern Pacific Ficus virens – tropical and subtropical Asia to northern Australia and western Pacific Ficus watkinsiana – eastern Australia These all share a common "strangling" growth habit that is found in many tropical forest species.

[ 1 ] [ failed verification ] This growth habit is an adaptation for growing in dark forests where the competition for light is intense. These plants are hemiepiphytes , spending the first part of their life without rooting into the ground. Their seeds, often bird-dispersed, germinate in crevices atop other trees. These seedlings grow their roots downward and envelop the host tree while also growing upward to reach into the sunlight zone above the canopy.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] An original support tree can sometimes die, so that the strangler fig becomes a "columnar tree" with a hollow central core.

[ 4 ] However, it is also believed that the strangler fig can help its support tree survive storms.

[ 5 ] Gallery [ edit ] A fig seedling with thread-like roots on an unknown host The trunk of a bald cypress, encircled by fig roots A strangler fig. The supporting tree, now dead, can also be seen Mature fig standing above the surrounding forest A cross section of a bald cypress at the Corkscrew Swamp Sanctuary , showing the fig roots inside it View looking through the hollow core of a fig after the host has died and rotted away References [ edit ] ^ Zhekun, Zhou & Michael G. Gilbert (2003) "Flora of China" (Moraceae) 5: 21–73.

hua.huh.harvard.edu Archived 2006-09-01 at the Wayback Machine ^ Serventy, V. (1984).

Australian Native Plants . Victoria: Reed Books.

^ "Light in the rainforest" 1992 Tropical topics. Vol 1 No. 5, epa.qld.gov.au Archived 2007-07-01 at the Wayback Machine ^ Margaret Lowman; H. Bruce Rinker (2004).

Forest Canopies . Academic Press. pp. 180–.

ISBN 978-0-12-457553-0 .

^ Richard, Leora.; Halkin, Sylvia (June 2017). "Strangler figs may support their host trees during severe storms".

Symbiosis .

72 (2): 153– 157.

doi : 10.1007/s13199-017-0484-5 .

S2CID 29202538 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Strangler figs .

The Tropical Rain Forest , including photos of strangler figs The Queen of Trees: Fig Trees – From the Sacred to the Strangler Being strangled may save this tree’s life Index of plants with the same common name This page is an index of articles on plant species (or higher taxonomic groups) with the same common name ( vernacular name).

If an internal link led you here, you may wish to edit the linking article so that it links directly to the intended article.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Strangler_fig&oldid=1302954361 " Categories : Set index articles on plant common names Ficus Epiphytes Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from October 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All set index articles This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 08:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Strangler fig 11 languages Add topic

