Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History 3 Ongoing evolution of cultural geography 4 Journals 5 Learned societies and groups 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Cultural geography 45 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subfield within human geography A world map illustrating cultural areas .

Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e Cultural geography is a subfield within human geography . Though the first traces of the study of different nations and cultures on Earth can be dated back to ancient geographers such as Ptolemy or Strabo , cultural geography as an academic study first emerged as an alternative to the environmental determinist theories of the early 20th century, which had believed that people and societies are controlled by the environment in which they develop.

[ 1 ] Rather than studying predetermined regions based on environmental classifications, cultural geography became interested in cultural landscapes .

[ 1 ] This was led by the "father of cultural geography" Carl O. Sauer of the University of California, Berkeley . As a result, cultural geography was long dominated by American writers.

Geographers drawing on this tradition see cultures and societies as developing out of their local landscapes but also shaping those landscapes.

[ 2 ] This interaction between the natural landscape and humans creates the cultural landscape . This understanding is a foundation of cultural geography but has been augmented over the past forty years with more nuanced and complex concepts of culture, drawn from a wide range of disciplines including anthropology , sociology , literary theory , and feminism . No single definition of culture dominates within cultural geography. Regardless of their particular interpretation of culture, however, geographers wholeheartedly reject theories that treat culture as if it took place "on the head of a pin".

[ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] Some of the topics within the field of study are globalization has been theorised as an explanation for cultural convergence.

This geography studies the geography of culture Theories of cultural hegemony or cultural assimilation via cultural imperialism Cultural areal differentiation, as a study of differences in way of life encompassing ideas, attitudes, languages, practices, institutions and structures of power and whole range of cultural practices in geographical areas.

[ 4 ] Study of cultural landscapes [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and cultural ecology .

Other topics include sense of place , colonialism , post-colonialism , internationalism , immigration , emigration and ecotourism .

History [ edit ] Charles Booth in the 19th century produced a series of books, Life and Labour of the People in London , with various maps highlighting poverty in the city Though the first traces of the study of different nations and cultures on Earth can be dated back to ancient geographers such as Ptolemy or Strabo , cultural geography as academic study firstly emerged as an alternative to the environmental determinist theories of the early Twentieth century, which had believed that people and societies are controlled by the environment in which they develop.

[ 1 ] Rather than studying predetermined regions based upon environmental classifications, cultural geography became interested in cultural landscapes .

[ 1 ] This was led by Carl O. Sauer (called the father of cultural geography), at the University of California, Berkeley . As a result, cultural geography was long dominated by American writers.

Sauer defined the landscape as the defining unit of geographic study. He saw that cultures and societies both developed out of their landscape, but also shaped them too.

[ 2 ] This interaction between the natural landscape and humans creates the cultural landscape .

[ 2 ] Sauer's work was highly qualitative and descriptive and was challenged in the 1930s by the regional geography of Richard Hartshorne . Hartshorne called for systematic analysis of the elements that varied from place to place, a project taken up by the quantitative revolution . Cultural geography was sidelined by the positivist tendencies of this effort to make geography into a hard science although writers such as David Lowenthal continued to write about the more subjective, qualitative aspects of landscape.

[ 7 ] In the 1970s, new kind of critique of positivism in geography directly challenged the deterministic and abstract ideas of quantitative geography. A revitalized cultural geography manifested itself in the engagement of geographers such as Yi-Fu Tuan and Edward Relph and Anne Buttimer with humanism , phenomenology , and hermeneutics . This break initiated a strong trend in human geography toward Post-positivism that developed under the label "new cultural geography" while deriving methods of systematic social and cultural critique from critical geography .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Ongoing evolution of cultural geography [ edit ] Cultural map of the world based on work by political scientists Ronald Inglehart and Christian Welzel in 2004 Regional map of Gamelan , Kulintang , and Piphat music culture in Southeast Asia Since the 1980s, a "new cultural geography" has emerged, drawing on a diverse set of theoretical traditions, including Marxist political-economic models , feminist theory , post-colonial theory , post-structuralism and psychoanalysis .

Drawing particularly from the theories of Michel Foucault and performativity in western academia, and the more diverse influences of postcolonial theory , there has been a concerted effort to deconstruct the cultural in order to reveal that power relations are fundamental to spatial processes and sense of place . Particular areas of interest are how identity politics are organized in space and the construction of subjectivity in particular places.

Examples of areas of study include: Feminist geography Children's geographies Some parts of tourism geography Behavioral geography Sexuality and space Some more recent developments in political geography Music geography Black geography Some within the new cultural geography have turned their attention to critiquing some of its ideas, seeing its views on identity and space as static. It has followed the critiques of Foucault made by other ' poststructuralist ' theorists such as Michel de Certeau and Gilles Deleuze . In this area, non-representational geography and population mobility research have dominated. Others have attempted to incorporate these and other critiques back into the new cultural geography.

[ 10 ] Groups within the geography community have differing views on the role of culture and how to analyze it in the context of geography.

[ 11 ] It is commonly thought that physical geography simply dictates aspects of culture such as shelter, clothing and cuisine. However, systematic development of this idea is generally discredited as environmental determinism . Geographers are now more likely to understand culture as a set of symbolic resources that help people make sense of the world around them, as well as a manifestation of the power relations between various groups and the structure through which social change is constrained and enabled.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] There are many ways to look at what culture means in light of various geographical insights, but in general geographers study how cultural processes involve spatial patterns and processes while requiring the existence and maintenance of particular kinds of places.

Journals [ edit ] Academic peer reviewed journals which are primarily focused on cultural geography or which contain articles that contribute to the area.

Journal of Cultural Geography Antipode Area cultural geographies Society and Space - Environment and Planning D Geography Compass (Cultural Geography Section) Social & Cultural Geography Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers Learned societies and groups [ edit ] Social and Cultural Geography Research Group of the Royal Geographical Society (with the Institute of British Geographers) Cultural Geography Specialty Group of the Association of American Geographers Cultural Geography Study Group of the Institute of Australian Geographers.

See also [ edit ] Cultural area Cross-cultural psychology Development geography Environmental determinism Possibilism (geography) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Peet, Richard; 1990; Modern Geographical Thought; Blackwell ^ a b c Sauer, Carl; 1925; The Morphology of Landscape ^ Gregory, Derek; Urry, John (1985).

Social Relations and Spatial Structures . London: Macmillan Education. pp.

9– 19.

ISBN 978-0312734848 .

^ Jones, Richard C. (2006). "Cultural Diversity in a "Bi-Cultural" City: Factors in the Location of Ancestry Groups in San Antonio." Journal of Cultural Geography .

^ Sinha, Amita; 2006; Cultural Landscape of Pavagadh: The Abode of Mother Goddess Kalika; Journal of Cultural Geography ^ Kuhlken, Robert; 2002; Intensive Agricultural Landscapes of Oceania; Journal of Cultural Geography ^ Jordan-Bychkov, Terry G.; Domosh, Mona; Rowntree, Lester (1994).

The human mosaic: a thematic introduction to cultural geography . New York: HarperCollins CollegePublishers.

ISBN 978-0-06-500731-2 .

^ Tuan, Yi-Fu (1977).

Space and Place: The Perspective of Experience . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 978-0816638772 .

^ Relph, Edward (1976).

Place and Placelessness . London: Pion.

ISBN 978-0850861761 .

^ Whatmore, S., 2006. "Materialist returns: practising cultural geography in and for a more-than-human world".

Cultural Geographies , 13(4), pp.600-609.

^ Whatmore, Sarah (2016).

"Materialist returns: Practising cultural geography in and for a more-than-human world" .

Cultural Geographies .

13 (4): 600– 609.

doi : 10.1191/1474474006cgj377oa .

hdl : 2262/52907 .

^ Wylie, John (2016). "Timely Geographies: 'New Directions in Cultural Geography' Revisited".

Area .

48 (3): 374– 377.

doi : 10.1111/area.12289 .

^ Adams, Paul C.; Hoelscher, Steven; Till, Karen E. (2001).

Textures of Place: Exploring Humanist Geographies . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 978-0816637560 .

Further reading [ edit ] Carter, George F.

Man and the Land. A Cultural Geography . New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1964.

Tuan, Yi-Fu. 2004. "Centennial Forum: Cultural Geography: Glances Backward and Forward". Annals of the Association of American Geographers. 94 (4): 729–733.

Links to related articles v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_geography&oldid=1300188225 " Categories : Cultural geography Human geography Cultural studies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 20:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cultural geography 45 languages Add topic

