Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The topics encompassed by virtue jurisprudence 2 Aretaic theories of judging Toggle Aretaic theories of judging subsection 2.1 The judicial virtues 2.2 Criticisms of a virtue-centered theory of judging 3 Virtue as the proper end of law 4 Law and virtue outside the Western tradition 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Virtue jurisprudence 2 languages Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Virtue ethics applied to jurisprudence This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the philosophy of law , virtue jurisprudence is the set of theories of law related to virtue ethics . By making the aretaic turn in legal theory, virtue jurisprudence focuses on the importance of character and human excellence or virtue to questions about the nature of law, the content of the law, and judging.

The topics encompassed by virtue jurisprudence [ edit ] Among the topics encompassed by virtue jurisprudence are: Virtue ethics has implications for an account of the proper ends of legislation. If the aim of law is to make citizens virtuous (as opposed to maximizing utility or realizing a set of moral rights), what are the implications for the content of the laws?

Virtue ethics has implications for legal ethics . Current approaches to legal ethics emphasize deontological moral theory, i.e. duties to clients and respect for client autonomy, and these deontological approaches are reflected in the various codes of professional conduct that have been devised for lawyers, judges, and legislators.

Accounts of the virtue of justice (in particular, Aristotle and Aquinas's theories of natural justice) have implications for debates between natural lawyers and legal positivists over the nature of law.

A virtue-centered theory of judging, which describes the particular excellences required by judges.

[ 1 ] Aretaic theories of judging [ edit ] The judicial virtues [ edit ] The most developed aspect of virtue jurisprudence is its distinctive theory of judging. A virtue-centered theory of judging offers an account of the characteristics or excellences that make for a good judge. These include: judicial temperance, judicial courage, judicial temperament, judicial intelligence, judicial wisdom, and justice. Although every theory of judging can incorporate some account of judicial virtue, a virtue-centered theory of judging makes the distinctive claim that the judicial virtues are central, i.e.

that they have basic explanatory and normative significance.

Criticisms of a virtue-centered theory of judging [ edit ] Many of the criticisms of virtue jurisprudence are parallel to those offered in the context of debates over virtue ethics. Some of these include: The charge that virtue jurisprudence does not provide sufficient guidance for making legal decisions. Advocates of virtue-centered theories of judging urge, "Do as a virtuous judge would do!" This formula provides little instruction to an ordinary decision maker, and it may encourage unedifying debates about the character--or lack thereof--of judges with whom one disagrees. Such virtue-centered standards may be too abstract to provide clear guidance, and may invite inappropriate personal attacks on judges' characters.

The argument that virtue jurisprudence requires inordinate trust in the capacities of judges. In a democratic society, the rightness or wrongness of legal decisions should be decided by criteria that are public and accessible to all citizens. Judges who make decisions based on their own individual view of what an (ideally?) virtuous judge would do, may violate this publicity requirement by relying on a personal ideal of judging, rather than on established legal norms.

The claim that in modern liberal societies there is significant disagreement about what virtues a good or exemplary judge must possess. Some putative judicial virtues (e.g., impartiality, wisdom, open-mindedness, integrity, fairness, industriousness, and good temper) are relatively uncontroversial, while others (such as judicial restraint or sympathy for the underprivileged) are more contentious.

Other common criticisms of virtue jurisprudence include: The claim that rules play a more important role in law than they do in ethics . In law, for example, respect for the rule of law may require judges to decide cases primarily by invoking legal rules and other well-established legal norms. In ethics, there may be more scope for individualized judgment and discretion, as well as a greater focus on issues of personal character and flourishing.

The argument that virtue jurisprudence, in virtue of its commitment to human flourishing as the proper aim of the law, can easily lead to illiberal values and misguided attempts to legislate morality.

[ 2 ] Virtue as the proper end of law [ edit ] Aristotle argued that the promotion of virtue was the proper end of law.

Aquinas argued that true laws (which are rational) can teach virtue by being internalized by those who already possess sufficient virtue to grasp the purpose of the law. Even those who have not yet achieved this level of virtue can be coerced into obedience to the law, and this may enable them to become more virtuous.

A contemporary restatement of this view is found in the writings of Robert George . In his book, Making Men Moral , George argues for the promotion of virtue as the end of law and against the contrary views that the purpose of law is either the protection of rights or the general happiness.

Law and virtue outside the Western tradition [ edit ] The phrase "virtue jurisprudence" is usually applied in the context of contemporary Western philosophical thinking about law. There are, however, important ideas about the relationship between law and virtue in other intellectual traditions. One example is provided by Confucian ideas about virtue. In the Analects , Confucius argues that a society in which people are virtuous would have no need of judges, rules, or jurisprudence because people would be able to resolve social conflicts by themselves. Thus, it is argued that the idea of virtue is opposed to the idea of law.

It can be argued that even virtuous citizens might disagree about the application of the law, especially where their own interests or ideological commitments are at stake. However, this argument is rather foreign to both traditional and modern Chinese political thought. Chinese political theory tends to assume that the truly virtuous are selfless to the point of martyrdom and would not consider their own personal interests and that the virtuous are able to transcend ideology. At the same time, traditional Chinese political thought regards those with absolute virtue to be historically extremely rare, and that most people, including the Emperor and his officials, are prone to both corruption and error. Consequently, there is a belief that law and indeed government is an unfortunate necessity in dealing with an imperfect world and with imperfect people.

The view that the inculcation of virtue is the proper end of legislation contrasts markedly with traditional Chinese thinking on the subject, which argues that laws exist because men are lacking in virtue. Confucianism places very little faith on the ability of law or external pressure to make men moral but rather believes that virtue must come from introspection and education. Throughout Chinese political and intellectual history, the Confucian view on law was frequently contrasted in discourse and practice with Chinese Legalist philosophy.

See also [ edit ] Adjudication Aristotle Constitutionalism Legal ethics Rule according to higher law Judicial activism Jurisprudence Natural law Philosophy of law Thomas Aquinas Virtue ethics Virtue References [ edit ] ^ Lawrence B. Solum, "Legal Theory Blog: Legal Theory Lexicon: Virtue Jurisprudence," available online at https://lsolum.typepad.com/legaltheory/2018/01/legal-theory-lexicon-virtue-jurisprudence.html ^ For a compact discussion of standard objections to virtue jurisprudence, together with possible replies, see Amalia Amaya and Ho Hock Lai, "Of Law, Virtue and Justice--An Introduction," in Amalia Amaya and Ho Hock Lai, eds.

Law, Virtue and Justice (Portland, OR: Hart Publishing, 2013), p. 9.

Further reading [ edit ] Amalia Amaya and Ho Hock Lai, eds., Law, Virtue and Justice . (Portland, OR: Hart Publishing, 2013).

Chapin Cimino, "Virtue Jurisprudence," in Nancy E. Snow, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Virtue . (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018).

R.A. Duff , The Limits of Virtue Jurisprudence , Metaphilosophy, Volume 34 Issue 1-2 Page 214 - January 2003.

Robert P. George, Making Men Moral (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993) ISBN 0-19-825424-5 .

Richard A. Posner, How Judges Think . (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2010).

Suzanna Sherry , Judges of Character , 38 Wake Forest L. Rev. 793 (2003).

Lawrence Solum, Natural Justice , American Journal of Jurisprudence, Vol. 51, pp. 65–105 (2006).

Lawrence B. Solum, Virtue Jurisprudence: A Virtue-Centered Theory of Judging , Metaphilosophy, Volume 34 Issue 1-2 Page 178 - January 2003.

External links [ edit ] Law and Virtue in Aquinas by Joseph M. Magee Legal theory lexicon: virtue jurisprudence by Lawrence B. Solum.

v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Virtue_jurisprudence&oldid=1302219555 " Categories : Virtue ethics Theories of law Law and morality Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 03:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Virtue jurisprudence 2 languages Add topic

