Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Content 2 Impact 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Our Common Future 21 languages Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Português Română Slovenčina Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Brundtland report Our Common Future Author World Commission on Environment and Development Subject Sustainability Publisher Oxford University Press Publication date 1987 October Pages 383 ISBN 019282080X Our Common Future , also known as the Brundtland Report , was published in October 1987 by the United Nations through the Oxford University Press . This publication was in recognition of Gro Harlem Brundtland , former Norwegian Prime Minister and Chair of the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED).

Its targets were multilateralism and interdependence of nations in the search for a sustainable development path. The report sought to recapture the spirit of the Stockholm Conference of 1972, which had introduced environmental concerns to the formal political development sphere.

Our Common Future placed environmental issues firmly on the political agenda: it aimed to discuss the environment and development as one single issue.

The document was the culmination of a "900-day" international exercise which catalogued, analysed, and synthesised written submissions and expert testimony from "senior government representatives, scientists and experts, research institutes, industrialists, representatives of non-governmental organizations, and the general public" held at public hearings throughout the world.

The report's definition of "sustainable development" is possibly the best-known definition of this concept: [ 1 ] Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.

[ 2 ] Content [ edit ] The Brundtland Commission's mandate, officially adopted at its inaugural meeting in Geneva on 1-3 October 1984, was to: [ 3 ] Re-examine the critical issues of environment and development and to formulate innovative, concrete, and realistic action proposals to deal with them; [S]trengthen international cooperation on environment and development and to assess and propose new forms of cooperation that can break out of existing patterns and influence policies and events in the direction of needed change; and [R]aise the level of understanding and commitment to action on the part of individuals, voluntary organizations, businesses, institutes, and governments.

[ 2 ] : 347 The report noted that the Commission had "focused its attention in the areas of population, food security, the loss of species and genetic resources , energy, industry, and human settlements - realizing that all of these are connected and cannot be treated in isolation one from another".

[ 2 ] : Paragraph 40 The report recognized that human resource development in the form of poverty reduction, gender equity, and wealth redistribution was crucial to formulating strategies for environmental conservation, and it also recognized that environmental-limits to economic growth in industrialized and industrializing societies existed. The Brundtland Report claimed that poverty reduces sustainability and accelerates environmental pressures – creating a need for the balancing between economy and ecology.

[ 4 ] Impact [ edit ] The publication of Our Common Future and the work of the World Commission on Environment and Development laid the groundwork for the convening of the 1992 Earth Summit and the adoption of Agenda 21 and the Rio Declaration , and led to the establishment of the Commission on Sustainable Development .

In addition, key contributions of Our Common Future to the concept of sustainable development included the recognition that the many crises facing the planet are interlocking crises that are elements of a single crisis of the whole, [ 5 ] and of the vital need for the active participation of all sectors of society in consultation and decisions relating to sustainable development.

However, in 1988, the Norwegian politician Helge Ole Bergesen wrote that this report is perceived by the Third World elites as green imperialism .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy References [ edit ] ^ Canterbury City Council , Sustainable development and Local Agenda 21 , archived on 17 October 2011, accessed on 7 August 2025 ^ a b c "Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common Future" (PDF) . United Nations. p. 16 . Retrieved 7 August 2025 .

^ World Commission on Environment and Development (1987).

Our Common Future . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

27 .

ISBN 019282080X .

^ Pyla, Panayiota (2012). "Beyond Smooth Talk".

Design and Culture .

4 (3): 273– 278.

doi : 10.2752/175470812X13361292229032 .

S2CID 147050081 .

^ World Commission on Environment and Development.

"Our Common Future: From One Earth to One World - A/42/427 Annex, Overview - UN Documents: Gathering a body of global agreements" .

www.un-documents.net .

^ Bergesen, Helge Ole (1988).

"Reformism Doomed to Failure? A Critical Look at the Strategy Promoted by the Brundtland Commission" .

International Challenges . Bd. 8, Ausg. 2 . Retrieved 16 August 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ahmed, Faiz (2008).

An Examination of the Development Path Taken by Small Island Developing States (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-10-03 . Retrieved 2012-04-19 .

(pp. 17–26) Iris Borowy, Defining Sustainable Development: the World Commission on Environment and Development (Brundtland Commission) , Milton Park: earthscan/Routledge, 2014 WBGU (the German Advisory Council on Global Change) (10 July 2019).

Our common digital future – a draft charter for a sustainable digital age (PDF) . Berlin, Germany: German Advisory Council on Global Change (WBGU) . Retrieved 2020-03-04 .

PDF version.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Our Common Future Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Portal : Politics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Our_Common_Future&oldid=1304618167 " Categories : 1987 non-fiction books 1987 in the environment 1987 in the United Nations 1987 controversies Sustainability books Environmental non-fiction books Environmental reports United Nations development policy Oxford University Press books Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 04:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Our Common Future 21 languages Add topic

