Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Position on the HR diagram 2 Pulsations 3 Other pulsating stars 4 References Toggle the table of contents Instability strip 20 languages Afrikaans العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Français 한국어 Italiano Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Slovenčina Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Region of an astronomical diagram For the S Doradus Instability Strip, see Luminous blue variable .

The unqualified term instability strip usually refers to a region of the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram largely occupied by several related classes of pulsating variable stars : [ 1 ] Delta Scuti variables , SX Phoenicis variables , and rapidly oscillating Ap stars (roAps) near the main sequence ; RR Lyrae variables where it intersects the horizontal branch ; and the Cepheid variables where it crosses the supergiants.

RV Tauri variables are also often considered to lie on the instability strip, occupying the area to the right of the brighter Cepheids (at lower temperatures), since their stellar pulsations are attributed to the same mechanism.

Position on the HR diagram [ edit ] HR diagram for pulsating stars The Hertzsprung–Russell diagram plots the real luminosity of stars against their effective temperature (their color , given by the temperature of their photosphere ). The instability strip intersects the main sequence , (the prominent diagonal band that runs from the upper left to the lower right) in the region of A and F stars (1–2 solar mass ( M ☉ )) and extends to G and early K bright supergiants (early M if RV Tauri stars at minimum are included).  Above the main sequence, the vast majority of stars in the instability strip are variable.  Where the instability strip intersects the main sequence, the vast majority of stars are stable, but there are some variables, including the roAp stars and the Delta Scuti variables .

[ 2 ] Pulsations [ edit ] Stars in the instability strip pulsate due to He III (doubly ionized helium), [ 1 ] in a process based on the Kappa–mechanism . In normal A-F-G class stars, He in the stellar photosphere is neutral. Deeper below the photosphere, where the temperature reaches 25,000– 30,000 K , begins the He II layer (first He ionization). Second ionization of helium (He III) starts at depths where the temperature is 35,000– 50,000 K .

When the star contracts, the density and temperature of the He II layer increases. The increased energy is sufficient to remove the lone remaining electron in the He II, transforming it into He III (second ionization ). This causes the opacity of the He layer to increase and the energy flux from the interior of the star is effectively absorbed. The temperature of the star's core increases, which causes it to expand. After expansion, the He III cools and begins to recombine with free electrons to form He II and the opacity of the star decreases. This allows the trapped heat to propagate to the surface of the star. When sufficient energy has been radiated away, overlying stellar material once again causes the He II layer to contract, and the cycle starts from the beginning. This results in the observed increase and decrease in the surface temperature of the star.

[ 3 ] In some stars, the pulsations are caused by the opacity peak of metal ions at about 200,000 K .

[ 4 ] The phase shift between a star's radial pulsations and brightness variations depends on the distance of He II zone from the stellar surface in the stellar atmosphere . For most Cepheids, this creates a distinctly asymmetrical observed light curve, increasing rapidly to maximum and slowly decreasing back down to minimum.

[ 5 ] Other pulsating stars [ edit ] There are several types of pulsating star not found on the instability strip and with pulsations driven by different mechanisms.  At cooler temperatures are the long period variable AGB stars.  At hotter temperatures are the Beta Cephei and PV Telescopii variables.  Right at the edge of the instability strip near the main sequence are Gamma Doradus variables .  The band of White dwarfs has three separate regions and types of variable: DOV, DBV, and DAV (= ZZ Ceti variables ) white dwarfs.  Each of these types of pulsating variable has an associated instability strip [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] created by variable opacity partial ionisation regions other than helium.

[ 1 ] Most high luminosity supergiants are somewhat variable, including the Alpha Cygni variables .  In the specific region of more luminous stars above the instability strip are found the yellow hypergiants which have irregular pulsations and eruptions.  The hotter luminous blue variables may be related and show similar short- and long-term spectral and brightness variations with irregular eruptions.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Gautschy, A.; Saio, H. (1996). "Stellar Pulsations Across the HR Diagram: Part 2".

Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics .

34 : 551– 606.

Bibcode : 1996ARA&A..34..551G .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.astro.34.1.551 .

^ Brian Warner, ed. (1992).

Variable Stars and Galaxies: A Symposium in Honour of Professor Michael W. Feast on His Retirement from the Directorship of the South African Astronomical Observatory, Held at the University of Cape Town, 5-7 February 1992 . Astronomical Society of the Pacific.

ISBN 978-0-937707-49-4 .

OCLC 1166923794 .

^ Norton, Andrew (2021).

Understanding the Universe: The Physics of the Cosmos from Quasars to Quarks . CRC Press. p. 185.

ISBN 9781000383911 .

^ Mine Takeuti; J. Robert Buchler, eds. (6 December 2012).

Nonlinear Phenomena in Stellar Variability . Springer Science & Business Media. pp. 70–.

ISBN 9789401110624 .

OCLC 1243544743 .

^ C. de Loore; C. Doom (6 December 2012).

Structure and Evolution of Single and Binary Stars . Springer Science & Business Media. pp. 232–.

ISBN 9789401125024 .

^ Beauchamp, A.; Wesemael, F.; Bergeron, P.; Fontaine, G.; Saffer, R. A.; Liebert, James; Brassard, P. (1999).

"Spectroscopic Studies of DB White Dwarfs: The Instability Strip of the Pulsating DB (V777 Herculis) Stars" .

The Astrophysical Journal .

516 (2): 887.

Bibcode : 1999ApJ...516..887B .

doi : 10.1086/307148 .

^ Starrfield, S. G.

; Cox, A. N.; Hodson, S. W.; Pesnell, W. D. (1983). "The discovery of nonradial instability strips for hot, evolved stars".

The Astrophysical Journal .

268 : L27.

Bibcode : 1983ApJ...268L..27S .

doi : 10.1086/184023 .

^ Dupret, M. -A.; Grigahcène, A.; Garrido, R.; Gabriel, M.; Scuflaire, R. (2004).

"Theoretical instability strips for δ Scuti and γ Doradus stars" .

Astronomy and Astrophysics .

414 (2): L17.

Bibcode : 2004A&A...414L..17D .

doi : 10.1051/0004-6361:20031740 .

^ Márcio Catelan; Horace A. Smith (23 March 2015).

Pulsating Stars . John Wiley & Sons. pp. 432–.

ISBN 978-3-527-40715-6 .

v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Instability_strip&oldid=1293882447 " Categories : Hertzsprung–Russell classifications Stellar evolution Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 06:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Instability strip 20 languages Add topic

