Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept 2 In popular culture 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Italiani brava gente 5 languages Deutsch Español Italiano Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian popular myth about Fascist Italy, the Holocaust, and World War II-related crimes For the 1964 Italian film of the same name, from which the term derives, see Attack and Retreat .

Spanish republican poster, reading "The claw of the Italian invader intends to enslave us", during the Spanish Civil War "Italians, the good people" ( Italian : Italiani brava gente ) is a phrase adopted by historians to refer to Italian popular beliefs about the allegedly limited, even non-existent, participation of Fascist Italy and the Royal Italian Army in the Holocaust and war crimes committed by Axis soldiers during World War II . The phenomenon is also known as the myth of the good Italian .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Concept [ edit ] A form of historical revisionism which emerged under the post-war republic , it was argued that Italian soldiers had been "good" or "decent people" ( brava gente ) who had acted with humanity and compassion, supposedly inherent Italian values, in contrast to their ideologically motivated and brutal German allies .

[ 3 ] In particular, it argued that the Italians had not participated in, or even had opposed, the Nazi persecution of Jews in occupied parts of Eastern Europe.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] By extension, the term is sometimes applied to describe popular beliefs about the Italo-Ethiopian War (1935–36) or non-Jewish responses to the Holocaust in Italy .

[ 6 ] Hannah Arendt supports the myth by maintaining that Italian Jews had been protected by the "general, spontaneous humanity of a people of ancient civilization".

[ 7 ] The concept is based on the benevolent characteristics of the Italian people, such as to make them potentially immune from inhumanity towards the enemy in war or towards colonized nations, and capable of guaranteeing Italians special indulgence in return from other peoples.

Pierluigi Battista defines it as: A shield of good-naturedness, joviality, a natural inclination towards meekness and cordial sociability which should have protected [the Italians] from brutal hostility, a comfortable cushion capable of cushioning the dramatic impact of history and cruelty.

[ 8 ] In contrast with Battista and others, who trace the rise of the myth to the post-World War II period, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Angelo Del Boca points out that its origins are older and date back to the beginning of Italian colonial expansion (1885), in which the country, the last to start it among the European powers, programmatically attempted to show itself different, more human, a bringer of civilization, strong as it was in its history.

[ 10 ] This led to the affirmation of the phrase, distorted by the Eritrean population , of bono italiano ('good Italian').

[ 11 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Notable examples of the phenomenon in popular culture are the film Mediterraneo (1991) directed by Gabriele Salvatores and the novel Captain Corelli's Mandolin (1994) by Louis de Bernières which was also adapted into a film in 2001.

[ 4 ] The myth avoided "a public debate on collective responsibility, guilt and denial, repentance and pardon" but has recently been challenged by historians.

[ 4 ] The myth parallels the popular beliefs about the "Clean Wehrmacht" popular in post-war West Germany or the " victim theory " in Austria .

See also [ edit ] Italian war crimes The Holocaust in Italy The Holocaust in Libya Libyan genocide Good German Myth of the clean Wehrmacht Austria victim theory Vichy syndrome and Résistancialisme Dunkirk spirit References [ edit ] ^ Paolo Favero, Italians, the “Good People”: Reflections on National Self-Representation in Contemporary Italian Debates on Xenophobia and War , in Outlines - Critical practice studies, No. 2 (2010), p. 138-153 ^ Diego Guzzi, The myth of the "Good Italian", the antisemitism and the colonial crimes , in Constelaciones - Revista de Teoría Crítica, No. 4 (2012), p. 255-264 ^ Bartolini, Guido (2 October 2018).

" 'Italiani brava gente' as a Transmedial Phenomenon" .

Interdisciplinary Italy . Arts and Humanities Research Council . Retrieved 31 July 2020 .

^ a b c Petrusewicz, Marta (2004). "The hidden pages of contemporary Italian history: War crimes, war guilt and collective memory".

Journal of Modern Italian Studies .

9 (3): 269– 270.

doi : 10.1080/1354571042000254700 .

S2CID 143230795 .

^ Rodogno, Davide (2005).

"Italiani brava gente? Fascist Italy's Policy Toward the Jews in the Balkans, April 1941-July 1943" .

European History Quarterly .

35 (2): 213– 240.

doi : 10.1177/0265691405051464 .

S2CID 143672344 .

^ Wilcox, Vanda (2021).

"Imperial Thinking and Colonial Combat in the Early Twentieth-Century Italian Army" .

The Historical Journal .

65 (5): 1333– 1353.

doi : 10.1017/S0018246X21000741 .

ISSN 0018-246X .

S2CID 240134142 .

^ Allegra, Luciano (April 2013). "Italiani, brava gente? Ebrei, fonti inquisitoriali e senso comune".

Quaderni storici (PDF) (in Italian). Vol. 142. Bologna: il Mulino. p. 252.

^ a b Battista, Pierluigi (28 August 2004). "Italiani brava gente. Un mito cancellato".

La Stampa (in Italian).

^ Allegra, Luciano (April 2013). "Italiani, brava gente? Ebrei, fonti inquisitoriali e senso comune".

Quaderni storici (PDF) (in Italian). Vol. 142. Bologna: il Mulino. p. 251.

^ Del Boca, Angelo (2005).

Italiani, brava gente?

(in Italian). Vicenza: Neri Pozza. p. 47.

ISBN 978-88-6559-178-9 . Retrieved 27 January 2021 .

^ Del Boca, Angelo (2005).

Italiani, brava gente?

(in Italian). Vicenza: Neri Pozza. p. 48.

ISBN 978-88-6559-178-9 . Retrieved 27 January 2021 .

.

Further reading [ edit ] Focardi, Filippo; Klinkhammer, Lutz (2004). "The Question of Fascist Italy's War Crimes: The Construction of a Self-Acquitting Myth (1943 – 1948)".

Journal of Modern Italian Studies .

9 (3): 330– 348.

doi : 10.1080/1354571042000254755 .

S2CID 143876226 .

Del Boca, Angelo (2011).

Italiani, brava gente? Un mito duro a morire (5th ed.). Venice: Neri Pozza.

ISBN 9788854503199 .

Fogu, Claudio (2006). "Italiani brava gente: The Legacy of Fascist Historical Culture on Italian Politics of Memory". In Lebow, Richard Ned; Kansteiner, Wulf; Fogu, Claudio (eds.).

The Politics of Memory in Postwar Europe . Durham, NC: Duke University Press. pp.

147– 176.

ISBN 978-0-8223-8833-3 .

External links [ edit ] Brava Gente? The Resurgence of the Shopworn Myth of Italian Benevolence During Fascism at i-Italy v t e Historical negationism Denialism Disinformation Knowledge falsification Pseudohistory school textbook controversies Rationalization Victim blaming Genocide denial / denial of mass killings and atrocities Armenian genocide Atrocities against Indigenous peoples Bosnian genocide Cambodian genocide Genocide of Serbs during WWII Croatian Wikipedia Holodomor Katyn massacre Khojaly massacre Nanjing Massacre U.S. cover-up of Japanese war crimes Rohingya genocide Rwandan genocide Denial of the 7 October attacks Holocaust Austria victim theory Clean Wehrmacht Rommel / Speer myth Italians, the good people Trivialization Double genocide theory Vichy syndrome Sonderaktion 1005 Other whitewashing of governments or time periods Cuba de ayer Czechoslovak myth Denial of state terrorism in Argentina Driftwood theory Ferdinand Marcos apologism Lost Cause of the Confederacy Dunning School Negationism of the military dictatorship of Brazil [ pt ] / Chile Merry England Neo-Stalinism Operation Legacy (UK) Other manifestations Allah as a lunar deity Ancient astronauts Ancient Egyptian race controversy Antiquization Book burnings list Censorship of Great Zimbabwe Christ myth theory Dacianism Damnatio memoriae Destruction of cultural heritage Islamic State Saudi Arabia Gaza Strip Lebanon Sudan Myth of English aid [ es ] Izbrisani Khazar hypothesis LGBT erasure Like sheep to the slaughter Myth of the golden exile Phantom time hypothesis / New chronology Western Pseudohistory Theory Shakespeare authorship question Territorial losses of Thailand Azerbaijan Destruction of Armenian heritage Cemetery in Julfa Nakhchivan [ ru ] Nizami Ganjavi Western Azerbaijan Germany Borussian myth Myth of Langemarck [ de ] Stab-in-the-back myth Israel / Palestine Denial of the 7 October attacks Nakba denial Temple denial There was no such thing as Palestinians Russia Allegations of genocide in Donbas All-Russian nation On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians Soviet Union Censorship of images Denial of Crimean Tatars Turkey Denial of Kurds History Thesis Sun Language Theory United States 1776 Commission Irish slaves myth Vietnam stab-in-the-back myth Organizations Adelaide Institute ASİMKK Centre for the Study of the Causes of the War CODOH Dalit Voice FactCheckArmenia.com Gesellschaft zur Rechtlichen und Humanitären Unterstützung HIAG Iğdır Genocide Memorial and Museum Institute for Armenian Research Institute for Historical Review Nippon Kaigi Turkish Historical Society United Daughters of the Confederacy Zeitgeschichtliche Forschungsstelle Ingolstadt Publications A Town Betrayed A Verdade Sufocada The Birth of a Nation Coverage of the Hillsborough disaster by The Sun Did Six Million Really Die?

Falsifiers of History Flatline Folk og Land A History of the Palestinian People (2017) Hitler Diaries The Hoax of the Twentieth Century I Am More Than a Wolf Whistle Jasenovac – istina Journal of Historical Review Leuchter report The Other Side: The Secret Relationship Between Nazism and Zionism The Ottoman Lieutenant Report about Case Srebrenica Conferences International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust Publishing houses Arndt Verlag J.J. Fedorowicz Publishing Munin Verlag Nation Europa Verlag Legal status Statute law Austria Belgium France Germany Case law R v Zundel (1992) Lehideux and Isorni v France (1998) Irving v Penguin Books Ltd (2000) Perinçek v. Switzerland (2013) International law Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime Right to truth Related Historical fiction Historical revisionism Historical misconceptions Accusation in a mirror Ash heap of history Censorship Cherry picking Conspiracy theories False attribution Furtive fallacy Genocide justification Propaganda Category v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Italiani_brava_gente&oldid=1277878825 " Categories : Aftermath of World War II in Italy Denialism Italian words and phrases Italy in World War II Historical controversies Holocaust historiography Historiography of Italy World War II-related historical negationism Controversies in Italy Italian war crimes Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Use dmy dates from June 2024 Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 06:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Italiani brava gente 5 languages Add topic

