Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Commentary and interpretation 3 Gender roles and social change in Oeconomicus 4 Manuscripts 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Oeconomicus 17 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Ido Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina 日本語 Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Work by Xenophon This article is about the dialogue by Xenophon. For the similarly named treatise attributed to Aristotle, see Economics (Aristotle) .

Socrates (Collezione Farnese); Museo Nazionale di Napoli The Oeconomicus ( Ancient Greek : Οἰκονομικός ) by Xenophon is a Socratic dialogue principally about household management and agriculture .

Oeconomicus comes from the Ancient Greek words oikos for home or house and nemein which means management, [ 1 ] literally translated to 'household management'. It is one of the earliest works on economics in its original sense of household management, and a significant source for the social and intellectual history of Classical Athens . Some philologues see the work as the source of the word "economy".

[ 2 ] Beyond the emphasis on household economics, the dialogue treats such topics as the qualities and relationships of men and women, rural vs.

urban life, slavery , religion , and education . Xenophon explores gentlemanliness, [ 3 ] husbandry, and gender roles, through Socrates' conversations about wealth and, more specifically, household management.

Joseph Epstein states that the Oeconomicus can actually be seen as a treatise on success in leading both an army and a state.

[ 4 ] Scholars lean towards a relatively late date in Xenophon's life for the composition of the Oeconomicus , perhaps after 362 BC.

Cicero translated the Oeconomicus into Latin , and the work gained popularity during the Renaissance in a number of translations.

Summary [ edit ] The opening framing dialogue is between Socrates and Critoboulus, the son of Crito . There, Socrates discusses the meaning of wealth and identifies it with usefulness and well-being, not merely possessions. He links moderation and hard work to success in household management. The dramatic date of this part of the work can be no earlier than 401 BC, as the Battle of Cunaxa is referred to at 4.18. In his conversation with Critoboulus, Socrates explains the value of property to each man and how some men value certain possessions more than others. Socrates uses flutes as an example: Then although they are the same, they are property to him who knows how to use each of them, but to him who does not know, they are no property; as for instance flutes are property to one who knows how to play tolerably well, but to one who does not know are nothing more than useless pebbles, unless indeed he should sell them (Trans. by B.J. Hayes, 1.10) Critoboulus claims that a man’s wealth consists of things that benefit, while the things that do not benefit and injure him are not part of his wealth. Continuing with the flute analogy, he concludes that as possessions, they are worthless, but if sold, they become part of the man’s wealth. Socrates and Critoboulus go on to use money as an example. If a man does not know how to use something, it is therefore not his property. With money, if a man does not know how to use it then he should not consider it as his property. Socrates makes the argument that a man's assets are not property unless he learns to use them diligently and wisely. This relates back to his points about effectively managing a household and leads him to talk about his conversation with Ischomachus.

When Critoboulus asks about the practices involved in household management, Socrates pleads ignorance on the subject but relates what he heard of it from an Athenian gentleman - farmer ( kaloskagathos ) named Ischomachus. In the discussion related by Socrates, Ischomachus describes the methods he used to educate his wife in housekeeping , their practices in ruling and training slaves, and the technology involved in farming. Approximately two thirds of the dialogue concerns the discussion between Socrates and Ischomachus. There is no final reversion to further discussion with Critoboulos.

Commentary and interpretation [ edit ] Leo Strauss wrote a political - philosophical commentary on the dialogue. He took the Oeconomicus as a more ironic examination of the nature of the gentleman, virtue , and domestic relationships.

Michel Foucault devoted a chapter in his The History of Sexuality (1976–1984) to "Ischomachus' Household". He took Xenophon's depiction of the relationship between Ischomachus and his wife as a classical expression of the ancient Greek ideology of power , according to which a man's control of his emotions was externally reflected in his control of his wife, his slaves, and his political subordinates.

Following Foucault, feminist scholars and social historians such as Sarah Pomeroy have explored the Oeconomicus as a source for Greek attitudes to the relationship between men and women, but successive interpretations have differed. Some see Xenophon's attitude toward women as misogynist and patriarchal , while others maintain that he was a proto-feminist in certain ways.

Some have taken Xenophon's use of Ischomachus as a supposed expert in the education of a wife as an instance of anachronistic irony, a device used by Plato in his Socratic dialogues . This ironic line of interpretation sees Ischomachus as a target of satire rather than a stand-in for Xenophon. Some have suggested that the Ischomachus of the dialogue is the same man whose family became the subject of ridicule in Athenian political oratory. After this Ischomachus died, his widow moved in with her daughter and son-in-law Callias and soon became pregnant with the man's child, which eventually led to the daughter's suicide attempt . Callias was frequently parodied in Athenian comedies for his sexual excesses and pseudo-intellectualism .

The import of such irony has also been the subject of much contention: are his wife's actions a sign of a bad education or just the inevitable result of the loss of the controlling influence in her life? How responsible was Ischomachus for his daughter's marriage to a man of such poor character ?

Gender roles and social change in Oeconomicus [ edit ] According to Sarah Pomeroy, the change from the fifth to fourth century largely was the shift from communal concerns to self-interested concerns. This general societal acceptance of the importance of the domestic sphere is represented in Oeconomicus ' examination of marital relationships and household management. In Pomeroy's commentary, she argues that Xenophon views a wife as more than just a means of reproduction. This is contrary to misogynistic Athenian ideals of marriage where once a wife birthed the necessary number of children, she was essentially viewed as a consumer.

[ 5 ] In Oeconomicus , Ischomachus incorporates his wife into household management as soon as they are married and even relies on her to run the household. He does not hide away assets he sees as property, rather he shares them with her. He sees his marriage as a give-and-take relationship, where both he and his wife share equal parts in its success.

Manuscripts [ edit ] Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 227 See also [ edit ] Ancient economic thought Notes [ edit ] ^ Leshem, Dotan (1 February 2016).

"Retrospectives: What Did the Ancient Greeks Mean by Oikonomia ?" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

30 (1): 225– 238.

doi : 10.1257/jep.30.1.225 .

^ Lowry, S. Todd (1998).

Xenophons Oikonomikos, Über einen Klassiker der Haushaltsökonomie (in German).

Düsseldorf : Verlag Wirtschaft und Finanzen. p. 77.

ISBN 3878811276 .

^ Eide, Stephen; Whitaker, Keith (2016). "A Philosopher and a Gentleman: Xenophon's Oeconomicus".

Arion: A Journal of Humanities and the Classics .

24 (2): 93– 100.

doi : 10.2307/arion.24.2.0093 .

JSTOR arion.24.2.0093 .

S2CID 171600706 .

^ Joseph Epstein, "Xenophon: The Third Man" in Essays in Biography, Axios Press, 2012, p. 539-550.

^ Pomeroy, Sarah B (1994).

Xenophon, Oeconomicus: a social and historical commentary . Clarendon Press; Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-814082-5 .

OCLC 29027086 .

[ page needed ] References [ edit ] Conversations of Socrates by Xenophon, edited by Robin H. Waterfield, Penguin Classics 1990 ISBN 0-14-044517-X Strauss, Leo , Xenophon's Socratic Discourse: An Interpretation of the "Oeconomicus" , Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1970 ISBN 1-890318-96-5 Henry W. Spiegel (1987). "Xenophon," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , v. 4, pp. 935–36.

Xenophon, The Shorter Socratic Writings: "Apology of Socrates to the Jury", "Oeconomicus", and "Symposium," trans. and with interpretive essays by Robert C. Bartlett, with Thomas Pangle and Wayne Ambler, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, The Agora Editions, 1996 ISBN 0-8014-7298-9 Williams, Brock R (2008). "An ecoconomist looks at Xenophon's Oeconomicus ".

The Classical Outlook .

85 (3): 102– 105.

JSTOR 43939810 .

Too, Yun Lee (1995). "Oeconomicus".

The Classical Review .

45 (2): 246– 248.

doi : 10.1017/S0009840X00293554 .

JSTOR 712370 .

S2CID 246881226 .

External links [ edit ] Works related to Oeconomicus at Wikisource Translation of the Oeconomicus by H.G. Dakyns at Project Gutenberg Review of a recent edition of the Oeconomicus Note on the ironic interpretation of the Oeconomicus Archived 2009-06-20 at the Wayback Machine Commentary on the Greek text by A H N_Sewell v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems v t e Works by Xenophon Historical and biographical works Anabasis Cyropaedia Hellenica Agesilaus Constitution of the Lacedaemonians Socratic works and dialogues Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Apology Hiero Short treatises On Horsemanship Hipparchicus Cynegeticus Ways and Means Falsely attributed to Xenophon Constitution of the Athenians ('Old Oligarch') v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oeconomicus&oldid=1301844415 " Categories : Works by Xenophon Socratic dialogues Home economics Economy of ancient Greece Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 01:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oeconomicus 17 languages Add topic

