Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Pre-Columbian 2.2 Colonial period, 1519–1821 2.3 Independence 2.4 20th century to the present 3 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 3.1 Political geography 3.2 Natural geography 3.3 Major communities 3.3.1 Localities 3.4 Climate 3.5 Ecosystems 4 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 4.1 Agriculture 4.2 Natural resources 4.3 Golden Lane Oil Fields 4.4 Industry, transportation and commerce 4.5 Handcrafts 5 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 5.1 Gastronomy 5.2 Museums 5.3 Fairs and festivals 5.4 Dance and music 5.5 Art and architecture 5.6 Literature 5.7 Religion 6 Education 7 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 7.1 Largest cities 8 Tourism 9 Archeological sites 10 Government Toggle Government subsection 10.1 Freedom of the press violations 11 Infrastructure Toggle Infrastructure subsection 11.1 Transport 11.2 Media 12 Notable people 13 See also 14 Notes 15 References 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Veracruz 91 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Aymar aru Basa Bali 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština ChiTumbuka Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული Kernowek Kiswahili Кырык мары Ladino Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 19°31′38″N 96°55′21″W ﻿ / ﻿ 19.52722°N 96.92250°W ﻿ / 19.52722; -96.92250 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia State of Mexico This article is about the Mexican state. For the Mexican city, see Veracruz (city) . For other uses, see Veracruz (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling .

You can assist by editing it .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Veracruz" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) State in Xalapa-Enríquez, Mexico Veracruz Cuetlaxcoapan ( Nahuatl ) State Free and Sovereign State of Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave Estado Libre y Soberano de Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave ( Spanish ) Tlahtohcayotl Cuetlaxcoapan ( Nahuatl ) Aerial view of the Petén–Veracruz rainforest Coat of arms Motto: Plus Ultra (Beyond) Anthem: Himno Veracruzano State of Veracruz within Mexico Coordinates: 19°31′38″N 96°55′21″W ﻿ / ﻿ 19.52722°N 96.92250°W ﻿ / 19.52722; -96.92250 Country Mexico Capital Xalapa-Enríquez Largest city Heroica Veracruz Largest metro Greater Veracruz Municipalities 212 Admission December 22, 1823 [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Order 7th Government • Governor Rocío Nahle García • Senators [ 5 ] Raquel Bonilla Herrera [ nb 1 ] Manuel Huerta Ladrón de Guevara Miguel Ángel Yunes Márquez [ nb 2 ] • Deputies [ 6 ] Federal Deputies • Armando Antonio Gómez Betancourt ( 1st ) • María del Carmen Pinete Vargas ( 2nd ) • Rocío Hernández Villanueva ( 3rd ) • Rosa Hernández Espejo ( 4th ) • Raquel Bonilla Herrera ( 5th ) • Jaime Humberto Pérez Bernabé ( 6th ) • Mónica Herrera Villavicencio ( 7th ) • Natalia García Molina ( 8th ) • José Francisco Yunes Zorrilla ( 9th ) • Rafael Hernández Villalpando ( 10th ) • Flora Tania Cruz Santos ( 11th ) • María Josefina Gamboa Torales ( 12th ) • Angélica Peña Martínez ( 13th ) • Rosalba Valencia Cruz ( 14th ) • Dulce María Corina Villegas Guarneros ( 15th ) • Martha Rosa Morales Romero ( 16th ) • Valentín Reyes López ( 17th ) • Itzel Aleli Domínguez Zopiyactle ( 18th ) • Paola Tenorio Adame ( 19th ) • Esteban Bautista Hernández ( 20th ) Area [ 7 ] • Total 71,826 km 2 (27,732 sq mi) Ranked 11th Highest elevation ( Pico de Orizaba ) 5,610 m (18,410 ft) Population (2020) [ 8 ] • Total 8,062,579 • Rank 4th • Density 110/km 2 (290/sq mi) • Rank 10th Demonyms Veracruzano, -na (formal) Jarocho , -cha (colloquial) GDP [ 9 ] • Total MXN 1.227 trillion (US$61.0 billion) (2022) • Per capita (US$7,491) (2022) Time zone UTC−06:00 ( CST ) Postal code 91–96 Area code Area codes • 1 • 1 • 1 • 1 • 1 ISO 3166 code MX-VER HDI 0.757 high Ranked 28th of 32 Website www .veracruz .gob .mx ^ Substitute for Claudia Tello Espinosa, who requested a leave from the Senate on November 26, 2024 [ 3 ] to occupy the State's Secretariat of Education in the government of Rocío Nahle.

^ After having voted in favor of president López Obrador's Judicial Reform, senator Yunes was expelled from the PAN on September 11, 2024.

[ 4 ] Veracruz , [ a ] formally Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave , [ b ] officially the Free and Sovereign State of Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave , [ c ] is one of the 31 states which, along with Mexico City , comprise the 32 Federal Entities of Mexico . Located in eastern Mexico, Veracruz is bordered by seven states, which are Tamaulipas , San Luis Potosí , Hidalgo , Puebla , Oaxaca , Chiapas , and Tabasco . Veracruz is divided into 212 municipalities , and its capital city is Xalapa-Enríquez .

Veracruz has a significant share of the coastline of the Gulf of Mexico on the east of the state. The state is noted for its mixed ethnic and indigenous populations.

Its cuisine reflects the many cultural influences that have come through the state because of the importance of the port of Veracruz . In addition to the capital city, the state's largest cities include Veracruz, Coatzacoalcos , Córdoba , Minatitlán , Poza Rica , Boca Del Río and Orizaba .

Etymology [ edit ] The official name of the state is Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave. It is named after its largest city and main port, Veracruz, originally founded as Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz [ 11 ] (Rich Town of the True Cross) by Spanish conquistadors in 1519. The name "Vera Cruz" combines Latin and Spanish elements meaning "True Cross".

[ 12 ] The suffix is in honor of Ignacio de la Llave y Segura Zevallos (1818–1863), who was the governor of Veracruz from 1855 to 1857 [ 13 ] and once again from 1861 to 1863.

[ 13 ] The state's official seal, adopted in 1954 by the state legislature through Law No. 92, [ 14 ] is based on the colonial coat of arms granted by King Charles I of Spain to Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz in 1523, recognizing it as the first Spanish settlement in New Spain.

[ 14 ] History [ edit ] Pre-Columbian [ edit ] Colossal stone head , Olmec culture, around 900 BC During the pre-Columbian era, Veracruz was mainly populated by four indigenous groups: the Huastecs and Otomis in the north, the Totonacs in the north-center, and the Olmecs in the south.

[ 15 ] Remains of these past civilizations can be found in archeological sites such as Pánuco, Castillo de Teayo , El Zapotal, Las Higueras, Quiahuiztlán, El Tajín , Cempoala , Tres Zapotes and San Lorenzo Tenochtitlán .

[ 16 ] The first major civilization in the territory of the current state was that of the Olmecs. The Olmecs lived in the Coatzacoalcos River region and it became the center of Olmec culture. The main ceremonial center here was San Lorenzo Tenochtitlán. Other major centers in the state include Tres Zapotes in the city of Veracruz and La Venta in Tabasco. The culture reached its height about 2600 years ago, with its best-known artistic expression being the colossal stone heads .

[ 16 ] These ceremonial sites were the most complex of that early time period. Consequently, many anthropologists regard the Olmecs as the "mother culture" of numerous other Mesoamerican cultures. However, according to historian John Schmal, the Olmecs were "eclipsed" by other emerging Mesoamerican civilizations by 300 BCE.

[ 15 ] Another major group was the Totonacs, who have survived to the present day. Their region, called Totonacapan , is centered between the Cazones River and the Papaloapan River in the north of the state. Pre-Columbian Totonacs lived from hunting, fishing and agriculture, mostly of corn, beans, chili peppers and squash. This is also the native region of the vanilla bean . Clay sculptures with smiling faces are indicative of this culture. The major site is El Tajín , located near Papantla , but the culture reached its apogee in Cempoala (about five miles (8.0 km) inland from the current port of Veracruz), when it was conquered by the Aztecs.

[ 16 ] When the Spaniards arrived in 1519, the territory was still home to a population of about 250,000 people living in fifty population centers and speaking four Totonac dialects. 25,000 were living in Cempoala alone.

[ 15 ] The Huastecs are in the far north of the Veracruz and extend into parts of Tamaulipas, Hidalgo, San Luis Potosí, Querétaro and Puebla. The language and agricultural techniques of these people and the Maya are similar; however, only a few buildings and ceramics remain from the early Huastec culture. This culture also reached its peak between 1200 and 1519, when it was conquered by the Spanish.

[ 16 ] During the 15th and very early 16th century, the Aztecs came to dominate much of the state and dividing it into tributary provinces, of Tochtepec, Cuetlaxtlan, Cempoallan, Quauhtochco, Jalapa, Misantla, and Tlatlauhquitepec. The Aztecs were interested in the area's vegetation and crops such as cedars, fruit, cotton, cacao, corn, beans and vanilla. However, the Totonacs chafed under Aztec rule, with Aztec rulers from Axayacatl to Moctezuma II having to send soldiers to quell rebellions. The Huastecs were subjugated more successfully by the Aztecs and relegated to the provinces of Atlan and Tochpan.

[ 15 ] Colonial period, 1519–1821 [ edit ] Playa Villa Rica, where the Spanish built the first city of Veracruz Statue of rebel leader Yanga Veracruz played an important part in the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire by Hernán Cortés and his expedition members. They founded Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz on May 18, 1519, as the first Spanish town in what is now Mexico. By doing so, Cortés threw off the authority of the Governor of Cuba, Diego Velázquez , claiming authority directly from the Spanish crown. A small contingent of the expedition remained at Veracruz, while the main body of conquerors moved inland.

[ 17 ] Among the first groups encountered by the Spanish in the Americas were the Totonacs .

[ 15 ] Juan de Grijalva was the first Spaniard to make contact with the Totonacs near present-day Veracruz.

[ 16 ] Seeking to free his people from Aztec rule, Totonac ruler Tlacochcalcatl offered conquistador Hernán Cortés 50,000 warriors to take Tenochtitlan. With Spanish assistance, the Totonacs expelled Aztec tax collectors and took over some Aztec outposts.

[ 15 ] The city of Veracruz was established as the first Spanish-controlled municipality on the coast. Cortés then advanced towards Tenochtitlan, initiating the Spanish conquest.

[ 16 ] As Cortés's campaign progressed, certain Totonac factions sided with the Spanish, while the Huastecs, also under Aztec rule, resisted Cortés's forces. After the Aztecs were defeated at Tenochtitlan, Cortés sent a unit to conquer the Huastecs as well.

[ 15 ] During the early conquest era, Cortés distributed the labor of indigenous settlements to particular conquerors in an institution known as encomienda . The indigenous ruler of the settlement was charged with mobilization labor and tribute that was due to the holder of the encomienda . Veracruz had a number of encomiendas that changed hands a number of times, but early on came under the direct control of the Spanish crown rather than individual encomenderos .

[ 18 ] During the colonial era, Veracruz was the main port of entry for immigrants from Spain, African slaves , and all types of luxury goods for import and export. The first group of Franciscans arrived in Veracruz in 1524, walking barefoot to the capital of the Spanish colony of New Spain .

[ 19 ] The route between Veracruz and the Spanish capital of Mexico City, built on the site of the Aztec capital Tenochtitlan , was the key trade route during the colonial era. Much of the history of the state is involved with the port city that Cortés founded in 1519. Veracruz became the principal and often only port to export and import goods between the colony of New Spain and Spain itself.

[ 15 ] To ensure the port's monopoly, it came to have control over almost all of New Spain's Gulf coastline.

[ 16 ] New Spain's silver and cochineal red dye, were the two most important exports from the port, along with chocolate, vanilla, chili peppers, and much more were exported. Imported were livestock (sheep, cows, goats, horses), wheat and other cultivars. From the Caribbean, slaves, pineapple, and sugar cane were introduced. This made the port a highly prized target for pirates during the colonial period, with attacks and sackings frequent.

[ 20 ] [ 15 ] This led to the building of the fort of San Juan de Ulúa , a site Juan de Grijalva visited in 1518, [ 21 ] and the fortification of the city overall.

[ 16 ] Much of Totonac and Huastec culture have survived the colonial period into the present day. Much of the reason for this is that the north of Veracruz is rugged with thick vegetation and relatively little of the resources the Spanish were looking for.

[ 15 ] Veracruz is considered to be where the " mestizo " or mixed European/indigenous ethnicities began, which is a large part of Mexican cultural identity.

[ 16 ] Arriving with the Spanish conquerors, new diseases made their first appearance in the continent.

European diseases [ 22 ] decimated the native population of the province, prompting the importation of African slaves during the colonial period, starting in the 16th century. The Spanish imported between 500,000 and 1,000,000 West African slaves into Mexico between 1535 and 1767 ( miscegenation between indigenous and African populations began almost immediately). New Spain did not have any laws prohibiting interracial marriage, hence the correct term is Afro-Mestizo, which includes all 3 ethnicities: Indigenous, African, and Spanish.

Runaway slaves ( cimarrones ) became problematic to public order since they frequently formed robber bands that attacked travelers on highways. Crown efforts against these groups began in earnest in the late sixteenth century, but a major rebellion broke out in 1606 in the areas of Villa Rica, Nueva Veracruz, Antón Lizardo, and the Rio Blanco area. However, the gravest of these occurred in the Orizaba area, where there were about 500 fugitive slaves. In 1609, a leader named Gaspar Yanga led an insurrection against the Spanish but was defeated in battle. Unrest continued, eventually forcing the government to sign an amnesty pact and giving the Africans the right to form their own community, exacting as a condition that bandits be suppressed. This was called San Lorenzo de Zerral but today it is known as the municipality of Yanga . This was the first time slavery was abolished in the Americas.

[ 16 ] In the first half of the seventeenth century, cities such as Córdoba , Orizaba , and Xalapa were formed or expanded to protect the trade route between Mexico City and the port of Veracruz. During this time, the Spanish and mixed-ethnicities population increased as the purely indigenous population continued to fall to a fraction of pre-Conquest levels (due now to mixing, rather than disease). Almost all trade in and out of New Spain had to be with Spain except for some limited trade authorized with England and other Spanish colonies. This would stay in place until 1778, when the Decreto de Libre Comercio , allowing a limited free trade within Spanish-held realms, lifted many of these restrictions on trade with Europe. This would make the port more important than it had been, and led to increased prosperity for the inhabitants.

Outside of the port, in other areas of the province, the economy was based on agriculture, livestock, and commerce. In 1720, Xalapa organized the first trade fair, making it the center for trade between inland Mexican goods and those from abroad. This would lead to its eventual status as the capital of the state.

[ 16 ] In 1746, the state was divided into the civil jurisdictions of Pánuco, Tampico, Huayacocotla, Huauchinango, Papantla, Misantla, Xalapa, Jalacingo, Veracruz, Córdoba, Orizaba, Cosamaloapan, Tuxtla, and Cotaxtla.

[ 16 ] The port city of Veracruz, and the fort of San Juan de Ulúa, where Cortés landed three hundred years earlier, was where the loyalist soldiers of the Spanish Crown made their last stand against the independence movement in 1824.

[ 15 ] Independence [ edit ] Depiction of the siege of Veracruz during the Mexican–American War During the Mexican War of Independence , there was support for the insurgents in many parts of the state, with skirmishes erupting in various parts as early as 1811. A major conspiracy against the colonial government was discovered in the port in 1812, with rebels taking Ayahualulco and Ixhuacán during the same year. This forced royalist troops to withdraw to Xalapa. Eventually, this city along with the port were cut off from Mexico City. Most of the state remained in rebel hands during the rest of the war although the commercial class of the port did not support the effort. In 1821, Juan de O'Donojú , the last viceroy of New Spain, came to the port to leave for Spain. However, until 1823, Spanish troops continued to occupy San Juan de Ulúa Fort. In 1826, the city would receive the first of its four titles of "heroic city" for confronting these remaining Spanish troops.

[ 16 ] While the last of the Spanish held on in San Juan de Ulúa, Agustín de Iturbide had been declared the emperor of Mexico in 1822. However, his reign quickly encountered resistance from those favoring a republican form of government, including from Antonio López de Santa Anna from his stronghold in Veracruz state. Months later, Iturbide would go into exile and Santa Anna would eventually hold nine terms as president.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The French intervened in Mexico through Veracruz for the first time in the 1838, in what became the Pastry War . The port was blockaded. Efforts to defend the country were coordinated from Xalapa. The port was bombarded, but eventually a settlement was reached.

[ 16 ] During the Mexican–American War , the port was blockaded again, this time by the Americans. Initial American attempts in 1847 to land in Alvarado were checked, but the Americans then made a plan to land a few miles south of Veracruz, which surrendered after a 20-day siege , defeated General Santa Anna 's forces at the Battle of Cerro Gordo , and marched inland through Xalapa towards Mexico City, led by General Winfield Scott .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Mexico surrendered shortly after.

The municipalities of Tuxpan and Chicontepec belonged to Puebla until 1853, when they were annexed to Veracruz to give the state its final form. In 1855, the State Government Palace was constructed. During the Reform War , the major player was Ignacio de la Llave whose name is part of the state's official designation. In 1858, the port became the site for the liberal government under Benito Juárez after he was forced out of Mexico City during the Reform War. Their control of this port and its customs duties allowed liberal forces to gather resources. Conservative forces attacked the state but were repelled from both the port and Xalapa.

[ 16 ] The Reform War devastated Mexico's economy, leaving it unable to repay its European debts. As a result, Juárez annulled the country's foreign debt, prompting Britain, Spain, and France to occupy the Mexican Gulf Coast in October 1861 to force repayment. Under normal conditions, this move would have been blocked by the United States under the Monroe Doctrine , however, that nation was occupied with a Civil War at the time, and the European powers believed that the Americans could not act. Spanish troops under General Manuel Gasset occupied the port of Veracruz without local resistance.

[ 23 ] Then, in November, the power was also occupied by British and French forces. The Spanish and the British withdrew after making deals with Juárez, but the French pushed on to establish the reign of Maximilian I of Mexico . However, this was short-lived and the French were expelled through Veracruz in 1866/67.

[ 15 ] In 1863, the state was officially named Veracruz-Llave. After the French were expelled, the state government was in the port of Veracruz. In 1878, the capital was transferred to Orizaba. It was later moved to Xalapa in 1885.

[ 16 ] By the end of the century, many infrastructure improvements, such as roads and railways (especially the Ferrocarril Interoceánico ) had been completed with the major cities being Veracruz, Orizaba, Xalapa, Córdoba, Jalacingo , Chicontepec and Tantoyuca . The discovery of oil in the north of the state attracted foreign firms, which brought machinery needed for its extraction. These companies included Huasteca Company Petroleum and El Aguila along with American and English firms. During the same time period, uprisings against the government under Porfirio Díaz in the agricultural south of the state were brutally repressed.

[ 16 ] 20th century to the present [ edit ] Unrest against the Díaz regime continued until the outbreak of the Mexican Revolution ousted him from power. The major event leading up to this war in Veracruz was the cigar-makers strike of 1905, when more than 5,000 workers of the "El Valle Nacional" company walked off the job. The governor, Teodora A. Dehesa, unsuccessfully tried to negotiate a settlement. The strike went on for months until the strikers won. This victory encouraged more actions, until strikes at the factories in Rio Blanco, Nogales, Santa Rosa and Contón de Orizaba resulted in dramatic violence in January 1907 .

[ 16 ] No major battles of the Mexican Revolution were fought in the state, though there were skirmishes and attacks on the port. By 1914 rebel Cándido Agular occupied a number of municipalities in the state and in 1917, Venustiano Carranza transferred the federal government here temporarily.

[ 16 ] In April 1914, the Tampico Affair , which concerned U.S. sailors in the city of Tampico, caused President Woodrow Wilson to send American troops to Veracruz for six months, after which Mexico severed diplomatic relations with the United States.

[ 15 ] After the Revolution, agrarian reform, including the redistribution of land and the creation of ejidos took place here. The oil companies in the north of the state were nationalized and consolidated into PEMEX in the 1930s by Lázaro Cárdenas . In the 1950s, more road construction, such as the Mexico City- Poza Rica, Veracruz-Alvarado- Coatzacoalco and Tinajas-Ciudad Aleman-Tlacoatalpan highways were constructed. The Universidad Veracruzana was expanded as well. In 1960, the Xalapa Museum of Anthropology was inaugurated as well as the Coatzacoalco- Salina Cruz highway. The Veracruz city international airport was opened in the 1970s.

[ 16 ] In the ten years after 2006, at least 3,600 people have disappeared within the state.

[ 24 ] Multiple mass graves have been found within the state.

[ 25 ] This is seen as part of the over 28,000 missing individuals related to the Mexican Drug War .

[ 26 ] Within the state the Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas have battled for control.

[ 27 ] Additionally, this has led to journalists being targeted and killed within the state.

[ 28 ] Geography [ edit ] Political geography [ edit ] The state is a crescent-shaped strip of land wedged between the Sierra Madre Oriental to the west and the Gulf of Mexico to the east.

[ 20 ] Its total area is 78,815 km 2 (30,431 sq mi), accounting for about 3.7% of Mexico's total territory.

[ 29 ] It stretches about 650 km (403.9 mi) north to south, but its width varies from between 212 and 36 km (132 and 22 mi), with an average of about 100 km (62 mi) in width.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Veracruz borders Tamaulipas to the north; Oaxaca and Chiapas to the south; Tabasco to the southeast; and Hidalgo , Puebla , and San Luis Potosí to the west. Its coastline along the Gulf of Mexico extends for 690 km (429 mi).

[ 15 ] Natural geography [ edit ] Citlaltépetl , the highest mountain in Mexico at 5,636 m.

View of the Jamapa River .

The natural geography can be categorized into nine regions: The Sierra de Zongolica , the Tecolutla Region, the Huayacocotla Region, the Metlac River area, the Tuxtlas Region, the Central Region, the Laguna del Castillo Region, the Pueblo Viejo-Tamiahua Region and the Laguna de Alvarado Region.

[ 30 ] The topography changes drastically, rising from the narrow coastal plains to the highlands of the eastern Sierra Madre. Elevation varies from sea level to the Pico de Orizaba , Mexico's highest peak at 5,636 m (18,491 ft) above sea level.

[ 29 ] [ 15 ] The coast is home to numerous tidewater streams and lagoons, which alternate with low strips of sand.

[ 31 ] Most of the long coastline is narrow and sandy with unstable dunes, small shifting lagoons, and points.

[ 30 ] The mountains are of the Sierra Madre Oriental and the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt . Mountain ranges include the Sierra de Topila, Sierra de Otontepec, Sierra de Huayacocotla, Sierra de Coxquihui, Sierra de Chiconquiaco , Sierra de Jalacingo, Sierra de Axocuapan, Sierra de Huatusco, Sierra de Zongolica , and the Sierra de Los Tuxtlas . Major peaks include Pico de Orizaba (5,636 m; 18,491 ft), Cofre de Perote (4,282 m; 14,048.6 ft), Cerro de Tecomates (3,227 m; 10,587 ft), Cerro del Vigía Alta (3,055 m; 10,023 ft) and Cerro de 3 Tortas (2,997 m; 9,833 ft). The Pico de Orizaba is covered in snow year round; the Cofre de Perote is covered in winter. Major valleys include the Acultzingo, Córdoba, Maltrata, Orizaba and San Andrés.

[ 30 ] Veracruz has over 40 rivers and tributaries, which transport rich silt from the state's highlands to its coastal regions and valleys. These rivers also provide water for hydroelectric power and irrigation.

[ 31 ] All of the rivers and streams that cross the state begin in the Sierra Madre Oriental or in the Central Mesa, flowing east to the Gulf of Mexico. The important ones include: Actopan River , Acuatempan river, Río Blanco , Cazones River , Coatzacoalcos River , Río de La Antigua, Ayyappan River, Jamapa River , Nautla River, Pánuco River , Papaloapan River , Tecolutla River , Tonalá River , Tuxpan River and Xoloapa River . The largest in terms of water discharge are the Pánuco, Tuxpan, Papaloapan, Coazocoalcos and Uxpanapa . The Panuco, Tuxpan, Papaloapan and Coatzacoalcos are navigable.

[ 30 ] Two of Mexico's most polluted rivers, the Coatzacoalcos and the Río Blanco are located in the state. Much of the pollution comes from industrial sources, but the discharge of sewerage and uncontrolled garbage disposal are also major contributors. The state has very few sewage treatment plants, with only 10% of sewage being treated before discharge.

[ 32 ] The state also has ten major waterfalls and ten major coastal lagoons. There is only one significant lake, called Lake Catemaco . Off the coast are the islands of Isla de Lobos, Isla de los Burros, Isla de Sacrificios , Isla de Salmendina, Isla del Idolo, Isladel Toro, Isla Frijoles, Isla Juan A Ramirez, Isla Pajaros and Isla Terrón and the ocean reefs called Blanquilla, Medio, Tangüillo, Tuxpan, Gualleguilla, Gallega, Anegada de Adento Anegada de Afuera and Cabezo.

[ 30 ] Major communities [ edit ] Acayucan Alvarado Boca del Río Camarón de Tejeda Catemaco Coatepec Coatzacoalcos Córdoba El Jícaro, Veracruz Martínez de la Torre Minatitlán Orizaba Papantla (Papantla de Olarte) Poza Rica Santiago Tuxtla San Andrés Tuxtla Tuxpan (Túxpam/Túxpam de Rodríguez Cano) Veracruz Xalapa (Xalapa-Enríquez) Localities [ edit ] La Martucha [ 33 ] Climate [ edit ] Mountain formation in the south of the state Veracruz Climate chart ( explanation ) J F M A M J J A S O N D 50 24 14 32 28 16 18 28 16 48 31 19 73 33 21 308 29 20 250 29 19 125 31 21 387 28 20 204 27 18 54 25 14 36 25 14 █ Average max. and min. temperatures in °C █ Precipitation totals in mm Source: Comisión Nacional del Agua Imperial conversion J F M A M J J A S O N D 2 75 57 1.3 82 61 0.7 82 61 1.9 88 66 2.9 91 70 12 84 68 9.8 84 66 4.9 88 70 15 82 68 8 81 64 2.1 77 57 1.4 77 57 █ Average max. and min. temperatures in °F █ Precipitation totals in inches The large variation of altitude results in a large mixture of climates, from cold, snow-topped mountain peaks to hot, humid tropical areas on the coast.

[ 15 ] 32% of the state is classified as hot and humid, 52% as hot and semi humid, 9% is warm and humid, 6% as temperate and humid and 1% is classified as cold.

[ 29 ] Hot and humid and hot and semi-humid climates dominate from sea level to about 1,000 m (3,281 ft) above sea level. Average annual temperature ranges from 22 to 26 °C (72 to 79 °F) with precipitation varying from 2,000 mm (79 in) to just over 3,500 mm (138 in) per year. Cooler and humid climates are found at elevations between 1,000 and 1,600 m (3,281 and 5,249 ft). These have an average temperature of between 18 and 22 °C (64 and 72 °F) with precipitation varying between 2,000 and 2,500 mm (79 and 98 in). Temperate climates are found at higher altitudes, between 1,600 and 2,800 m (5,249 and 9,186 ft). Temperatures here vary from 12 to 18 °C (54 to 64 °F) with precipitation varying more, between 500 and 2,500 mm (20 and 98 in). Cold climates are found at the highest elevations, reaching up to the Cofre de Perote and the Pico de Orizaba. There is a small semiarid region around the city of Perote and the west of the Huasteca area. This is due to a rain shadow caused by the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt and the Sierra Madre Oriental , which do not permit the flow of moist Gulf air to this region.

[ 30 ] Ecosystems [ edit ] Shore of Lake Catemaco Bougainvillea Various types of forest cover the state, but evergreen tropical forest dominate.

[ 30 ] The state's ecology is of great importance for many plant and animal species. It is a center of plant endemism and has two separate endemic bird areas.

[ 34 ] The northern part of the state as well as the higher mountain areas, are convergence zones between lowland evergreen tropical forests and more temperate flora and fauna. It is also the northernmost occurrence of subhumid tropical forest in Mexico, although little of this remains, mostly on steep slopes. The tropical forests of the Veracruz moist forests ecoregion are situated in the northeastern coastal plain and extend into southern Tamaulipas state, on the east side of the Sierra Madre Oriental . The soils here are volcanic and shallow, but with rich organic matter. Species that predominate include Mayan breadnut ( Brosimum alicastrum ), sapodilla ( Manilkara zapota ), rosadillo ( Celtis monoica ), Bursera simaruba , Dendropanax arboreus , and Sideroxylon capiri . This ecoregion extends into the central part of the state, with vegetation changing to include mahogany ( Swietenia macrophylla ), sapodilla ( Manilkara zapota ), Bernoullia flammea , and Astronium graveolens .

[ 34 ] In the central part of the state, the Veracruz dry forests extend from the Sierra to the coast, south of the Sierra de Chiconquiaco . The Petén–Veracruz moist forests occupy the southern part of the state, and extend eastwards through neighboring Chiapas and Tabasco states into Guatemala.

Veracruz has been described as having one of the richest varieties of wildlife in the western hemisphere. There is an especially diverse array of endemic insects like the conspicuous Arsenura armida . As well as insects, the state is known for its many arachnids, and features over 25 species of tarantula (Theraphosidae), of which many are endemic. The state is part of Birdlife International 's Endemic Bird Area(EBA) project due to the number of endemic birds here. Some of these include green-cheeked amazon ( Amazona viridigenalis ), Tamaulipas crow ( Corvus imparatus ), Altamira yellowthroat ( Geothlypis flavovelata ) and crimson-collared grosbeak ( Rhodothraupis celaeno ). Despite much of the deterioration of the forest areas, it is still an important stopover for migratory birds as well. Many endangered mammal species can be found here including two endemic rodents ( Peromyscus ochraventer and Neotoma angustapalata ), the jaguar ( Panthera onca ), ocelot ( Leopardus pardalis ), jaguarundi ( Herpailurus yaguarondi ) and white-nosed coati ( Nasua narica ).

[ 34 ] The endangered Baird's tapir may occasionally be spotted in the state's southern jungle regions, such as Biósfera Los Tuxtlas . This region is also the northernmost extent of the primate Alouatta palliata , or mantled howler .

Most of Veracruz's native forests have been destroyed and replaced by scrub and secondary communities of trees. From 1900 to 1987, over 18,553 km 2 (7,163.4 sq mi) of forest had been logged, resulting in the loss of habitat and biodiversity. Much of the logging is due to commercial timber, search for tropical hardwoods and the clearing of land for local farmers, especially for cattle grazing. Only 20% of Veracruz's original ecosystem remains, with 64% transformed by human exploitation. Despite some efforts at conservation and reclamation, exploitation continues to put pressure on remaining wild areas.

[ 34 ] The state has 31 environmentally protected areas in 21 different municipalities. Nine are urban parks, three are national parks ( Pico de Orizaba , Cofre de Perote and San José de los Molinos ).

[ 30 ] The Cofre de Perote National Park is 11,700 hectares of pine and oyamel forest, which was created in 1937. The Los Tuxtlas Biosphere Reserve covers the municipalities of Ángel R. Cabada , Santiago Tuxtla , San Andres Tuxtla , Catemaco , Soteapan , Mecayapan , Pajapan and Tatahuicapan for a total of 155,122 ha (383,314.8 acres). It contains various volcanos such as San Martín and Santa Marta and rich biodiversity as it stretches from sea level to higher elevations, with 16 climate regions groups into four climate types. Forest types range from evergreen tropical rainforest to pine. 75% of species here are also found in Central America and there is a total of 2,368 plant species. Some, such as Costus dirzoi , Daphnopsis megacarpa , Eugenia sotoesparzae , Inga sinacae , Miconia ibarrae , Mormodes tuxtlensis , and Thelypteris rachyflexuosa , are native only to this area. Wildlife includes 102 mammal species, 49 amphibian, 109 reptilian, 561 bird species and more. Species in danger of extinction include the jaguar, spider monkey and anteater .

[ 30 ] The Veracruz Reef System is also considered to be a national park and is mostly off the coast of Veracruz city, Boca del Río and Alvarado . The area includes coral reefs, seaweed beds and other marine vegetation, covering an area of 52,239 ha (129,085.4 acres). There are seventeen reefs in total, some of which jut above the surface to form small islands. This system links with the reef systems of Campeche and Yucatán .

[ 30 ] Economy [ edit ] Veracruz has one of Mexico's leading economies, based on agriculture and petroleum.

[ 31 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2025 ) Agriculture [ edit ] Vanilla beans The primary sector of the economy (agriculture, forestry and fishing) has been important since pre-Hispanic times and continues to be important both as a source of income as well as culturally. The state has abundant rainfall and extremely fertile soils, as well as a long coastline and forest containing a wide variety of trees and other plants.

[ 15 ] [ 35 ] There is about 1 million hectares of cultivable land, half of which is in private hands and 43% is ejido or communal land. The rest is occupied by human settlements. There are 3,620 ejidos parceled out to 270,000 ejido members. 52.5% of agricultural land is used for the growing of crops or used as pasture and 43.1% is forest or rainforest. Chief agricultural products include coffee, vanilla, sugarcane, tobacco, bananas, coconuts, and vegetables, but local farmers depend mainly on corn and beans.

[ 31 ] Two corn crops per year are generally produced, planted on 644,936 hectares with a production of 1,114,325 tons. The state is the leading national producer of coffee, sugarcane, corn, and rice.

[ 15 ] Coffee is grown on 152,993 hectares producing 400,575 tons. Export earnings from this crop are about US$232 million annually. Most coffee is grown in the mountain areas of Córdoba-Huatusco, Coatepec-Teocelo-Cosautlán and Misantla-Tlapacoyan-Atzalan. Sugarcane is cultivated on 254,000 hectares, producing 16,867,958 tons annually. Veracruz is the largest producer of rice with 24,000 hectares producing 120,000 tons. Much is this crop is protected by import bans from Asia.

[ citation needed ] The state grows half of the country's citrus fruit and grows the most kinds. This occupies 180,577 hectares and produces 2,575,140 tons annually. Varieties include oranges, tangerines, mandarins , limes and grapefruit. Most citrus is grown in the north of the state, and much of the lime crop is exported, supporting a packing and shipping industry. Veracruz is the largest mango producer in the country, grown on 31,640 hectares producing 287,000 tons. Most of this is the manila variety, which is preferred in Mexico. 95% of this crop is consumed fresh within Mexico although exports to Canada have begun.

[ citation needed ] Vanilla beans are native to the state, which is the primary producer for Mexico. Most of this crop is grown in an area known as Totonacapan in and around Papantla.

Livestock raising is an important activity. There are over 300,000 units of production most of which raise cattle, with Veracruz being the main beef producer for the country at 14% of the total. In addition to beef cattle, dairy cattle, pigs, sheep, goats, horses, domestic fowl, and bees are raised.

[ 31 ] The state's inland tropical forests supply dyewoods , hardwoods, and rubber.

[ 15 ] About 20% of the state's territory is forested, with 220,000 of temperate forest and 1,200,000 hectares of tropical forests. Logging in the state produces 128,254 m3 of wood products per year. The most exploited species include pine, oyamel, cypress and oak. Some tropical hardwoods are harvested as well.

Veracruz's long coastline supports a large fishing industry, producing one-fifth of Mexico's catch. Most of the country's mojarra , oysters and shrimp come from here. Other major fish catches include crab, sea bass and red snapper .

Agroindustry focuses on the processing of coffee and sugar products, with citrus packers holding an important position as well.

[ citation needed ] Natural resources [ edit ] Petroleum tower in Poza Rica Veracruz, a resource-rich state, plays a significant role in Mexico's economy. It hosts about 35% of the country's water supply, and is a key hub for oil production.

[ 15 ] While the state's mountains also contain unexploited coal, iron, gold, and silver reserves, its mining activity primarily focuses on non-metallic minerals such as calcium , feldspar , kaolin , marble , and silica . The state ranks fourth in the country for non-metallic mineral output. In total, mining contributes 1.5% to the state's economy.

[ 15 ] Veracruz was a pioneer in both the extraction and refining of petroleum products.

[ 30 ] The state has about one-fourth of Mexico's petroleum reserves and ranks third in petroleum production.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Most of this production is concentrated in the northern part of the state.

[ 15 ] Approximately 40,000,000 barrels (6,400,000 m 3 ) of oil are produced each year and 109,870,000,000 cubic feet (3.111 × 10 9 m 3 ) of natural gas. Petrochemicals represent 28.1% of the state's manufacturing and ranks first nationally. There are 22 petrochemical plants, with the most important being La Cangrejera , Jáltipan de Morelos , Poza Rica , Cosoleacaque , Pajaritos and Minatitlán .

Golden Lane Oil Fields [ edit ] Map of the Golden Lane [ 36 ] The "Golden Lane" ("Dos Bocas-Alamo structure" or The Ridge") refers to a series of oil fields aligned in an arc onshore and a symmetrical alignment offshore, forming two sides of a Cretaceous atoll 180 km long.

[ 37 ] The structure was discovered in 1908 by Weetman Pearson 's Mexican Eagle Petroleum Company San diego de la Mar No. 1 well, which flowed 2,500 bbl /day.

[ 37 ] The Golden Lane oil fields penetrate a massive elliptical reef platform, identified as the Sierra del Abra limestone (consisting of reef, backreef and lagoonal facies ), which dips southeast.

[ 38 ] The site for the discovery well was selected due to the presence of petroleum seeps , just as was Edward Laurence Doheny 's La Paz No. well in the Ebano-Panuco petroleum district west of Tampico , Tamaulipas, the first Mexican discovery well in 1904.

[ 39 ] In 1908, the infamous Dos Bocas oil fire occurred after the San Diego de la Mar No. 3 blowout .

[ 40 ] This was followed by the Potrero del Llano No. 4 well, flowing 100,000 bbl per day during the three months it was out of control.

[ 40 ] Doheny's Cerro Azul No. 4 well, located by Ezequiel Ordonez, became the largest daily production record holder in 1916 at 260,000 bbl.

[ 40 ] Geophysical studies, in particular gravimetry , starting in 1920 led to the discovery of the Poza Rica Field in 1932 and Moralillo Field in 1948, on the west flank of the Golden Lane in the Tamabra forereef facies.

[ 41 ] Refraction seismography surveys started in 1930, augemented in 1948 with reflection seismography, which led to the discovery of the southern extent of the atoll with the Ezequiel Ordonez No. 1 well in 1952 and additional discoveries through 1968.

[ 42 ] Marine seismic and magnetometer surveys starting in 1957 showed the extent of the atoll offshore and led to the first offshore well, Isla de Lobos No. 1-B, in 1963.

[ 42 ] The depths of wells are on the order of 500 m onshore and 2000 m offshore.

[ 43 ] Industry, transportation and commerce [ edit ] A portion of the port of Veracruz Laguna Verde Nuclear Power Plant (LVNPP) in Alto Lucero, Veracruz, produces about 4.5% of Mexico's electrical energy.
21% to 33% of Veracruz's gross domestic product (GDP) is derrived from manufacturing, with the chemical and petrochemical sectors contributing about 64% of the manufacturing GDP.

[ 15 ] Other products produced include metals, processed foods, beverages, printing and publishing, textiles and machinery.

[ 15 ] Most of the state's industry takes place in the municipalities of Coatzacoalcos , Minatitlán, Cosoleacaque, Poza Rica, Córdoba, Orizaba, Tuxpan and Veracruz, with over 5,000 establishments. The rest is divided among nearly 11,000 smaller establishments. There are five major industrial parks: Bruno Pagliai, Ixtac, Petroquimico Morelos, Córdoba-Amatlán and Parque 2000. The largest of these is Bruno Pagliai, which covers 300.8 hectares (743 acres).

Transportation and commerce are important factors in the state, mostly linked to importing and exporting through its four deepwater ports. The focus of most of these activities is the port of Veracruz, whose location on the Gulf coast of Mexico makes it a key export hub. It handles 75% of Mexico's port activity, with exports from Veracruz traveling to Europe, Latin America, and the United States. Its primary exports include coffee, fertilizer, fish and crustaceans, and fresh fruits.

[ 15 ] Other ports include those in Tuxpan and Coatzacoalcos. Most highway, rail and air connections link to the port of Veracruz and other ports to the south.

[ 31 ] The state has 73 companies that have been classified as high-volume exporters and it is ranked sixth in the country for exports. The state contains five major food wholesale markets, 146 government sponsored markets, about 75,000 private stores and 201 supermarkets. Wholesale vendors focus on agricultural products such as wood, livestock and food products. The major focal point for international business is the World Trade Center EXPOVER in Boca del Río. Inaugurated in 1989, the center has facilities to accommodate 5,000 people in 7,000 square metres (75,000 sq ft), an exhibition hall of 12,000 square metres (130,000 sq ft), a business center and parking for over 800 vehicles.

In the industrial sector, relatively poor municipios are not catching up to relatively rich ones though the latter are not diverging either. A policy of encouraging much more domestic and/or foreign investment is called
for if poorer areas are to prosper and the outflow of residents is to stop.

[ 44 ] Handcrafts [ edit ] In the more rural and indigenous areas of the state, a number of handicrafts are still made and sold both to local buyers and to tourists. Many of these crafts are produced by communities that specialize in one or more types. Wood furniture and other items are made by the Huasteca people, mostly using cedar and palm trees. The best work comes from the towns of Ozulama and Castillo de Teayo. Teocelo and Monte Blanco are known for bamboo furniture and other items. Musical instruments of wood such as a guitar called "jarana" are constructed in the Los Tuxtlas area, especially in Catemaco, with flutes made in Papantla. Wooden masks are made in Teocelo, and items made with the wood of coffee plants are made in Misantla, Coatepec, Huastusco and Xico. Corn husks are used to make decorative figures, often religious, in Nautla and Naranjos de Amatlán. Palm fronds are woven into fans, shoes and baskets in Jalcomulco, Ozulama and Tlalixcoyan.

[ 45 ] Ceramics have been made in almost all parts of Veracruz since the Olmecs. One area known for its work is Papantla which also includes life sized representations of folk dancers from the area along with more mundane items of glazed and unglazed pottery. Minatitlán is known for its production of ceramic cooking utensils which are also popular in the neighboring municipalities of Actopan and Naolinco. San Miguel Aguasuelos and Jalcomulco are known for their white clay wares which include water jars, toys, nativity scenes, bells and more.

[ 45 ] Traditional clothing and embroidery can be most easily found in the La Huasteca area, where elaborately decorated women's blouses can be seen, especially in the El Higo and Tlalixcoyan area. In Totonacalpan, men are still often seen in white shirts and pants with a bag to hold personal items. This dress dates back to the early colonial period and had not changed much since then. Other areas specialize in wool items such as Naranjos de Amatlán, Minatilán and the city of Veracruz where items such as dresses, skirts and jackets. These and other textiles such as tablecloths and napkins are often decorated with cross-stitch. Leather items include shoes, jackets, bags, wallets, belts and boots and are usually made in the La Huasteca region, Teocolo, Citlaltépetl and Naolinco.

[ 45 ] Culture [ edit ] Gastronomy [ edit ] Main article: Cuisine of Veracruz Huachinango ( red snapper ) a la Veracruzana The gastronomy of the state is unique in Mexico and mixed Spanish, indigenous, and Caribbean influences.

[ 46 ] From the pre-Hispanic period, the cuisine of the state was unique. The staple triumvirate of corn, beans, and squash was supplemented by tropical fruits, vanilla beans, and an herb called acuyo or hoja santa . Another important native contribution is seafood, which is featured in many dishes such as, arroz a la tumbada and caldo de mariscos (seafood soup).

[ 20 ] During the colonial period, a variety of spices and ingredients were introduced to Veracruz, significantly impacting the local cuisine. In terms of spices, the Spanish introduced bay laurel , cilantro , parsley , parsley , and thyme from Europe and cloves , cinnamon , and black pepper from Asia. They also brought almonds, capers, garlic, olives, olive oil, rice, and wheat. Capers, garlic, and olive oil are essential ingredients in what is perhaps the most famous specialty of the region, huachinango a la veracruzana , red snapper in a spicy tomato sauce. Caribbean imports such as sugar cane and pineapple were adapted as well as the peanut, brought from Africa by the Portuguese (although the peanut is originally from South America).

[ 20 ] Veracruz cuisine divides into six regions called Sotavento, Centro Norte, Centro Sur, Sierra, Costa Norte, and Los Tuxtlas. The Sotovento area is in the south of the state, and the dishes here are heavily based on rice. Common dishes include arroz a la tumbada, which is rice cooked with seafood or meat and rice with fried bananas. Seafood dishes are also prominent based mostly on fish and shrimp. A common ingredient in dishes is a herb called "hoja santa" or "hierba Santa", which is a plant of the family Piperaceae . The Centro Norte is centered on Xalapa. Dishes here tend to be more indigenous in nature, heavily flavored with mild chili peppers. Common dishes here include Chilehuates, similar to a tamale, stuffed chile peppers, and enchiladas. Less seafood and more pork and domestic fowl are consumed. The Centro Sur area is mostly indigenous and encompasses the area of, Huatusco, Coscomatepec, Cotaxtla, Orizaba, Amatlán, Huilango y las españolas Córdoba y Fortín de las Flores, la negra Yanga and San Lorenzo de los Negros. Dishes here are similar to Centro Norte, but chayotes appear more often as this region is a major producer of the vegetable. Meats in adobo sauce are common as well. The Sierra and Costa Norte encompass the northern part of the state, such as the Pánuco River area and Totonacapan. This area is noted for a number of unique dishes such as frijoles en achuchutl, made with black beans, pork rind, chayotes, squash seeds, and jalapeño peppers .

Bocoles are a kind of filled tortilla made with corn dough, stuffed with black beans, chorizo, eggs, or seafood, which then are fried in lard. Tamales are often made with banana leaves. The area is also known for its breads, especially anise –flavored rolls. The Los Tuxtlas area is centered on the communities of Santiago, San Andrés and Catemaco, which were the center of the Olmec civilization. The cuisine in this area features yucca, "chocos" (a type of edible flower), fish, especially mojarra, and exotic meats such as monkey, and iguana .

[ 46 ] Museums [ edit ] The Olmec San Martin Pajapan Monument 1 on exhibit in the Museum of Anthropology in Xalapa The state capital of Xalapa is also home to a number of important museums. The Museum of Anthropology contains the second most important collection of Mesoamerican artifacts in the country. It was built beginning in 1959 over six hectares. The complex is divided into various halls and galleries by theme, focusing on the Olmec and Totonac cultures. The Patio Olmeca contains the colossal head found in 1945 and known as El Rey (The King). Other important artifacts include giant stelae and San Martin Pajapan Monument 1 (at right).
The Museum of Science and Technology is in Xalapa. It contains more than 400 exhibitions in eight halls: Life, Ecology, Space, Transportation, Sciences, Energy, Water and Earth. The Pinoteca Diega Rivera was established by the state in the former Monastery of San Francisco in Xalapa. Its primary function is to preserve and display Rivera 's works owned by the state, but it also contains early works by José María Velasco , Jorge Cuesta and Teodoro A. Dehesa . Near the city is the Hacienda del Lencero, which was the home and headquarters of President Antonio López de Santa Anna in the 19th century. It has been preserved and turned into a museum.

[ 46 ] In Tuxpan is the Regional Museum of Anthropology with more than 400 pieces from pre-Hispanic groups in the region, displayed in four halls. Most of the pieces come from the center of the state and from the Huasteca region.On the edge of the Tuxpan River. The city also has the Mexican-Cuban Museum. It contains a collection of photographs from the Cuban Revolution as well as a statue of José Martí .

[ 46 ] Other museums are scattered in other parts of the state. The Salvador Ferrando Museum is located in Tlacotalpan and contains many everyday items and art from the 16th to the 19th centuries. The Tuxteco Regional Museum in Santiago de Tuxtla contains Olmec and Totonac artifacts including art objects, farming implements, utensils and more. In the garden area, there are giant stone sculptures from the Tres Zapotes site. The Jardín Central (Central Garden) of the municipality of Tierra Blanca has a number of Totonac archeological pieces on display. The Archeological Museum of Córdoba is in the city of the same name with three exhibition halls containing artifacts from the Maya, Olmec, Toltec and Huastec cultures. There is also a collection of historical photographs of the city. The Veracruz State Art Museum (Museo de Arte del Estado de Veracruz) is located in Orizaba in what was the monastery associated with the Concordia Church. Its collection includes works by Diego Rivera, Ignacio Rosas and Gonzalo Argüelles . It also contains a collection of historical photographs related to Veracruz and art. The Malintzin Archeological Museum is in the municipality of Nogales . It is a small museum with one hall, with photographs and documents. It is located in the church where Malinche and Juan de Jaramillo were supposedly married.

[ 46 ] Fairs and festivals [ edit ] The state is noted for its quantity and variety of festivals. The most important of these is Carnival in the city of Veracruz. This city's version of the event begins with the "burning of bad humor", which is represented in effigy. A number of kings and queens are "crowned" including categories for children but the most important is the Rey Feo (Ugly King) and the Reina del Carnaval (Queen of the Carnival). The latter is accompanies by cadets from the Naval Academy during the parade. This celebration is repeated all along the Veracruz coastline with other significant festivities taking place in Alvarado , Coatzacoalcos , San Rafael and Villa José Cardel .

Minatitlán 's celebration draws people from the nearby states of Oaxaca and Tabasco.

[ 47 ] Day of the Dead is celebrated in almost all of Mexico from Oct 31 to November 2 but there are local twists in the state. In some places, it is commemorated during the months of August and September. In Papantla, boards or tables are placed on rooftops, which have been adorned with flowers, plant matter and more. In Tantoyuca, it is commemorated with costumes and music, similar to Carnival.

[ 46 ] The Christian celebration of Candlemas is fused with traditions associated with Chalchiuhtlicua , the goddess of water, rivers, lakes and ocean. She was replaced by the Virgin of Candlemas, the protector of fishermen, making this celebration particularly important on the coast, especially in Tlacotalpan, where it is celebrated with much pomp. In Jáltipan de Morelos , ethnic Nahuas and Popolucas dress in elaborate costumes and arrange their hair in intricate styles. In Santa María Magdalena, on July 22, bulls are set free to roam the streets. Corn harvest festivals are prominent in the Huasteca region in municipalities such as Chontla , Chicontepec, and Ixhuatlán de Madero . These generally include native dances and foods based on corn.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Dance and music [ edit ] "La malagueña" Son huasteco, performed by Los Hijos de la Malinche of Jáltipan, Veracruz Problems playing this file? See media help .

The state is well known in the country for its music and dance. The fandango is a dance brought over from Spanish. Today the state has two varieties: the jarocho and the huasteco.

[ 46 ] Indigenous and folk dances in the state are most often associated with rituals and religious festivals. These include one called Los Lisceres also called the Tigres from the Los Tuxtlas region. Participants wear Olmec style masks which represent the rain god Tlalóc. Another is Los Guaguas in which the participants pay homage to the sun, and Los Santiagos, which is related to the veneration of Saint James, patron saint of Hernán Cortés. One last one is called Los Negritos (The Little Black Ones) which was created by African slaves. According to tradition, the origin of this dance lies in a story about a boy who was bitten by a snake and the rituals his family held to heal him.

[ 48 ] However, the state's most famous dance is as much a ritual and daredevil act as movements performed to music. The Danza de los Voladores (Dance of the Flyers) is a ceremony/ritual which has its roots in the pre-Hispanic period and presently best known as associated with the town of Papantla , Veracruz. It is believed to have originated with the Nahua , Huastec and Otomi peoples in central Mexico, and then spread throughout most of Mesoamerica . The ritual consists of dance and the climbing of a 30-meter pole from which four of the five participants then launch themselves tied with ropes to descend to the ground. The fifth remains on top of the pole, dancing and playing a flute and drum. According to myth, the ritual was created to ask the gods to end a severe drought . Although the ritual did not originate with the Totonac people, today it is most strongly associated with them, especially those in and around Papantla , as the ceremony has died off in most other places.

[ 49 ] The ceremony was named an Intangible Cultural Heritage by UNESCO in order to help the ritual survive and thrive in the modern world.

[ 50 ] The state's best-known musical style is called the "son". A " son " is a musical variation which traces its origins to Spain and developed during the 17th and 18th centuries. It is the state's most popular musical style shows influences from the many peoples who have lived here such as indigenous groups, Portuguese, Italians, Africans, French and others. The music is generally performed by harps, violins and guitars, with an occasional wind instrument.

Son huasteco (also called son huapango) is a variety of son played in the north of the state mostly among the Totonacs. Son jarocho is the better known and more popular variety played in the south of the state. The famous Grammy award-winning song "La Bamba" by Los Lobos is said have its roots in a traditional folk song from Veracruz (hence the reference to the "Marinero" in that song).

[ 46 ] [ 51 ] The state has produced a number of musicians famous in the country. One of the best known is Francisco Gabilondo Soler. Gabilondo Soler is best known for creating a character known as "Cri-cri", a singing cricket for a radio show in the first half of the 20th century. As a musician, he specialized in writing children's songs such as "Abuelito", "Caminito de la escuela", "El baile de los muñecos", "El burrito" and "La negrita Cucurumbé". A number of his works have been translated into other languages. Another famous musician is Agustín Lara, who has had more international fame. Nicknamed "Flaco de oro" (golden skinny one), he always insisted that he was born in Tlacotalpan, Veracruz and not Mexico City as records show. Lara formed his first band in 1930 called El Son de Marabú and toured almost continuously in Mexico and abroad during his career. His most famous compositions include "Veracruz", "Noche de Ronda" and "Solamente una vez".

[ 51 ] Other prominent musicians include Toña "La Negra" or María Antonia del Carmen Peregino, Narcisco Serradel, Lorenzo Barcelata and María Greever.

[ 46 ] Art and architecture [ edit ] Mural depicting the history of Papantla in the town square by Teodoro Cano García During the colonial era, a movement called the "estilo veracruzano" (Veracruz style) developed mostly focusing on landscapes in the state with a certain amount of indigenous influence although the painters themselves were criollo or Mexico-born Spanish. These paintings focus on the mountains, valles, coasts, volcanos and other natural phenomena in the state. Most of the proponents of this were born in Veracruz itself and include José Justo Montiel (1824–1899), Gonzalo Argüelles Bringas (1877–1942), Eugenio Landecio (teacher of José María Velasco ), Natal Pesado and Ignacio Rosas .

[ 52 ] However, most of Veracruz's best-known artists are from the 19th and 20th centuries. In the 19th century, these include Miguel Mata Reyes , Salvador Ferrando , José María Jara , Enrique Guerra and Alberto Fuster . Miguel Mata Reyes is best known for his contributions to the design of the Palacio de Bellas Artes as well a portrait of Antonio López de Santa Anna . Salvador Ferrando was a portrait and landscape artist from the north of the state. Until recently, most of his work had been hidden in a museum named after him in the Tlacotalpan region. Much of it now is on display at the Museo de Arte de Veracruz in Orizaba. José María Jara is noted for his paintings of Veracruz customs, whose works include El Velorio , which was presented at the World's Fair in Paris. Enrique Guerra was an important sculptor at the end of the 19th century. His best-known works are bas reliefs and include Asesinato de César , Coroliano , Thais and Crisálida . Alberto Fuster was most active at the end of the century and is noted for bringing symbolism painting to Mexico from his stay in Europe. His works include El progreso , Safo en el templo de Delfos and Nativa con loro .

[ 52 ] There are three important artists from the 20th century, Carlos Bracho , Norberto Martínez and Teodoro Cano García . Active in the first half of the century, sculptor Carlos Bracho's work has been compared to that of Juan Rulfo . His works have been done in plaster, bronze, terracotta and green onyx and include monumental works which can be found in the cities of Xalapa, Puebla , Pachuca and Mexico City. His best-known works are El abrazo, Cabeza verde and El campesino se apodera de la tierra. Norberto Martínez only lived 45 years but is considered one of the most prolific of Mexican painters who dedicated most of his works to social themes. A number of these are early murals such as El comercio in the Jáuregi de Xalapa market as well as an untitled work in a private home in Córdoba which deals with the fusion of the Spanish, indigenous and African ethnicities in Mexico. Later works include the three murals in the main stairwell of the School of Law at the University of Xalapa and El hombre y el conocimiento at the Universidad Veracruzana . Teodoro Cano García is one of Mexico's most famous muralists of the late 20th century, famous for the promotion of the Totonac culture of his hometown of Papantla. He has created paintings, sculptures, etchings, photography and mixed media works with his murals and sculptures most acclaimed. Examples of his work can be seen in various parts of public buildings in Papantla .

[ 52 ] Most of Veracruz's older architecture can be found in the inland cities of Xalapa and Córdoba. Despite being the first Spanish settlement, the city of Veracruz lost most its older structures to the various invasions it has suffered. Architecture from the 16th to the 19th century includes colonial Spanish, Moorish, Neo gothic and Neoclassical. From the 20th century on, a number of names stand out. Armando Bravo Ramírez remodeled the State Government Palace and the facade of the Capillas de Ánimas, both in Xalapa. Other prominent names responsible for many projects in the state include Luis González Aparicio, Bernal Lascuraín Rangel and Luis Manuel Tello Deschamps.

[ 52 ] Literature [ edit ] The literary arts reached their peak in Veracruz starting in the 19th century and extends to the "Generation of the 1950s".

Salvador Díaz Mirón is one of Veracruz's most-distinguished poets. Over his lifetime from the latter 19th to early 20th centuries, he worked as a professor, politician and journalist contributing to periodicals such as El Veracruzano, El Orden, and El Imparcial. His creative works include some of the first Romantic pieces produced in Mexico such as Oda a Víctor Hugo, Ojos verdes, Gloria and Voces interiores. Other works include Poesías A Tirsa , Nox (also known as Claudia ) and his last works such as Al buen cura and La mujer de nieve . He became a member of the Academia Mexicana de la Lengua and is buried at the Rotonda de los Hombres Ilustres in Mexico City.

María Enriqueta Camarillo was one of a number of women writers to gain prominence in Mexico at the end of the 19th century. While she wrote a number of works such as Jirón del mundo , Sorpresas de la vida and El Secreto , she is best known for Rosas de la infancia , with which many Mexicans learned to read.

[ 53 ] Writers born at the end of the 19th century, such as Gregorio López y Fuentes , Manuel Maples Arce and Jorge Mateo Cuesta Porte-Petit were often concerned with social issues. Works of this type include El Indio by López, Metrópolis by Maples and a poem called Canto a un dios mineral by Cuesta. The following generation, born in the first decades of the 20th century, became known as the Generation of the 1950s. During this time Veracruz's literary tradition consolidated and decided to break type. One example is Juan Hernández Ramírez 's writing of poetry in the Nahuatl spoken in the La Huasteca area of Veracruz. One important name from this generation is Emilio Carballido who wrote about 100 plays as well as scripts for radio and television. Some of his works include Rosalba y los llaveros , Felicidad and Las visitaciones del Diablo . In 1996, he won the Premio Nacional de Literatura and in 2002 he received the Ariel de Oro for his work in cinema.

[ 53 ] Religion [ edit ] The Catholic patron saint of Veracruz is Rafael Guízar y Valencia .

[ 54 ] Education [ edit ] Public education in the state is supervised by the state Dirección General de Educación Popular and the Dirección General de Educación Media Superior y Superior. The current system is the result of a number of reforms which took place in the 1980s and 1990s. In the late 1990s, 302 new school campuses were created statewide and 257 schools were remodeled. These included new schools for special education, distance learning and technological institutes, giving the state one of the highest number of school campuses in the country. There are a total of 20,479 schools, with nearly 2 million students and about 85,000 teachers. 93% of schools are in the basic education category (preschool, primary and middle schools. Preschools also include those geared towards the indigenous populations, focusing on bilingual and bicultural education in both the indigenous language/culture and Spanish. One major focus of these and other schools is to eliminate illiteracy in indigenous communities. The "Medio Superior" level includes vocational high school and technical colleges. These account for 6.6% of schools in the public system. The Superior level includes teachers' colleges and universities. There are 166 institutes at this level, with about 68,000 students studying 221 different majors. There are also 63 master's degree programs and six PhDs.

[ 55 ] These institutions serve about 135,000 students accounting for about 19% of the college-aged population (19- to 24-year-olds), slightly below the national average of 24%.

[ 56 ] The major state university is the Universidad Veracruzana , with offers 56 bachelor's degrees, 37 masters and 5 PhDs. It is based in the capital of Xalapa and is noted for its large and varied sports programs. There are campuses in fourteen other cities.

[ 55 ] About 37% of university students attend the main public university, with a student population of 47,000 undergraduates and 2,000 postgraduates.

[ 56 ] Other important schools include Instituto Tecnologico de Veracruz in Veracruz, Universidad Anáhuac in Xalapa, Universidad de Xalapa in Xalapa, ITESM in Córdoba, Universidad Cristóbal Colón in Veracruz, the Veracruz Naval Academy and the Instituto Tecnológico del Mar.

[ 55 ] Demographics [ edit ] Largest cities [ edit ] Largest cities or towns in Veracruz Source: [ 57 ] Rank Municipality Pop.

1 Veracruz Veracruz/ Boca del Río 537,963 2 Xalapa-Enríquez Xalapa 443,063 3 Coatzacoalcos Coatzacoalcos 212,540 4 Poza Rica Poza Rica 180,057 5 Minatitlán Minatitlán/ Cosoleacaque 149,192 6 Córdoba Córdoba 139,075 7 Orizaba Orizaba 120,500 8 Túxpam de Rodríguez Cano Tuxpan 89,557 9 Martínez de la Torre Martínez de la Torre 64,692 10 San Andrés Tuxtla San Andrés Tuxtla 64,445 Historical population Year Pop.

±% 1895 [ 58 ] 863,220 — 1900 981,030 +13.6% 1910 1,132,859 +15.5% 1921 1,159,935 +2.4% 1930 1,377,293 +18.7% 1940 1,619,338 +17.6% 1950 2,040,231 +26.0% 1960 2,727,899 +33.7% 1970 3,815,422 +39.9% 1980 5,387,680 +41.2% 1990 6,228,239 +15.6% 1995 6,737,324 +8.2% 2000 6,908,975 +2.5% 2005 7,110,214 +2.9% 2010 7,643,194 +7.5% 2015 8,112,505 +6.1% 2020 [ 8 ] 8,062,579 −0.6% Two children with their donkey in the state of Veracruz in 2008.

The state of Veracruz, especially its port, has been a crossroads for various cultures since the very early colonial period. The port of Veracruz has brought cargo, sailors, seamen, and slaves from various parts of the world, especially from the Caribbean and Europe. The state has indigenous cultural influences mixed with those from Europe, Africa and the Afro-Caribbean . These can be best seen in the music, the culinary traditions and in the people themselves.

[ 20 ] The number of ethnic communities in the state has been calculated at 2,062. The most numerous include the Nahuas , Totonacs, Huastecs, Popolucs, Zapotecas , Chinantecas , Otomis, Mazatecas, Tepehuas, Mixtecas, Zoques, Mixes , Mayas and Tzotzils , all indigenous groups. The largest are Nahuas, who make up over half of the indigenous population. Most native communities can be found in 68 municipalities especially in Tehuipango , Mixtla de Altamirano , Astacinga , Soledad Atzompa , Atlahuilco , Tequila , Tlaquilpan, Los Reyes, Magdalena, San Andres Tenejapan, Tantoyuca, Zongolica, Chicontepec, Papantla, Ixhuatlán de Madero, Soteapan, Playa Vicente, Mecayapan y Coyutla, Benito Juárez, Coxquihi, Espinal, Filomeno Mata, Ixcatepec, Mecatlán and Zozocolco de Hidalgo. In 1998, about 10% of the population spoke an indigenous language; however, this does not take into account all indigenous peoples. The census of 2005 counted 605,135 as speaking an indigenous language.

[ 59 ] There are also small immigrant communities of Spaniards, Italians, Basque and Lebanese .

[ 46 ] Africans were first brought to Mexico through slavery to the Veracruz port. At one point, they outnumbered Europeans and a significant number ran away from haciendas and plantations to form their own communities, sometimes allied with indigenous groups. One such rebellion was led by Yanga, who successfully negotiated a free African community with Spanish authorities in 1609. Like other groups, many of African descent would intermarry with other groups, with the category of "mulatto" existing in the old colonial caste system for those with African blood. Today, the vast majority of Afro-Mexicans in Veracruz and other parts of the country are spread out and intermixed with the rest of the population.

[ 60 ] According to the 2020 Census, 2.67% of Veracruz's population identified as Black, Afro-Mexican, or of African descent.

[ 61 ] With a population of 7,110,214 (2005), Veracruz is the third most populous entity in the country, after the Federal District of Mexico City and the State of Mexico . Population growth has slowed in the state in the last decades, due to lower birthrates and the exodus of migrants, mostly men. Women outnumber men. One reason for the decline in birthrates is the elevation of education levels, especially among women. Another is urbanization, with about one-third of the state's population living in urban centers, especially Veracruz, Xalapa, Coatzacoalcos, Minatitlán and Papantla. Most (90%) of the state's communities, outside of municipal seats have fewer than 500 people and contain only 21% of the total population. The migration of men outside the state has put more women into the state's workforce.

[ 59 ] Approximately 75% of the population is under 45 years of age and 30% under the age of 15.

[ 62 ] Life expectancy is just under the norm for the rest of the country. The overwhelming majority of people in the state are Catholic, however, there is a significant Protestant minority and a number who profess the Jewish faith.

[ 59 ] Tourism [ edit ] Tourism mostly centers on the port city of Veracruz but there are other destinations.

[ 46 ] There are over 1,000 hotels in the state, over half of which are small, family-owned enterprises. Almost all of the four and five-star establishments are in metropolitan area of Veracruz. Many of the state major historical and cultural monuments are located in the port of Veracruz. Some of these include the Aquarium, the Museum of the city (Museo de la Ciudad), The Agustín Lara Museum, the Santiago Fortress (Baluarte de Santiago) the "Las Atarazanas" Museum and the San Juan de Ulúa Fort.

[ 46 ] To the north of the port city is the Sierra or Totonacalpan area of the state, home to the Totonac people. This is home to the important pre-Hispanic city of El Tajín and the present-day city of Papantla . The modern city is best known as the home of the Totonac version of the " danza de voladores "; there, the dancers spin from 80 ft (24.4 m) high poles. The area is also the native habitat of the vanilla bean.

[ 20 ] To the south of the port is on the coast, is Catemaco. This is in a tropical area. The area's two main features are Lake Catemaco , which is located in the crater of an extinct volcano and Isla Tanaxpillo just off the coast. This island is also called the island of the monkeys or baboons due to a group of feral monkeys that escaped and found refuge here.

[ 20 ] [ 46 ] Inland is the coffee-growing region in and around the cities of Coatepec and Xalapa. Orizaba is best known for the volcano nearby but also has a large waterfall called El Elefante and a Cañon (Canyon) de Río Blanco.

[ 46 ] Archeological sites [ edit ] El Tajín, Niche pyramid The remnants of pre-Hispanic Huastec , Olmec , and Totonac can be found in Veracruz. The ruins of one city, El Tajín, whose apex occurred between the 9th and 13th centuries CE, were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1992.

[ 31 ] El Zapotal is an archeological site which was discovered in 1971 in a region known at Mixtequlla (between the Blanco and Papaloapan Rivers). This site is noted for its clay figurines with smiling faces, part of an extremely large offering in honor of the god of death Mictlantecuhtli .

[ 46 ] Cempoala is an archeological site located on the coast between the modern settlements of La Antigua and Ciudad Cardel. It was occupied when Hernán Cortés arrived, and he managed to form an alliance with the Totonacs here against the Aztecs. In the center of the site, there is a large plaza surrounded by temples and the palace of the Totonac chief. The site also has a small museum.

[ 46 ] Quiahuiztlán is on the coast on a small mountain named Bernal. It is cut into the mountain as a series of terraces. It is located very close to where Cortés founded the initial Spanish settlement of Villa Rica de la Vera-Cruz.

[ 46 ] The Castillo de Teayo (Teayo Castle) is really a pyramid, whose original name was Zapotitlán. It is located on the border between Huasctec and Totonac lands. It was abandoned in the 19th century.

[ 46 ] The largest and most important site is El Tajín , located near the city of Papantla. The name is from the Totonac language and means "thunder", but no one knows what the true name of this city was. It is also unknown if the Totonac built it, but since they have dominated the region for centuries, they lay claim to it. The city developed from the end of the Classic period and the beginning of the Post Classic period, between 800 and 1150 C.E. It is divided into five zones, the Plaza del Arroyo Group, the Central Zone, the Gran Xicalcoliuhqui, Tajín Chico and the Column Complex. Its signature building is the Pyramid of the Niches, named after the 365 niches built into the levels of the structure. The site has a large number of Mesoamerican ball game courts, one with details reliefs showing the beheading of a ballplayer and his role in the afterlife.

[ 46 ] The Tres Zapotes site is located the community of the same name. Covering 1.5 hectares, the main building has a square base, which is surrounded by gardens and trees. The most important find from his is Stele "C" which is on display at the Museo Nacional de Antropología in Mexico City.

[ 46 ] El Pital is a site in the municipality of Martínez de la Torre . It consists of a mound with a pyramid base and stairs on the east side. The site's culture is considered to be a link between the coastal and highland cultures of the region.

[ 46 ] Los Idolos is a site in the municipal city of Misantla , and was an important ceremonial site for the Totonacapan region. It consists of four rectangular patios linked by platforms and flat-topped mounds. Many of the structures are decorated with smooth river stone, thought to have come from the Misantla River .

[ 46 ] The Centro Ceremonial Cuajilote is located on the Bobos River . It consists of a large plaza 400 meters long lined with structures. In the center of the plaza there are three shrines, one of which contains phallic figures.

[ 46 ] Government [ edit ] Veracruz was officially established as a state in 1824. Its government consists of a governor, elected to a single six-year term, and a unicameral State Congress, whose members serve three-year terms. It is divided into 212 municipios (municipalities).

[ 31 ] The newest of these are the municipalities of San Rafael and Santiago Sochiapan which were created in 2003.

[ 63 ] These municipalities are grouped into regions called Huasteca Alta (with ten municipalities), Huasteca Baja (with 23 municipalities), Totonac (with 15 municipalities), Nautla (with 11 municipalities), Capital (with 33 municipalities), Sotavento (with 12 municipalities), De las Montañas (with 57 municipalities), Papaloapan (with 22 municipalities), De los Tuxtlas (with four municipalities) and Olmeca (with 25 municipalities).

[ 64 ] Freedom of the press violations [ edit ] According to many journalists' organizations, Veracruz is one of the most dangerous places for journalists, especially after governor Javier Duarte de Ochoa came to power in December 2010.

[ 65 ] Infrastructure [ edit ] Transport [ edit ] The road system in the state contains 16,039 km (9,966.2 mi), representing 5.1% of the roads nationwide. For each 100 km 2 (38.6 sq mi) of territory, there are 22 km (13.7 mi) of roads. 3,144.5 km (1,953.9 mi) are part of the federal highway system. State roads comprise 2,176 km (1,352.1 mi) with the rest maintained by local authorities. There are over 3,000 km (1,864.1 mi) of rural roads, but only 71.5 km (44.4 mi) are paved.

[ 55 ] The state contains 1,675.3 km (1,041.0 mi) of railway. Most of this is conceded by the federal government to private companies, with strategic stretches maintained directly by the government. Some of the private companies include Kansas City Southern de México and Ferrosur . These lines are used almost exclusively for the transportation of freight, which in 1999 added up to 37 million tons. Three rail lines serve the port of Veracruz exclusively. One is dedicated to the port of Coatzacalcos.

[ 55 ] The ports of Veracruz are Tuxpan, Veracruz, Coatzacoalcos, Pajaritos, Minatitlán-Nanchital, Tecolutla, Nautla , Alvarado and Tlacotalpan. The first three are the ports for heavy cargo ships, with Veracruz the most important of the three. The others are small ports for small ships, fishing boats and tourism. All ports are operated privately with the exception of Pajaritos, which is operated by PEMEX . Port traffic in Veracruz account for 10% of all commercial traffic in the country, 23.4% of the port traffic of Mexico and 21% of all port traffic in the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean. Goods imported through the state reach 16 out of Mexico's 31 states plus Mexico City. The port of Veracruz alone handles over 12 million tons of freight per year. Coatzacoalcos is important for its handling of petroleum products.

[ 55 ] The state contains three major airports. "El Tajín" in Tihuatlán serving Poza Rica and "Canticas" in Minatitlán provide national service. "Heriberto Jara Corona" in the city of Veracruz provides national and international service. There are also 31 smaller regional airfields in municipalities such as Acayucán, Cazones de Herrera , Córdoba, Cuitlahuac , Juán Rodríguez Clara , Ozuluama , Platón Sánchez , Playa Vicente , Soconusco , Tamalín , Tamiahua , Tecolutla , Temapache , Tempoal and Tierra Blanca.

[ 55 ] Media [ edit ] There are 59 local newspapers and 40 magazines published in the state. These include El Dictamen, [ 66 ] El Sol del Centro, [ 67 ] la Opinión de Minatitlán, [ 68 ] Diario de Xalapa , El Diario de Minatitlán , El Mundo de Córdoba , El Mundo de Orizaba , El Sol de Córdoba , El Sol de Orizaba , Esto de Veracruz , Imagen de Veracruz , La Jornada Veracruz , La Opinión de Poza Rica , Liberal del Sur , Milenio El Portal , Noreste Diario Regional Independiente , and Sotavento.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] There are 202 radio stations (57 AM, 35 FM). Most are commercial or private but some are operated by non-profits and governmental agencies. There are 22 television stations; two channels are local, and the rest are repeaters from national broadcasters. Five companies provide cable and satellite television.

Telmex controls over 75% of the telephone service in the state.

[ 55 ] Notable people [ edit ] Lorena Alarcon-Casas Wright , endocrinologist and Associate Professor at the University of Washington School of Medicine .

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Salma Hayek , actress and film producer Raquel Torres Cerdán , anthropologist and restaurateur Verónica Valerio (born 1991), singer, harpist and composer Yeri Mua , singer and songwriter See also [ edit ] Misantla Totonac Municipalities of Veracuz Portals : Geography North America Latin America Mexico Notes [ edit ] ^ Latin American Spanish: [beɾaˈkɾus] ⓘ ^ Latin American Spanish: [beɾaˈkɾus ðejɣˈnasjo ðe la ˈʝaβe] ^ Spanish : Estado Libre y Soberano de Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave References [ edit ] ^ "Las Diputaciones Provinciales" (PDF) (in Spanish). p. 15.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 28, 2016 . Retrieved April 10, 2011 .

^ Nettie Lee Benson; Colegio de México. Centro de Estudios Históricos; Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (1994).

La diputación provincial y el federalismo mexicano . UNAM. pp. 227–.

ISBN 978-968-12-0586-7 .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2023 . Retrieved February 20, 2011 .

^ "Senadora Claudia Tello Espinosa (Licencia)" .

Senado de la República . 2024-12-01.

Archived from the original on 2024-12-01 . Retrieved 2024-12-01 .

^ Cayetano, Pilar (2024-09-11).

"¡PAN expulsa a los Yunes por VOTAR a favor de reforma judicial de AMLO!" [PAN expels the Yunes for voting in favor of AMLO's judicial reform!].

Político MX (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 2024-11-18 . Retrieved 2024-12-01 .

^ "Senadores por Veracruz LXVI Legislatura" [Veracruz State Senators to the LXVI Congress]. Senado de la Republica. 2024-12-01.

Archived from the original on 2024-12-01 . Retrieved 2024-12-01 .

^ "Álbum de Diputados y Diputadas Federales 2018-2021. Segundo año de ejercicio constitucional" (PDF) . Camara de Diputados.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 17, 2019 . Retrieved April 9, 2019 .

^ "Resumen" . Cuentame INEGI.

Archived from the original on October 10, 2014 . Retrieved February 12, 2013 .

^ a b "México en cifras" . January 2016.

Archived from the original on July 18, 2021 . Retrieved January 25, 2021 .

^ Citibanamex (June 13, 2023).

"Indicadores Regionales de Actividad Económica 2023" (PDF) (in Spanish) . Retrieved August 13, 2023 .

^ "Relieve" . Cuentame INEGI. Archived from the original on June 17, 2010 . Retrieved October 20, 2010 .

^ "Veracruz - 7 Wonders" .

7wonders.org . Retrieved 2025-04-27 .

^ "What does Veracruz mean?" .

www.definitions.net . Retrieved 2025-04-27 .

^ a b Municipal, Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo.

"Ignacio de la Llave: natalicio e historia" .

gob.mx (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2025-04-27 .

^ a b "Escudo de Veracruz" .

paratodomexico.com (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2025-04-27 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa Schmal, John P. (2004).

"The History of Veracruz" . Houston Institute for Culture.

Archived from the original on October 13, 2018 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v "Historia" [History].

Enciclopedia de los Municipios de México Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave (in Spanish). Mexico: Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo Municipal. 2005. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ Ida Altman, Sarah Cline, and Javier Pescador, The Early History of Greater Mexico . Prentice Hall 2003, p. 57.

^ Peter Gerhard, A Guide to the Historical Geography of New Spain, Revised Edition . Norman: University of Oklahoma Press 1993.

^ Altman, et al.

The Early History of Greater Mexico , p. 119.

^ a b c d e f g Hursh Graber, Karen (January 1, 2006).

"The cuisine of Veracruz: a tasty blend of cultures" . Mexconnect.

Archived from the original on October 8, 2018 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ Thomas, Hugh. Conquest: Montezuma, Cortes, and the Fall of Old Mexico. p. 173 ^ Magner, Lois N.

"The Impact of European Disease on Native Americans" .

Encyclopedia.com . Cengage.

Archived from the original on December 16, 2021 . Retrieved January 21, 2021 .

^ The New York Times , "The Expedition to Mexico," January 3, 1861 ^ "Mexico finds 166 bodies in mass grave" .

France24 . September 7, 2018.

Archived from the original on October 1, 2018 . Retrieved September 6, 2018 .

Woody, Christopher (June 11, 2018).

"A former Mexican governor has been accused of involvement in forced disappearances, and it points to a sinister problem with Mexico's police" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2018 . Retrieved September 6, 2018 .

^ José de Córdoba (March 15, 2017).

"Grieving Mothers Lead Authorities to Mass Grave in Mexico" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on September 7, 2018 . Retrieved September 6, 2018 .

Garrido, Edgar (March 19, 2017). Cameron-Moore, Simon (ed.).

"Mexico drug war investigators unearth 47 more skulls in mass graves" .

Archived from the original on September 7, 2018 . Retrieved September 6, 2018 .

^ Wade, Lizzie (December 14, 2016).

"How forensic anthropologists are helping the families of Mexico's disappeared seek justice" .

Science .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2022 . Retrieved September 6, 2018 .

^ "Mexico drugs war: Mass grave found in Veracruz" .

BBC News . June 19, 2014.

Archived from the original on September 7, 2018 . Retrieved September 6, 2018 .

^ Imison, Paul (August 17, 2015).

"How Veracruz Became the Most Dangerous State in Mexico for Journalists" .

Vice .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2023 . Retrieved September 6, 2018 .

^ a b c "Estado de Veracruz" [State of Veracruz] (in Spanish). Veracruz: Secretaria de Desarrollo Economico y Portuario. 2006.

Archived from the original on January 12, 2010 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Medio Fisico" [Environment].

Enciclopedia de los Municipios de México Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave (in Spanish). Mexico: Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo Municipal. 2005. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Veracruz" .

Encyclopædia .

Archived from the original on July 22, 2010 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ "En el estado de Veracruz, los dos ríos más contaminados de México: Salvemos el Agua" [In the state of Veracruz, the two most contaminated rivers in Mexico: Lets sabe the water].

Potamología (in Spanish). Mexico: Instituto Mexicano de Tecnología del Agua. January 1, 2010.

Archived from the original on July 22, 2011 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ "La Martucha (Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave)" .

mexico.pueblosamerica.com (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on July 26, 2023 . Retrieved July 26, 2023 .

^ a b c d "Veracruz moist forests" .

Terrestrial Ecoregions . World Wildlife Fund . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ Moritzky, Charles E. (January 1, 2006).

"Veracruz: traveling the Central High Plains of Mexico" . Mexconnect.

Archived from the original on August 19, 2010 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ Viniegra O., F., and Castillo-Tejero, C., 1970, Golden Lane Fields, Veracruz, Mexico, in Geology of Giant Petroleum Fields, AAPG Memoir 14, Halbouty, M.T. editor, Tulsa: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, p. 310.

^ a b Viniegra O., L., and Castillo-Tejero, C.,Golden Lane Fields, Veracruz, Mexico, in Geology of Giant Petroleum Fields, Tulsa: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 14, p. 309, 1970.

^ Viniegra O., L., and Castillo-Tejero, C.,Golden Lane Fields, Veracruz, mexico, in Geology of Giant Petroleum Fields, Tulsa: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 14, pp. 314 and 316, 1970.

^ Viniegra O., L., and Castillo-Tejero, C.,Golden Lane Fields, Veracruz, Mexico, in Geology of Giant Petroleum Fields, Tulsa: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 14, pp. 309–311, 1970.

^ a b c Viniegra O., L., and Castillo-Tejero, C.,Golden Lane Fields, Veracruz, Mexico, in Geology of Giant Petroleum Fields, Tulsa: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 14, p. 311, 1970.

^ Viniegra O., L., and Castillo-Tejero, C.,Golden Lane Fields, Veracruz, Mexico, in Geology of Giant Petroleum Fields, Tulsa: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 14, pp. 311 and 317, 1970.

^ a b Viniegra O., L., and Castillo-Tejero, C.,Golden Lane Fields, Veracruz, mexico, in Geology of Giant Petroleum Fields, Tulsa: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 14, p. 312, 1970.

^ Viniegra O., L., and Castillo-Tejero, C.,Golden Lane Fields, Veracruz, Mexico, in Geology of Giant Petroleum Fields, Tulsa: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Memoir 14, pp. 311–312, 1970.

^ Brock, Gregory (2014).

" "The Long Run Industrial Growth of Veracruz State, 1955-2008" .

Journal of Economic Studies .

41 (6): 821– 832.

doi : 10.1108/JES-02-2013-0020 .

S2CID 154695456 .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 7, 2014 .

^ a b c González, pp. 40–42 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x "Atractivos Culturales y Turísticos" [Cultural and Tourist Attractions].

Enciclopedia de los Municipios de México Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave (in Spanish). Mexico: Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo Municipal. 2005. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ a b González, p. 23 ^ González, p. 22 ^ Wilkerson, S. Jeffrey K (1987).

El Tajin: A Guide for Visitors . Universidad Veracruzana. pp.

75– 76.

ISBN 968-499-293-9 .

^ " 'Flying Men' are now Cultural Heritage".

McClatchy – Tribune Business News . Washington, DC. October 1, 2009.

^ a b González, pp. 20–21 ^ a b c d González, pp. 12–15 ^ a b González, pp. 16–18 ^ Patron saint of Veracruz Archived March 13, 2013, at the Wayback Machine at Catholic-Hierarchy.org.

Retrieved 06.April 2013 ^ a b c d e f g h "Infraestructura" [Infrastructure].

Enciclopedia de los Municipios de México Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave (in Spanish). Mexico: Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo Municipal. 2005. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ a b "Higher education and research in the State of Veracruz" . Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development.

Archived from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ "Censo Veracruz 2020" .

Archived from the original on August 1, 2023 . Retrieved April 24, 2023 .

^ "Mexico: extended population list" . GeoHive. Archived from the original on March 11, 2012 . Retrieved July 29, 2011 .

^ a b c "Perfil Sociodemografico" [Socio-demographic profile].

Enciclopedia de los Municipios de México Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave (in Spanish). Mexico: Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo Municipal. 2005. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ Patrisia Gonzales and Roberto Rodriguez (March 3, 1996).

"African Roots Stretch Deep Into Mexico" . Mexconnect.

Archived from the original on August 19, 2010 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ "Panorama sociodemográfico de México" .

www.inegi.org.mx .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2021 .

^ "Veracruz Ignacio de la Llave Número de habitantes" [Veracruz Ignacio de la Llave Number of inhabitants] (in Spanish). Mexico: INEGI . 2005.

Archived from the original on July 23, 2011 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ "Gobierno" [Government].

Enciclopedia de los Municipios de México Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave (in Spanish). Mexico: Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo Municipal. 2005. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ "Regionalización" [Regions].

Enciclopedia de los Municipios de México Veracruz de Ignacio de la Llave (in Spanish). Mexico: Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo Municipal. 2005. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ "Threats and censorship at peak in Veracruz, Oaxaca, Michoacán and Zacatecas - Reporters without borders" .

RSF . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved July 9, 2018 .

^ "Noticias de Veracruz" .

El Dictamen (in Mexican Spanish).

Archived from the original on July 1, 2022 . Retrieved July 1, 2022 .

^ "Veracruz - El Sol del Centro | Noticias Locales, Policiacas, sobre México, Aguascalientes y el Mundo" .

www.elsoldelcentro.com.mx .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2023 . Retrieved July 1, 2022 .

^ "Noticias de minatitlán" .

La Opinión (in Spanish). November 7, 2019.

Archived from the original on July 1, 2022 . Retrieved July 1, 2022 .

^ "Publicaciones periódicas en Veracruz" .

Sistema de Información Cultural (in Spanish). Gobierno de Mexico.

Archived from the original on May 28, 2022 . Retrieved March 7, 2020 .

^ "Latin American & Mexican Online News" .

Research Guides . US: University of Texas at San Antonio Libraries . Archived from the original on March 7, 2020.

^ "Defying the Odds" .

UW Medicine: Shortening the Distance to Healthier Lives . April 2, 2018.

Archived from the original on June 19, 2021 . Retrieved May 30, 2021 .

^ "LatinX Diabetes Clinic opens at UW Medicine in SLU" .

newsroom.uw.edu . September 24, 2020.

Archived from the original on April 27, 2021 . Retrieved May 30, 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Booker, Jackie R. (1993).

Veracruz Merchants, 1770–1829: A Mercantile Elite in Late Bourbon and Early Independent Mexico . Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.

Carroll, Patrick J. (1991).

Blacks in Colonial Veracruz . Austin: University of Texas Press.

Jiménez González, Victor Manuel, ed. (2010).

Veracruz Guia para descubrir los encantos del estado [ Veracruz Guide to Discover the Charms of the State ] (in Spanish) (First ed.). Océano, Mexico: Editorial Oceano de Mexico SA de CV.

ISBN 978-607-400-323-9 .

Knaut, Andrew L. (November 1997). "Yellow Fever and the Late Colonial Public Health Response in the Port of Veracruz".

Hispanic American Historical Review 77:4. 619–644.

doi : 10.2307/2516981 .

JSTOR 2516981 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Veracruz .

Geographic data related to Veracruz at OpenStreetMap Veracruz State government official website Archived 2011-09-23 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) v t e State of Veracruz Xalapa (capital) Municipalities of Veracruz Huasteca Alta Region Chalma Chiconamel Chinampa de Gorostiza El Higo Naranjos Amatlán Ozuluama de Mascareñas Pánuco Platón Sánchez Pueblo Viejo Tamalín Tamiahua Tampico Alto Tantima Tantoyuca Tempoal de Sánchez Huasteca Baja Region Álamo Temapache Benito Juárez Castillo de Teayo Cerro Azul Chicontepec de Tejeda Chontla Citlaltépetl Huayacocotla Ilamatlán Ixcatepec Ixhuatlán de Madero Tancoco Tepetzintla Texcatepec Tlachichilco Tuxpan Zacualpan Zontecomatlán de López y Fuentes Totonaca Region Cazones de Herrera Chumatlán Coahuitlán Coatzintla Coxquihui Coyutla Espinal Filomeno Mata Gutiérrez Zamora Mecatlán Papantla Poza Rica Tecolutla Tihuatlán Zozocolco de Hidalgo Nautla Region Atzalán Colipa Juchique de Ferrer Martínez de la Torre Misantla Nautla San Rafael Tenochtitlán Tlapacoyan Vega de Alatorre Yecuatla Capital Region Acajete Acatlán Actopan Alto Lucero Altotonga Apazapan Ayahualulco Banderilla Chiconquiaco Coacoatzintla Coatepec Cosautlán de Carvajal Emiliano Zapata ( Dos Ríos ) Ixhuacán Jalacingo Jalcomulco Jilotepec Landero y Coss Las Minas Las Vigas de Ramírez Miahuatlán Naolinco Perote Rafael Lucio Tatatila Teocelo Tepetlán Tlacolulan Tlalnelhuayocan Tonayán Villa Aldama Xalapa Xico Sotavento Region Boca del Río Cotaxtla Jamapa La Antigua ( José Cardel ) Manlio Fabio Altamirano Medellín Paso de Ovejas Puente Nacional Soledad de Doblado Tlalixcoyan Úrsulo Galván Veracruz Mountains Region Acultzingo Alpatláhuac Amatlán de los Reyes Aquila Astacinga Atlahuilco Atoyac Atzacan Calcahualco Camarón de Tejeda Camerino Z. Mendoza Carrillo Puerto ( Tamarindo ) Chocamán Coetzala Comapa Córdoba Coscomatepec Cuichapa Cuitláhuac Fortín de las Flores Huatusco Huiloapan de Cuauhtémoc Ixhuatlán del Café Ixhuatlancillo Ixtaczoquitlán La Perla Los Reyes Magdalena Maltrata Mariano Escobedo Mixtla de Altamirano Naranjal Nogales Omealca Orizaba Paso del Macho Rafael Delgado Río Blanco San Andrés Tenejapan Sochiapa Soledad Atzompa Tehuipango Tenampa Tepatlaxco Tequila Texhuacán Tezonapa Tlacotepec de Mejía Tlaltetela Tlaquilpa Tlilapan Tomatlán Totutla Xoxocotla Yanga Zentla Zongolica Papaloapan Region Acula Ángel R. Cabada Alvarado Amatitlán Carlos A. Carrillo Chacaltianguis Cosamaloapan de Carpio Ignacio de la Llave Isla Ixmatlahuacan José Azueta Juan Rodríguez Clara Lerdo de Tejada Otatitlán Playa Vicente Saltabarranca Santiago Sochiapan ( Xochiapa ) Tierra Blanca Tlacojalpan Tlacotalpan Tres Valles Tuxtilla Los Tuxtlas Region Catemaco San Andrés Tuxtla Santiago Tuxtla Hueyapan de Ocampo Olmeca Region Acayucan Agua Dulce Chinameca Coatzacoalcos Cosoleacaque Hidalgotitlán Ixhuatlán del Sureste Jáltipan Jesús Carranza Las Choapas Mecayapan Minatitlán Moloacán Nanchital Oluta Oteapan Pajapan San Juan Evangelista Sayula de Alemán Soconusco Soteapan Tatahuicapan Texistepec Uxpanapa Zaragoza v t e States of Mexico Aguascalientes Baja California Baja California Sur Campeche Chiapas Chihuahua Coahuila Colima Durango Guanajuato Guerrero Hidalgo Jalisco México Mexico City Michoacán Morelos Nayarit Nuevo León Oaxaca Puebla Querétaro Quintana Roo San Luis Potosí Sinaloa Sonora Tabasco Tamaulipas Tlaxcala Veracruz Yucatán Zacatecas Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Geographic MusicBrainz area Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xzdv9
Cached time: 20250817045000
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.503 seconds
Real time usage: 1.806 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13356/1000000
Revision size: 122375/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 407415/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 47101/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 29/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 286154/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.792/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22329636/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1407.746      1 -total
 27.19%  382.739      3 Template:Reflist
 23.90%  336.450      1 Template:Infobox_settlement
 20.20%  284.296      1 Template:Infobox
 12.84%  180.744     40 Template:Cite_web
  7.64%  107.605      8 Template:Cite_news
  6.74%   94.891      3 Template:Navbox
  6.57%   92.453      2 Template:Nobold
  6.44%   90.692      1 Template:Veracruz
  6.20%   87.279      1 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:63125:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045000 and revision id 1305975891. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Veracruz&oldid=1305975891 " Categories : Veracruz 1824 establishments in Mexico Gulf Coast of Mexico States and territories established in 1824 States of Mexico Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with Latin American Spanish IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Spanish-language text CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Mexican Spanish-language sources (es-mx) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from April 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing copy edit Articles needing additional references from April 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with text in Nahuatl languages Coordinates on Wikidata Articles to be expanded from April 2025 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2016 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using largest cities with unknown parameters Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 05:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Veracruz 91 languages Add topic

