Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Contributors 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents American Affairs 3 languages বাংলা Deutsch Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Quarterly American political journal American Affairs Editor and founder Julius Krein Assistant Editor Gladden Pappin Categories Politics Frequency Quarterly First issue February 2017 ; 8 years ago ( 2017 ) Company American Affairs Foundation Inc.

Country United States Based in Boston Language English Website americanaffairsjournal .org ISSN 2475-8809 American Affairs is a quarterly American political journal founded in February 2017 by Julius Krein .

Its project has been outlined in Tablet as: "a dense, technically sophisticated form of neo-Hamiltonian economic nationalism , pushed in various forms by Michael Lind , David P. Goldman , and Krein himself," based on the contention that "a short-sighted American elite has allowed the country’s manufacturing core—the key to both widespread domestic prosperity and national security in the face of a mercantilist China —to be hollowed out," just as "Production and technical expertise have shifted to China and Asia, domestic capital has flowed into unproductive share buybacks or tech schemes ( Uber , WeWork ), and America has become a country with a two-tiered service economy, with bankers, consultants, and software engineers at the top and Walmart greeters and Uber drivers at the bottom." [ 1 ] Since its founding in 2017, American Affairs has become known for in-depth articles on trade and industrial policy , [ 2 ] criticisms of financialization , [ 3 ] advocacy of family childcare allowances [ 4 ] and infrastructure spending , [ 5 ] as well as for bringing together right and left-wing critics of neoliberalism .

[ 6 ] Aside from public policy, it has also covered political theory and cultural criticism . It has been characterized in the New Statesman as a "heterodox policy journal" [ 6 ] featuring, for instance, conservative arguments in favor of a greater role for the state [ 7 ] alongside left-wing arguments against identity politics [ 8 ] and open borders .

[ 9 ] Notable articles include Krein's "The Real Class War" which "attracted attention from both left and right in November 2019 by upending the conversation over class in the Democratic primary," according to New Statesman .

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] A predecessor to American Affairs is the Journal of American Greatness , a short-lived 2016 political blog best known for publishing "The Flight 93 Election," a widely read essay about the 2016 presidential election by the pseudonymous author Publius Decius Mus, later revealed to be Michael Anton .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] American Affairs was initially considered by some as a "pro- Trump journal." [ 13 ] On its launch, it was described by the New York Times as "dedicated to giving intellectual heft and coherence to the amorphous ideology known, for lack of a better term, as Trumpism ." [ 14 ] But in August 2017, after the "Unite the Right" rally at Charlottesvile, Virginia , Krein wrote an opinion article in The New York Times publicly acknowledging his regret in voting for the candidate.

[ 15 ] Jennifer Schuessler of The New York Times writes: "the magazine seeks to fill the void left by a conservative intellectual establishment more focused on opposing Mr. Trump than on grappling with the rejection of globalism and free-market dogma that propelled his victory." According to The Washington Post , the journal is read by Vice President JD Vance .

[ 16 ] Contributors [ edit ] Contributors to the magazine include: Michael Anton, Robert D. Atkinson , Mehrsa Baradaran , Thierry Baudet , Daniel A. Bell , Fred Block , Dan Breznitz , Christopher Caldwell , Oren Cass , Angelo M. Codevilla , Colin Crouch , Patrick J. Deneen , Ronald W. Dworkin , Fredrik Erixon , Nancy Fraser , Amber A'Lee Frost , Frank Furedi , Maurice Glasman , James K. Galbraith , David P. Goldman, Allen C. Guelzo , Ofir Haivry , Shadi Hamid , James Hankins , Yoram Hazony , Joseph Heath , Arthur Herman , John B. Judis , Eric Kaufmann , Joel Kotkin , Ryszard Legutko , Michael Lind , Edward Luttwak , Bruno Maçães , Noel Malcolm , Pierre Manent , Lawrence M. Mead , Bill Mitchell , Angela Nagle , David Oks , Eric A. Posner , R.R. Reno , Ganesh Sitaraman , Anne-Marie Slaughter , Matthew Stoller , Wolfgang Streeck , Cass Sunstein , Ruy Teixiera , Nick Timothy , Roberto M. Unger , Adrian Vermeule , Henry Williams , L. Randall Wray , and Slavoj Zizek .

[ 17 ] References [ edit ] ^ "The Battle on the New Right for the Soul of Trump's America" .

Tablet Magazine . February 5, 2020 . Retrieved July 13, 2020 .

^ MacDougald, Park (July 19, 2019).

"What the Hell Is 'National Conservatism' Anyway?" .

Intelligencer . Retrieved February 16, 2021 .

^ Krein, Julius (August 20, 2021).

"The Value of Nothing: Capital versus Growth" .

American Affairs Journal . Retrieved March 22, 2024 .

^ "Gladden Pappin Wants to Make Conservatism Great Again" .

Texas Monthly . December 16, 2020 . Retrieved February 16, 2021 .

^ "How the GOP Can Win Over Millennials" .

National Review . October 18, 2020 . Retrieved February 16, 2021 .

^ a b c "The new intellectuals of the American right" .

www.newstatesman.com . Retrieved February 16, 2021 .

^ "Toward a Party of the State" .

American Affairs Journal . February 20, 2019 . Retrieved February 16, 2021 .

^ "From Progressive Neoliberalism to Trump—and Beyond" .

American Affairs Journal . November 20, 2017 . Retrieved February 16, 2021 .

^ "The Left Case against Open Borders" .

American Affairs Journal . November 20, 2018 . Retrieved February 16, 2021 .

^ Schuessler, Jennifer (March 8, 2017).

"Talking Trumpism: A New Political Journal Enters the Fray" .

The New York Times .

^ Johnson, Eliana (March 1, 2017).

"Meet the Harvard whiz kid who wants to explain Trumpism" . Politico . Retrieved March 9, 2017 .

^ Sanneh, Kelefa (February 25, 2017).

"A New Trumpist Magazine Débuts at the Harvard Club" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved March 9, 2017 .

^ Johnson, Eliana; Dawsey, Josh (July 23, 2017).

"GOP despairs at inability to deliver" .

Politico . Retrieved July 24, 2017 .

^ Schuessler, Jennifer (March 8, 2017).

"Talking Trumpism: A New Political Journal Enters the Fray" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ Krein, Julius (August 8, 2017).

"Opinion: I Voted for Trump. And I Sorely Regret It" .

The New York Times .

^ "The radicalization of J.D. Vance" .

Washington Post . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "Archives" .

American Affairs Journal . Retrieved July 13, 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Portal : Conservatism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Affairs&oldid=1301347558 " Categories : Political magazines published in the United States Magazines established in 2017 Conservative magazines published in the United States Quarterly magazines published in the United States Magazines published in Boston Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 08:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American Affairs 3 languages Add topic

