Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Right to an adequate standard of living 2 Decent living standard 3 Factors considered by scholars Toggle Factors considered by scholars subsection 3.1 Lists 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Standard of living 56 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Олык марий پنجابی Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Measure of income, comfort and services "Living standard" redirects here. For normative standards implemented as living documents, see Living document .

Standard of living is the level of income , comforts and services available to an individual, community or society . A contributing factor to an individual's quality of life , standard of living is generally concerned with objective metrics outside an individual's personal control, such as economic , societal, political, and environmental matters.

[ 1 ] Individuals or groups use the standard of living to evaluate where to live in the world, or when assessing the success of society.

In international law, an "adequate standard of living" was first described in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and further described in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights . To evaluate the impact of policy for sustainable development , different disciplines have defined Decent Living Standards in order to evaluate or compare relative living experience.

[ 2 ] During much of its use in economics, improvements to standard of living were thought to be directly connected to economic growth , as well as increase amount of energy consumption and other materials. However, the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report found that literature demonstrates that improvements in sustainable development practices as well as changes in technological efficiency and energy production and use, allow for a Decent Living Standard for all people without fossil fuels and ~15.3 GJ per capita by the end of the 21st century.

[ 3 ] This allows for climate change mitigation by demand reduction as well as other sustainable development practices.

[ 3 ] Right to an adequate standard of living [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Right to an adequate standard of living .

[ edit ] Freedom from Want (1943) by painter Norman Rockwell The right to an adequate standard of living is listed as part of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights that was accepted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 10, 1948.

[ 4 ] Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food , clothing , housing and medical care and necessary social services , and the right to security in the event of unemployement , sickness, disability , widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.

— Article 25.1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights [ 4 ] The third is freedom from want which, translated into world terms, means economic understandings which will secure to every nation a healthy peacetime life for its inhabitants, everywhere in the world.

— President Franklin D. Roosevelt , January 6, 1941.

[ 5 ] Decent living standard [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2022 ) The standard of living varies between individuals depending on different aspects of life. The standard of living consists of the individuals having the basics such as food, shelter, social safety [ clarification needed ] and interaction, which all contribute to their wellbeing and what is considered to be a decent living standard.

Commentators use a number of different measures and approaches to establish the decent living standard (DLS).

[ 2 ] The decent living standard revolves around the idea and principle that a majority of the population demand the basics that will allow them to have shelter, food and water; however it [ clarification needed ] is not always able to be maintained for a long period of time.

[ 6 ] Factors considered by scholars [ edit ] Standard of living might be evaluated using a number of characteristics including as the quality and availability of employment , real income , disposable income , class disparity, poverty rate , quality and housing affordability, hours of work required to purchase necessities , gross domestic product , inflation rate , amount of leisure time, access to and quality of healthcare, quality and availability of education , literacy rates, life expectancy, occurrence of diseases, cost of goods and services, infrastructure, access to, quality and affordability of public transportation, national economic growth , economic and political stability, freedom, environmental quality, climate and safety. For the purposes of economics, politics and policy, it is usually compared across time or between groups defined by social, economic or geographical parameters.

Standard of living is generally measured by standards such as inflation -adjusted income per person and poverty rate. Other measures such as access and quality of health care , income growth inequality , and educational standards are also used. Examples are access to certain goods (such as the number of refrigerators per 1000 people), or measurement of health such as life expectancy. It is the ease by which people living in a time or place are able to satisfy their needs and/or wants.

[ 7 ] There is also the biological standard of living, which pertains to how well the human biological organism fares in its socio-economic environment.

[ 8 ] It is often measured by the height of a population.

[ 9 ] The idea of a 'standard' may be contrasted with the quality of life , which takes into account not only the material standard of living but also other more intangible aspects that make up human life, such as leisure, safety, cultural resources, social life, physical health , environmental quality issues.

[ 10 ] Lists [ edit ] Cost-of-living index Disposable household and per capita income Housing costs as percentage of gross income List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita List of countries by average wage Median household income See also [ edit ] Gini coefficient GDP per capita Housing stress Human Development Index Income and fertility Index of Economic Freedom List of countries by Social Progress Index Living wage Measurable economic welfare Right to an adequate standard of living Total fertility rate Where-to-be-born Index Working hours References [ edit ] ^ "standard of living" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/OED/5785495729 .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ a b "Supplementary Material I Chapter 5: Social Science Primer" (PDF) .

IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change .

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . 2022.

^ a b "Chapter 5: Demand, services and social aspects of mitigation" (PDF) .

IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change .

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . 2022.

^ a b United Nations, Universal Declaration of Human Rights ^ Roosvelt, Franklin Delano (January 6, 1941) The Four Freedoms , American Rhetoric ^ Rao, Narasimha D.; Min, Jihoon (July 2018).

"Decent Living Standards: Material Prerequisites for Human Wellbeing" .

Social Indicators Research .

138 (1): 225– 244.

doi : 10.1007/s11205-017-1650-0 .

ISSN 0303-8300 .

PMC 6013539 .

PMID 29950752 .

^ Clark, Nardinelli.

"Industrial Revolution and the Standard of Living" .

Econlib .

^ Komlos, John; Baten, Joerg (1998).

"The Biological Standard of Living in Comparative Perspective" .

eh.net . pp.

236– 249 . Retrieved 29 May 2022 .

^ Komlos, John; Coclanis, Peter (1997).

"On the 'Puzzling' Antebellum Cycle of the Biological Standard of Living: the Case of Georgia" .

Explorations in Economic History .

34 : 433– 459.

doi : 10.1006/exeh.1997.0680 .

^ Investopedia Staff.

"Standard of Living Definition" .

Investopedia .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Standard of living .

Industrial Revolution and the Standard of Living by Freddy Madero Commission on Living Standards Archived 12 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Standard_of_living&oldid=1303906273 " Categories : Standard of living Purchasing power Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles to be expanded from April 2022 All articles to be expanded Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from July 2020 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 19:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Standard of living 56 languages Add topic

