Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Legal aspect Toggle Legal aspect subsection 2.1 Formalization of the marital rape exemption in law 2.1.1 Common law and the United Kingdom 2.2 Feminist critique in the 19th century 2.3 20th- and 21st-century criminalization 2.3.1 Legal changes 2.3.2 United States 2.3.3 England and Wales 2.3.3.1 Background 2.3.3.2 Ending the exemption 2.3.3.3 Aftermath 2.3.4 Northern Ireland 2.3.5 Australia 2.3.6 India and Pakistan 3 Marriage after rape Toggle Marriage after rape subsection 3.1 In the context of forced and child marriage 4 Prevalence 5 Physical and psychological damage 6 Relation to other forms of marital violence 7 Sustaining factors Toggle Sustaining factors subsection 7.1 Legal 7.2 Culturally unrecognizable 7.3 The way marriages are arranged 7.4 Religion 7.4.1 Christianity 7.4.2 Islam 7.4.3 Judaism 7.5 Gender expectations 8 Universal lived experience 9 Problems in prosecuting marital rape 10 Legislation by country 11 See also 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Citations 12.2 Bibliography 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Marital rape 28 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch Español فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית मैथिली Nederlands नेपाली پنجابی Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rape of a victim by their spouse This article is about rape within marriage. For rape before marriage, see Marry-your-rapist law . For overlapping (non-marital) phenomena, see intimate partner sexual violence .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Marital rape" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rape Types Acquaintance rape Campus rape Child sexual abuse Corrective rape LGBT victims Cybersex trafficking Drug-facilitated rape Date rape Gang rape Genocidal rape Gray rape Live streaming rape Marital rape Prison rape Rape chant Serial rape Sexual abuse Sexual assault Statutory rape Unacknowledged rape Rape by deception Effects and motivations Effects and aftermath Factors involved Pregnancy from rape Rape crisis movement Rape trauma syndrome Causes Post-assault treatment of sexual assault victims Weinstein effect Secondary victimisation Sociobiological theories Rape culture By country Afghanistan Belgium China Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Finland France Germany India Pakistan Papua New Guinea Philippines Saudi Arabia South Africa Sweden United Kingdom United States During conflicts Armenian genocide World War II Eastern Front Italian campaign Imperial Japan Occupation of Germany / Japan / Poland / Manchuria Liberation of France / Serbia Kashmir conflict Algerian War Vietnam War Sri Lankan civil war Bangladesh Liberation War Sierra Leone Civil War Bosnian War Rwandan genocide Congo Wars Darfur genocide ISIL Syrian civil war Tigray war Russian invasion of Ukraine Gaza war By Israel By Palestinians Laws Marital rape laws by country Marry-your-rapist law Rape shield law False accusation of rape Rape investigation Rape kit Sexual consent in law In Islamic law See also Anti-rape movement Bodily integrity Date rape drug Sexual violence statistics History of rape Military sexual trauma Preventive measures Rape by gender Rape of males Anti-rape device Rape crisis centre Rape myth Rape pornography Rape and revenge films Rape fantasy Rape schedule Rape statistics Rape threat Sex and the law Sex trafficking Sexual harassment Sexual predator Sexual trauma therapy Sexual violence Law portal Category v t e Sex and the law Social issues Abortion Access to abortion Age of consent Antisexualism Bodily integrity Circumcision Consent Deviant sexual intercourse Ethics Homophobia Capital punishment Criminalization LGBTQ rights Conversion therapy Decriminalization Civil union Same-sex marriage Adoption Intersex Transgender Marriageable age Miscegenation Norms Objectification Pedophile advocacy Pornography Laws Public morality Prostitution Reproductive rights Red-light district Reproductive rights Right to sexuality Sex industry Workers' rights Decriminalization World Charter Survival sex Specific offences ( varies by jurisdiction ) Adultery Laws Anti-miscegenation U.S. laws Bestiality Child pornography Laws Child prostitution Criminal transmission of HIV Cybersex trafficking Female genital mutilation Forced circumcision Forcible touching Fornication Incest Obscenity U.S. law Pimping Prostitution forced procuring Public indecency Rape statutory marital Revenge porn Seduction Sex trafficking Sexting Sexual abuse child Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual grooming Slavery Sodomy U.S. laws Female sodomy UK Section 63 (2008) Violence Trafficking Voyeurism Sex offender registration Sex offender registry Sex offender registries in the United States Portals Human sexuality portal Law portal v t e Part of a series on Violence against women Murder Bride burning Dowry death Honor killing Femicide Infanticide Matricide Pregnant women Sati Sororicide Uxoricide Sexual assault and rape Causes of sexual violence Child sexual initiation Sexual violence statistics Forced prostitution Cybersex trafficking Human trafficking Fetish slaves Sexual slavery Violence against prostitutes Post-assault treatment of victims of sexual assault Rape Acquaintance By deception Corrective Date Effects Factors Gang Genocidal History Laws Marital Pregnancy Prevention Prison Statistics Statutory Threat Unacknowledged Wartime Sexual assault Campus Child In Service Mass Secondary victimisation Sexual violence Virgin cleansing myth Widow cleansing Disfigurement Acid attack Breast ironing Female genital mutilation Gishiri cutting Infibulation Foot binding Other issues Gaslighting Dating abuse Domestic violence outline management and pregnancy Droit du seigneur Eve teasing Forced abortion Force-feeding Forced marriage Forced pregnancy Forced sterilisation Intimate partner violence Marriage by abduction Marry-your-rapist law Online gender-based violence Raptio Sexual bullying Toxic masculinity Witch trials International legal framework DEDAW CEDAW VDPA DEVAW Belém do Pará Maputo Istanbul Related topics Prosecution of gender-targeted crimes Women's shelter 25 November 6 February By country Sex and the law Victimology Violence against LGBT people v t e Marital rape or spousal rape is the act of sexual intercourse with one's spouse without the spouse's consent . The lack of consent is the essential element and does not always involve physical violence. Marital rape is considered a form of domestic violence and sexual abuse .

[ 1 ] Although, historically, sexual intercourse within marriage was regarded as a right of spouses, engaging in the act without the spouse's consent is now widely classified as rape by many societies around the world, and increasingly criminalized. However, it remains unacknowledged by some more conservative cultures.

The issues of sexual and domestic violence within marriage and the family unit, and more specifically, the issue of violence against women , have come to growing international attention from the second half of the 20th century. Still, in many countries, marital rape either remains outside the criminal law , or is illegal but widely tolerated. Laws are rarely enforced, due to factors ranging from reluctance of authorities to pursue the crime, to lack of public knowledge that sexual intercourse in marriage without consent is illegal.

Marital rape is more widely experienced by women, though not exclusively. Marital rape is often a chronic form of violence for the victim which takes place within abusive relations . It exists in a complex web of state governments, cultural practices, and societal ideologies which combine to influence each distinct instance and situation in varying ways. The reluctance to define non-consensual sex between married couples as a crime and to prosecute has been attributed to traditional views of marriage, interpretations of religious doctrines, ideas about male and female sexuality , and to cultural expectations of subordination of a wife to her husband — views which continue to be common in many parts of the world. These views of marriage and sexuality started to be challenged in most Western countries from the 1960s and 70s especially by second-wave feminism , leading to an acknowledgment of the woman's right to self-determination of all matters relating to her body, and the withdrawal of the exemption or defence of marital rape.

Most countries criminalized marital rape from the late 20th century onward — very few legal systems allowed for the prosecution of rape within marriage before the 1970s. Criminalization has occurred through various ways, including removal of statutory exemptions from the definitions of rape, judicial decisions, explicit legislative reference in statutory law preventing the use of marriage as a defence, or creation of a specific offense of marital rape, albeit at a lower level of punishment. In many countries, it is still unclear whether marital rape is covered by the ordinary rape laws, but in some countries non-consensual sexual relations involving coercion may be prosecuted under general statutes prohibiting violence, such as assault and battery laws.

History [ edit ] Further information: History of rape Historically, in much of the world, rape was seen as a crime or tort of theft of a man's property (usually either a husband or father). In this case, property damage meant that the crime was not legally recognized as damage against the victim, but instead to her father or husband's property. Therefore, by definition a husband could not rape his wife.

[ 2 ] The view that a husband cannot be charged with the rape of his wife was described by Sir Matthew Hale (1609–1676) in History of the Pleas of the Crown , published posthumously in 1736, where he wrote that "The husband cannot be guilty of a rape committed by himself upon his lawful wife, for by their mutual consent and contract the wife hath given up herself in this kind unto her husband, which she cannot retract". Also, American and English law subscribed until the 20th century to the system of coverture , that is, a legal doctrine under which, upon marriage, a woman's legal rights were subsumed by those of her husband.

[ 3 ] The implication was that once unified by marriage, a spouse could no longer be charged with raping one's spouse, anymore than be charged with raping oneself.

[ 4 ] Many jurisdictions, including all fifty U.S. states, had criminalized marital rape by the 1990s. English common law also had a great impact on many legal systems of the world through colonialism .

[ 5 ] Kersti Yllö states in the prologue of Understanding Marital Rape In a Global Context , "In some cultures, consent is not even something that an individual wife can give. The families that arranged the marriage guarantee her permanent consent." [ 6 ] : 1 Control over a wife's sexuality was only a part of the greater control that men had in all other areas concerning her. A husband's control over his wife's body could also be seen in the way adultery between a wife and another man was constructed; for example in 1707, English Lord Chief Justice John Holt described the act of a man having sexual relations with another man's wife as "the highest invasion of property".

[ 7 ] For this reason, in many cultures there was a conflation between the crimes of rape and adultery, since both were seen and understood as a violation of the rights of the husband. Spousal rape was considered a property crime against a husband, not against a woman's right to self-determination.

[ 8 ] The property to be withheld in a female was her virginity; this was the commodity.

[ 9 ] : 20 Following this line of logic, a woman was (and still is in many cultures across the globe) first the property of her father, then, upon marriage, the property of her husband.

[ 9 ] : 20 Therefore, a man could not be prosecuted for raping his own wife because she was his possession.

[ 10 ] : 87 However, if another man raped someone's wife, this was essentially stealing property (a women's sexuality).

[ 9 ] In English customs, "bride capture" (a man claiming a woman through rape) was thought to be stealing a father's property by raping his daughter. Therefore, rape laws were created to "protect the property interests men had in their women, not to protect women themselves".

[ 10 ] In some cultures, marriage is arranged for the purpose of creating access to procreation.

[ 6 ] In these situations, the parties do not necessarily consent to marriage (in the case of forced marriage ).

[ 6 ] Following this logic, if consent is not part of marriage, then it is not necessary for intercourse. The autonomy of the wife is also often compromised in cultures where bride price is paid. Under customary law in certain parts of Africa, forced sex in marriage was not prohibited, although some specific circumstances, such as during advanced pregnancy, immediately after childbirth, during menstruation, or during mourning for a deceased close relative, were recognized as giving the wife the right to refuse sex.

[ 11 ] Rape has been, until recent decades, understood as a crime against honor and reputation – not only in domestic legislation, but also in international law; for example according to the Article 27 of the Fourth Geneva Convention , "Women shall be especially protected against any attack on their honour, in particular against rape, enforced prostitution, or any form of indecent assault".

[ 12 ] It was not until the 1990s that the International Criminal Court statute recognized crimes of sexual violence as violent crimes against the person; [ 13 ] "Not until the last half century was rape understood to be an offense against the woman, against her dignity, instead of against her family's or her husband's honor".

[ 13 ] Legal aspect [ edit ] Historically, many cultures have had a concept of spouses' conjugal rights [ 14 ] to sexual intercourse with each other. This can be seen in English common law , in force in Anglo America and the British Commonwealth , where the very concept of marital rape was treated as an impossibility. This was illustrated most vividly by Sir Matthew Hale (1609–1676), in his legal treatise Historia Placitorum Coronæ or History of the Pleas of the Crown (posthumously, 1736) where he wrote that "The husband cannot be guilty of a rape committed by himself upon his lawful wife, for by their mutual consent and contract the wife hath given up herself in this kind unto her husband, which she cannot retract." [ 15 ] Formalization of the marital rape exemption in law [ edit ] Common law and the United Kingdom [ edit ] See also: Rape in English law Sir Matthew Hale's statement in History of the Pleas of the Crown did not cite a legal precedent for it, though it relied on earlier standards. In a case of Lord Audley's (1593–1631), for instance, Hale cite's the jurist Bracton (c. 1210 – c. 1268) support of this rule, said to have derived from laws of King Æthelstan (r. 927–939) where upon the law holds that even "were the party of no chaste life, but a whore, yet there may be ravishment: but it is a good plea to say she was his concubine".

[ 16 ] A lawful marriage legitimizes the conjugal act itself, so "marital rape" is a contradiction in terms . While a physical assault against a spouse may be charged, such is distinct from the delegitimization of conjugal union itself as rape. Marriage then should not be defined as an "exemption" to rape but as "contradictory" to it. Marriage created conjugal rights between spouses, and marriage could not be annulled except by a private act of Parliament—it therefore follows that a spouse could not revoke conjugal rights from the marriage, and therefore there could be no rape between spouses. The principle was repeated in East's Treatise of the Pleas of the Crown in 1803 and in Archbold's Pleading and Evidence in Criminal Cases in 1822. The principle was framed as an exemption to the law of rape in an English courtroom in R v Clarence , [ 17 ] but it was not overturned until 1991 by the House of Lords in the case of R v R in 1991, where it was described as an anachronistic and offensive legal fiction.

[ 18 ] Feminist critique in the 19th century [ edit ] From the beginnings of the 19th century feminist movement , activists challenged the presumed right of men to engage in forced or coerced sex with their wives. In the United States , "the nineteenth-century woman's rights movement fought against a husband's right to control marital intercourse in a campaign that was remarkably developed, prolific, and insistent, given nineteenth-century taboos against the public mention of sex or sexuality." [ 19 ] Suffragists including Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucy Stone "singled out a woman's right to control marital intercourse as the core component of equality." [ 20 ] Nineteenth century feminist demands centered on the right of women to control their bodies and fertility, positioned consent in marital sexual relations as an alternative to contraception and abortion (which many opposed), and also embraced eugenic concerns about excessive procreation.

[ 21 ] British liberal feminists John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor attacked marital rape as a gross double standard in law and as central to the subordination of women.

[ 22 ] [ failed verification ] Advocates of the Free Love Movement , including early anarcha-feminists such as Voltairine de Cleyre and Emma Goldman , as well as Victoria Woodhull , Thomas Low Nichols , and Mary Gove Nichols , joined a critique of marital rape to advocate women's autonomy and sexual pleasure .

[ 23 ] Moses Harman , a Kansas-based publisher and advocate for women's rights, was jailed twice under the Comstock laws for publishing articles (by a woman who was victimized and a doctor who treated marital rape survivors) decrying marital rape.

De Cleyre defended Harman in a well-known article, "Sexual Slavery." She refused to draw any distinction between rape outside of and within marriage: "And that is rape, where a man forces himself sexually upon a woman whether he is licensed by the marriage law to do it or not." [ 24 ] British philosopher and writer Bertrand Russell in his book Marriage and Morals (1929) deplored the situation of married women. He wrote "Marriage is for woman the commonest mode of livelihood, and the total amount of undesired sex endured by women is probably greater in marriage than in prostitution ." [ 25 ] 20th- and 21st-century criminalization [ edit ] The marital rape exemption or defence became more widely viewed as inconsistent with the developing concepts of human rights and equality. The first country which criminalized the marital rape in 1922 was Soviet Union (i. e. the penal code made no longer the distinction between violent sex within marriage and outside the marriage), [ 26 ] one decade later Poland in 1932.

[ 27 ] After World War II , many members of the Communist Bloc followed the Soviet example, e. g.

Czechoslovakia in 1950.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Under the influence of European countries in which marital rape was already illegal (Soviet Union, etc.), [ 30 ] feminists in other countries worked systematically since the 1960s to overturn the marital rape exemption and criminalize marital rape.

[ 31 ] Increasing criminalization of spousal rape is part of a worldwide reclassification of sexual crimes "from offenses against morality, the family, good customs, honor, or chastity ... to offenses against liberty, self-determination, or physical integrity." [ 32 ] In December 1993, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights published the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women . This establishes marital rape as a human rights violation.

[ citation needed ] The importance of the right to self sexual determination of women is increasingly being recognized as crucial to women's rights . In 2012, High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay stated that: [ 33 ] "Violations of women's human rights are often linked to their sexuality and reproductive role. (...) In many countries, married women may not refuse to have sexual relations with their husbands, and often have no say in whether they use contraception. (...) Ensuring that women have full autonomy over their bodies is the first crucial step towards achieving substantive equality between women and men. Personal issues—such as when, how and with whom they choose to have sex, and when, how and with whom they choose to have children—are at the heart of living a life in dignity." Despite these trends and international moves, criminalization has not occurred in all UN member States . Determining the criminal status of marital rape may be challenging, because, while some countries explicitly criminalize the act (by stipulating in their rape laws that marriage is not a defense to a charge of rape; or by creating a specific crime of 'marital rape'; or, otherwise, by having statutory provisions that expressly state that a spouse can be charged with the rape of their other spouse) and other countries explicitly exempt spouses (by defining rape as forced sexual intercourse outside of marriage; or forced sexual intercourse with a woman not the perpetrator's wife; or by providing in their rape provisions that marriage is a defense to a charge of rape), in many countries the ordinary rape laws are silent on the issue (that is, they do not address the issue one way or another)—in such cases, in order to determine whether marital rape is covered by the ordinary rape laws it must be analyzed whether there are judicial decisions in this respect; and former definitions of the law are also important (for instance whether there was previously a statutory exemption that was removed by legislators for the purpose of implicitly including marital rape).

[ citation needed ] In 2006, the UN Secretary-General's in-depth study on all forms of violence against women stated that: [ 34 ] "Marital rape may be prosecuted in at least 104 States. Of these, 32 have made marital rape a specific criminal offence, while the remaining 74 do not exempt marital rape from general rape provisions. Marital rape is not a prosecutable offence in at least 53 States. Four States criminalize marital rape only when the spouses are judicially separated. Four States are considering legislation that would allow marital rape to be prosecuted." In 2011, the UN Women report Progress of the World's Women:In Pursuit of Justice stated that: [ 35 ] "By April 2011, at least 52 States had explicitly outlawed marital rape in their criminal code".

Traditionally, rape was a criminal offense that could only be committed outside marriage, and courts did not apply the rape statutes to acts of forced sex between spouses. With changing social views, and international condemnation of sexual violence in marriage, courts have started to apply the rape laws in marriage. The current applicability in many countries of rape laws to spouses is currently unclear, since in many countries the laws have not been recently tested in court. In some countries, notably jurisdictions which have inherited the 1860 Indian Penal Code (such as Singapore , India , Bangladesh , Sri Lanka , Burma ) and some countries in the Commonwealth Caribbean region, the laws explicitly exempt spouses from prosecution (for instance, under the 1860 Indian Penal Code, which has also been inherited by other countries in the region, the law on rape states that "Sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife is not rape").

[ 36 ] An example of a country where the rape law explicitly excludes a husband as a possible perpetrator is Ethiopia ; its rape law states: [ 37 ] "Article 620 – Rape: Whoever compels a woman to submit to sexual intercourse outside wedlock , whether by the use of violence or grave intimidation, or after having rendered her unconscious or incapable of resistance, is punishable with rigorous imprisonment from five years to fifteen years". Another example is South Sudan , where the law states: "Sexual intercourse by a married couple is not rape, within the meaning of this section". (Art 247).

[ 38 ] Conversely, an example of country where the rape law explicitly criminalizes marital rape is Namibia – The Combating of Rape Act (No. 8 of 2000) states that: "No marriage or other relationship shall constitute a defence to a charge of rape under this Act".

[ 39 ] An example of a jurisdiction where marital rape is a distinct criminal offense is Bhutan where 'Marital rape' is defined by Article 199 which reads: "A defendant shall be guilty of marital rape, if the defendant engages in sexual intercourse with one's own spouse without consent or against the will of the other spouse".

[ 40 ] By 1986, in Europe, there was international pressure to criminalize marital rape: the European Parliament's Resolution on Violence Against Women of 1986 called for its criminalization.

[ 41 ] This was reiterated by the Recommendation Rec(2002)5 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the protection of women against violence.

[ 42 ] (see para 35) This recommendation provided detailed guidelines on how legislation regarding domestic violence, rape, and other forms of violence against women should operate. It also provided a definition of violence against women, and gave a list of non-exhaustive examples, including marital rape (see section "Definition" para 1). Although the approach on the issue of violence against women has varied significantly among European countries, the traditional view that acts of violence against a woman are crimes against honor and morality, and not against the self-determination of the woman, was still prevalent in the 1990s in many countries.

[ 43 ] The above recommendation stated that member states must "ensure that criminal law provides that any act of violence against a person, in particular physical or sexual violence, constitutes a violation of that person's physical, psychological and/or sexual freedom and integrity, and not solely a violation of morality, honour or decency" (para 34).

[ 44 ] The approach regarding sexual and other forms of violence against women in specific European countries did not necessarily mirror women's rights in other areas of life (such as public or political life) in those countries: in fact some countries otherwise known for advanced women's rights, such as Finland and Denmark , have received strong criticism for their policies in this area. A 2008 report produced by Amnesty International , [ 45 ] described Danish laws on sexual violence as "inconsistent with international human rights standards", [ 46 ] which has led to Denmark eventually reforming its sexual offenses legislation in 2013.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] (Until 2013, in Denmark "the Penal Code reduce[d] the level of penalty or provide[d] for exclusion of punishment altogether for rape and sexual violence within marriage in certain instances [...] and if the perpetrator enter[ed] into or continu[ed] a marriage with his victim the punishment for rape c[ould] be reduced or remitted").

[ 46 ] Cultural and religious values which support female subordination and inequality are considered important in dealing with the issue of sexual violence against women; but there have been calls for analyses of cultural gender norms which tolerate violence against women to not be based on stereotypes; Mala Htun and S. Laurel Weldon write "gender policy is not one issue but many" and "When [...] Latin American countries are quicker to adopt policies addressing violence against women than the Nordic countries , one at least ought to consider the possibility that fresh ways of grouping states would further the study of gender politics." [ 50 ] The causes of the toleration – in law or in practice – of sexual violence inside marriage are complex; lack of understanding of the concept of consent and coercion due to lack of sexual education and public discussion about sexuality are often cited as causes of sexual abuse in general; but there has been criticism towards the idea that sex education about consent, in and of itself, is sufficient.

[ 51 ] The countries which choose to ratify the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence , the first legally binding instrument in Europe in the field of violence against women, [ 52 ] are bound by its provisions to ensure that non-consensual sexual acts committed against a spouse or partner are illegal.

[ 53 ] The convention came into force in August 2014.

[ 54 ] In its explanatory report (para 219) it acknowledges the long tradition of toleration, de jure or de facto , of marital rape and domestic violence: "A large number of the offences established in accordance with this Convention are offences typically committed by family members, intimate partners or others in the immediate social environment of the victim. There are many examples from past practice in Council of Europe member states that show that exceptions to the prosecution of such cases were made, either in law or in practice, if victim and perpetrator were, for example, married to each other or had been in a relationship. The most prominent example is rape within marriage, which for a long time had not been recognised as rape because of the relationship between victim and perpetrator." Legal changes [ edit ] Countries which were early to criminalize marital rape include the Soviet Union (1922), [ 55 ] Poland (1932), Czechoslovakia (1950), some other members of the Communist Bloc , Sweden (1965), [ 29 ] and Norway (1971).

[ 29 ] Slovenia , then a republic within federal Yugoslavia , criminalized marital rape in 1977.

[ 56 ] The Israeli Supreme Court affirmed that marital rape is a crime in a 1980 decision, citing law based on the Talmud (at least 6th century).

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Criminalization in Australia began with the state of New South Wales in 1981, followed by all other states from 1985 to 1992.

[ 59 ] Several formerly British-ruled countries followed suit: Canada (1983), [ 60 ] [ 61 ] New Zealand (1985), and Ireland (1990).

[ 59 ] Marital rape was criminalized in Austria in 1989 [ 62 ] (and in 2004 it became a state offense meaning it can be prosecuted by the state even in the absence of a complaint from the spouse, with procedures being similar to stranger rape [ 63 ] ). In Switzerland marital rape became a crime in 1992 [ 64 ] (and became a state offense in 2004 [ 65 ] ). In Spain , the Supreme Court ruled in 1992 that sex within marriage must be consensual and that sexuality in marriage must be understood in light of the principle of the freedom to make one's own decisions with respect to sexual activity; in doing so it upheld the conviction of a man who had been found guilty of raping his wife by a lower court.

[ 66 ] In Europe , Finland outlawed marital rape in 1994.

[ 67 ] The case of domestic violence in Finland has been the subject of interest and discussion, because Finland is otherwise considered a country where women have very advanced rights in regard to public life and participation in the public sphere (jobs, opportunities, etc.). The country has been made the object of international criticism in regard to its approach towards violence against women.

[ 68 ] A 2010 Eurobarometer survey on European attitudes on violence against women showed that victim blaming attitudes are much more common in Finland than in other countries: 74% of Finns blamed "the provocative behaviour of women" for violence against women, much higher than in other countries (for instance many countries that are popularly believed to be among the most patriarchal of Europe were significantly less likely to agree with that assertion: 33% in Spain, 46% in Ireland, 47% in Italy).

[ 69 ] Belgium was early to criminalize marital rape. In 1979, the Brussels Court of Appeal recognized marital rape and found that a husband who used serious violence to coerce his wife into having sex against her wishes was guilty of the criminal offense of rape. The logic of the court was that, although the husband did have a 'right' to sex with his wife, he could not use violence to claim it, as Belgian laws did not allow people to obtain their rights by violence.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] In 1989 laws were amended, the definition of rape was broadened, and marital rape began to be treated the same as other forms of rape.

[ 72 ] In Ireland , the Criminal Law (Rape) Act, 1981 defined rape as "unlawful sexual intercourse" without consent; [ 73 ] an attempt to explicitly include spouses within the definition was rejected by the Fianna Fáil government .

[ 74 ] Seán Doherty , the Minister for Justice , suggested that the courts might allow a charge of rape in some cases, and that various assault charges might be prosecuted in others.

[ 74 ] A 1987 discussion paper by the Law Reform Commission stated, "In the absence of Irish decisions on the topic, the present law cannot be stated with any great degree of confidence. It would appear, however, that to the extent that the marital rape exemption exists, it is confined to circumstances where the spouses are cohabiting and there are no separation proceedings in being, or even, perhaps, in contemplation." [ 75 ] The paper's call to abolish any marital exemption was "on the whole, generally welcomed, although some misgivings were expressed as to whether it might not lead to fabricated complaints and unwarranted intrusions in the marital relationship." [ 76 ] The Criminal Law (Rape) (Amendment) Act, 1990 removed the word "unlawful" from the 1981 definition of rape, and abolished "any rule of law by virtue of which a husband cannot be guilty of the rape of his wife".

[ 77 ] The first two convictions were in 2006 (upon retrial) and 2016.

[ 78 ] In France , in 1990, following a case where a man had tortured and raped his wife, the Court of Cassation authorized prosecution of spouses for rape or sexual assault. In 1992 the Court convicted a man of the rape of his wife, stating that the presumption that spouses have consented to sexual acts that occur within marriage is only valid when the contrary is not proven.

[ 79 ] In 1994, Law 94-89 criminalized marital rape; [ 79 ] a second law, passed 4 April 2006, makes rape by a partner (including in unmarried relationships, marriages, and civil unions) an aggravating circumstance in prosecuting rape.

[ 80 ] Germany outlawed spousal rape in 1997, which is later than other developed countries. Female ministers and women's rights activists lobbied for this law for over 25 years.

[ 81 ] Before 1997, the definition of rape was: " Whoever compels a woman to have extramarital intercourse with him, or with a third person, by force or the threat of present danger to life or limb, shall be punished by not less than two years’ imprisonment ".

[ 82 ] In 1997 there were changes to the rape law, broadening the definition, making it gender-neutral, and removing the marital exemption.

[ 83 ] Before, marital rape could only be prosecuted as "Causing bodily harm" (Section 223 of the German Criminal Code ), "Insult" (Section 185 of the German Criminal Code) and "Using threats or force to cause a person to do, suffer or omit an act" (Nötigung, Section 240 of the German Criminal Code) which carried lower sentences [ 84 ] and were rarely prosecuted.

Before a new Criminal Code came into force in 2003, [ 85 ] the law on rape in Bosnia and Herzegovina also contained a statutory exemption, and read: " Whoever coerces a female not his wife into sexual intercourse by force or threat of imminent attack upon her life or body or the life or body of a person close to her, shall be sentenced to a prison term of one to ten years ".

[ 82 ] In Portugal also, before 1982, there was a statutory exemption.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Marital rape was criminalized in Serbia in 2002; before that date rape was legally defined as forced sexual intercourse outside of marriage.

[ 88 ] The same was true in Hungary until 1997.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] In 1994, in Judgment no. 223/94 V, 1994, the Court of Appeal of Luxembourg confirmed the applicability of the provisions of the Criminal Code regarding rape to marital rape.

[ 72 ] [ 91 ] Marital rape was made illegal in the Netherlands in 1991.

[ 92 ] The legislative changes provided a new definition for rape in 1991, which removed the marital exemption, and also made the crime gender-neutral; before 1991 the legal definition of rape was a man forcing, by violence or threat of thereof, a woman to engage in sexual intercourse outside of marriage.

[ 93 ] In Italy the law on rape, violenza carnale ('carnal violence', as it was termed) did not contain a statutory exemption, but was, as elsewhere, understood as inapplicable in the context of marriage. Although Italy has a reputation of a male dominated traditional society, it was quite early to accept that the rape law covers forced sex in marriage too: in 1976 in Sentenza n. 12857 del 1976 , the Supreme Court ruled that "the spouse who compels the other spouse to carnal knowledge by violence or threats commits the crime of carnal violence" (" commette il delitto di violenza carnale il coniuge che costringa con violenza o minaccia l’altro coniuge a congiunzione carnale ").

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] Cyprus criminalized marital rape in 1994.

[ 97 ] Marital rape was made illegal in North Macedonia in 1996.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] In Croatia marital rape was criminalized in 1998.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] In 2006, Greece enacted Law 3500/2006 , entitled "For combating domestic violence", which punishes marital rape. It entered into force on 24 October 2006. This legislation also prohibits numerous other forms of violence within marriage and cohabiting relations, and various other forms of abuse of women.

[ 102 ] Liechtenstein made marital rape illegal in 2001.

[ 103 ] In South America, Colombia criminalized marital rape in 1996, [ 104 ] and Chile criminalized it in 1999.

[ 105 ] Thailand outlawed marital rape in 2007.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] The new reforms were enacted amid strong controversy and were opposed by many. One opponent of the law was legal scholar Taweekiet Meenakanit who voiced his opposition to the legal reforms. He also opposed the making of rape a gender neutral offense. Meenakanit claimed that allowing a husband to file a rape charge against his wife is "abnormal logic" and that wives would refuse to divorce or put their husband in jail since many Thai wives are dependent on their husbands.

[ 108 ] Papua New Guinea criminalized marital rape in 2003.

[ 109 ] Namibia outlawed marital rape in 2000.

[ 110 ] Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) considers the forced sex in marriages as a crime only when the wife is below age 15. Thus, marital rape is not a criminal offense under the IPC.

[ 111 ] Marital rape victims have to take recourse to the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 (PWDVA).

[ 112 ] The PWDVA, which came into force in 2006, outlaws marital rape.

[ 113 ] However, it offers only a civil remedy for the offence.

[ 114 ] In February 2022, Smriti Irani (Minister for Women and Child Development) told parliament that “The Government of India has initiated the process for comprehensive amendments to criminal laws in consultation" in response to questions on marital rape, which assures some provisions will be made on criminalizing marital rape.

[ citation needed ] Recent countries to criminalize marital rape include Zimbabwe (2001), [ 115 ] [ 116 ] Turkey (2005), [ 117 ] Cambodia (2005), [ 118 ] Liberia (2006), [ 119 ] Nepal (2006), [ 120 ] Mauritius (2007), [ 121 ] Ghana (2007), [ 122 ] Malaysia (2007), [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Thailand (2007), [ 125 ] Rwanda (2009), [ 126 ] Suriname (2009), [ 127 ] Nicaragua (2012), [ 128 ] Sierra Leone (2012), [ 115 ] [ 129 ] South Korea (2013), [ 130 ] Bolivia (2013), [ 131 ] Samoa (2013), [ 132 ] Tonga (1999/2013).

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] Human rights observers have criticized a variety of countries for failing to effectively prosecute marital rape once it has been criminalized.

[ 135 ] South Africa, which criminalized in 1993, [ 136 ] saw its first conviction for marital rape in 2012.

[ 137 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Marital rape in the United States The traditional definition of rape in the United States is the forced sexual intercourse by a male with a "female not his wife ", making it clear that the statutes did not apply to married couples. The 1962 Model Penal Code repeated the marital rape exemption, stating: A male who has sexual intercourse with a female not his wife is guilty of rape if: ....

[ 138 ] Reforms of marital rape laws in the United States began in the mid-1970s with the criminalization of marital rape.

South Dakota criminalized marital rape in 1975, making it the first U.S. state to do so. Two years later, however, the South Dakota legislature decriminalized marital rape. After this change, marital rape would not be recriminalized in South Dakota until 1990.

[ 139 ] The earlier laws of the 1970s often required the husband and wife to no longer be living together for marital rape charges to be brought. The case in the United States that first challenged this cohabitation clause was Oregon v. Rideout in 1978.

[ 140 ] : 172 Although the husband was acquitted of raping his wife, it spurred the movement towards reform. By 1993 marital rape was a crime in all 50 states.

[ 141 ] Still, in the 1990s, most states continued to differentiate between the way marital rape and non-marital rape was viewed and treated. The laws have continued to change and evolve, with most states reforming their laws in the 21st century. But there are still states, like South Carolina, where marital and non-marital rape are treated quite differently under the law.

[ citation needed ] In the 1990s, most states differentiated between the way marital rape and non-marital rape were treated. These differences were visible through shorter penalties, taking into account whether or not violence was used, and allowing for shorter reporting periods. (Bergen, 1996; Russell, 1990).

[ 142 ] The laws have continued to change and evolve, with most states reforming their legislation in the 21st century, in order to bring marital rape laws in line with non-marital rape, but even today there remain differences in some states. With the removal, in 2005, [ 143 ] [ 144 ] of the requirement of a higher level of violence from the law of Tennessee , which now allows for marital rape in Tennessee to be treated like any other type of rape, South Carolina remains the only US state with a law requiring excessive force/violence (the force or violence used or threatened must be of a "high and aggravated nature").

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] In most states the criminalization has occurred by the removal of the exemptions from the general rape law by legislation, or by courts striking down such exemptions as unconstitutional.

[ 147 ] Some states have created a distinct crime of spousal rape. California, for example, has separate criminal offenses for rape (Article 261) and for spousal rape (Article 262).

[ 148 ] England and Wales [ edit ] Background [ edit ] Although the issue of marital rape was highlighted by feminists in the 19th century, and was also deplored by thinkers such as John Stuart Mill and Bertrand Russell (see above section 'Feminist critique in the 19th century'), it was not until the 1970s that this issue was raised at a political level. The late 1970s also saw the enactment of Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1976 , which provided the first statutory definition of rape (prior to this rape was defined by the common law). The Criminal Law Revision Committee in their 1984 Report on Sexual Offences rejected the idea that the offense of rape should be extended to marital relations; writing the following: [ 149 ] "The majority of us ... believe that rape cannot be considered in the abstract as merely 'sexual intercourse without consent'. The circumstances of rape may be peculiarly grave. This feature is not present in the case of a husband and wife cohabiting with each other when an act of sexual intercourse occurs without the wife's consent. They may well have had sexual intercourse regularly before the act in question and, because a sexual relationship may involve a degree of compromise, she may sometimes have agreed only with some reluctance to such intercourse. Should he go further and force her to have sexual intercourse without her consent, this may evidence a failure of the marital relationship. But it is far from being the 'unique' and 'grave' offence described earlier. Where the husband goes so far as to cause injury, there are available a number of offences against the person with which he may be charged, but the gravamen of the husband's conduct is the injury he has caused not the sexual intercourse he has forced." The committee also expressed more general views on domestic violence arguing that "Violence occurs in some marriages but the wives do not always wish the marital tie to be severed" and reiterated the point that domestic incidents without physical injury would generally be outside the scope of the law: "Some of us consider that the criminal law should keep out of marital relationships between cohabiting partners—especially the marriage bed—except where injury arises, when there are other offences which can be charged." [ 149 ] Five years later, in Scotland , the High Court of Justiciary took a different view, abolishing marital immunity, in S. v. H.M. Advocate , 1989. The same happened in England and Wales in 1991, in R v R (see below). Very soon after this, in Australia, at the end of 1991, in R v L , the High Court of Australia ruled the same, ruling that if the common law exemption had ever been part of the Australian law, it no longer was (by that time most Australian states and territories had already abolished their exemptions by statutory law).

[ 150 ] Ending the exemption [ edit ] Main article: Rape in English law 2012 West Midlands Police poster against sexual violence, stating marriage is 'no excuse' The marital rape exemption was first referred to in 1736 in Matthew Hale's History of the Pleas of the Crown (see above). It was abolished in England and Wales in 1991 by the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords , in the case of R v R , [ 151 ] [ 152 ] which was the first occasion where the marital rights exemption had been appealed as far as the House of Lords, and it followed the trio of cases since 1988 where the marital rights exemption was held to exist. The leading judgment, unanimously approved, was given by Lord Keith of Kinkel . He stated that the contortions being performed in the lower courts in order to avoid applying the marital rights exemption were indicative of the absurdity of the rule, and held, agreeing with earlier judgments in Scotland and in the Court of Appeal in R v R , that "the fiction of implied consent has no useful purpose to serve today in the law of rape" and that the marital rights exemption was a "common law fiction" which had never been a true rule of English law . R's appeal was accordingly dismissed, and he was convicted of the rape of his wife.

[ citation needed ] The first attempted prosecution of a husband for the rape of his wife was R v Clarke (1949).

[ 153 ] Rather than try to argue directly against Hale's logic, the court held that consent in this instance had been revoked by an order of the court for non-cohabitation. It was the first of a number of cases in which the courts found reasons not to apply the exemption, notably R v O'Brien (1974) [ 154 ] (the obtaining of decree nisi ), R v Steele (1976) [ 155 ] (an undertaking by the husband to the court not to molest the wife) and R v Roberts (1986) [ 156 ] (the existence of a formal separation agreement).

[ citation needed ] There are at least four recorded instances of a husband successfully relying on the exemption in England and Wales. The first was R v Miller (1954), [ 157 ] where it was held that the wife had not legally revoked her consent despite having presented a divorce petition.

R v Kowalski (1988) [ 158 ] was followed by R v Sharples (1990), [ 159 ] and R v J (1991), a judgment made after the first instance decision of the Crown Court in R v R but before the decision of the House of Lords that was to abolish the exemption. In Miller , Kowalski and R v J the husbands were instead convicted of assault . The R v Kowalski case involved, among other acts, an instance of non-consensual oral sex . For this, the husband was convicted of indecent assault , as the court ruled that his wife's "implied consent" by virtue of marriage extended only to vaginal intercourse, not to other acts such as fellatio.

[ 160 ] (At that time the offense of 'rape' dealt only with vaginal intercourse.) In R v Sharples (1990) it was alleged that the husband had raped his wife in 1989. Despite the fact that the wife had obtained a family protection order before the alleged rape, the judge refused to accept that rape could legally occur, concluding that the family protection order had not removed the wife's implied consent , ruling that: "it cannot be inferred that by obtaining the order in these terms the wife had withdrawn her consent to sexual intercourse".

[ 161 ] Aftermath [ edit ] By 1991, when the exemption was removed, the Law Commission in its Working Paper of 1990 was already supporting the abolition of the exemption, a view reiterated in their Final Report that was published in 1992; and international moves in this direction were by now common. Therefore, the result of the R v R case was welcomed. But, while the removal of the exemption itself was not controversial, the way through which this was done was; since the change was not made through usual statutory modification. The cases of SW v UK and CR v UK arose in response to R v R ; in which the applicants (convicted of rape and attempted rape of the wives) appealed to the European Court of Human Rights arguing that their convictions were a retrospective application of the law in breach of Article 7 of the European Convention on Human Rights. They claimed that at the time of the rape there was a common law exemption in force, therefore their convictions were post facto . Their case was not successful, with their arguments being rejected by the European Court of Human Rights, which ruled that the criminalization of marital rape had become a reasonably foreseeable development of the criminal law in the light of the evolution of social norms; and that the Article 7 does not prohibit the gradual judicial evolution of the interpretation of an offense, provided the result is consistent with the essence of the offense and that it could be reasonably foreseen.

[ 162 ] A new definition of the offense of 'rape' was created in 1994 by the section 142 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 , providing a broader definition that included anal sex; and an even broader definition was created by the Sexual Offences Act 2003 , including oral sex. The law on rape does not—and did not ever since the removal of the marital exemption in 1991—provide for any different punishment based on the relation between parties. However, in 1993, in R v W 1993 14 Cr App R (S) 256 , the court ruled: "It should not be thought a different and lower scale automatically attaches to the rape of a wife by her husband. All will depend upon the circumstances of the case. Where the parties are cohabiting and the husband insisted upon intercourse against his wife's will but without violence or threats this may reduce sentence. Where the conduct is gross and involves threats or violence the relationship will be of little significance." [ 163 ] Northern Ireland [ edit ] At the time of R v R (see "England and Wales" above), rape in Northern Ireland was a crime at common law. Northern Ireland common law is similar to that of England and Wales, and partially derives from the same sources; so any (alleged) exemption from its rape law was also removed by R v R . In March 2000, a Belfast man was convicted for raping his wife, in the first case of its kind in Northern Ireland.

[ 164 ] Until 28 July 2003, rape in Northern Ireland remained solely an offense at common law that could only be committed by a man against a woman only as vaginal intercourse. Between 28 July 2003 and 2 February 2009 rape was defined by the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 2003 as "any act of non-consensual intercourse by a man with a person", but the common law offense continued to exist, and oral sex remained excluded. On 2 February 2009 the Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008 came into force, abolishing the common law offense of rape, and providing a definition of rape that is similar to that of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 of England and Wales. The Public Prosecution Service for Northern Ireland has the same policy for marital rape as for other forms of rape; it states in its Policy for Prosecuting Cases of Rape document that: "The Policy applies to all types of rape, including marital and relationship rape, acquaintance and stranger rape, both against male and female victims".

[ 165 ] Australia [ edit ] In Australia , the immunity for marital rape was removed in all states and territories, either by statute or judicial decision, between late 1970s and early 1990s. Previously, the exemption of marital rape was based on the English common law offense of rape, being generally understood as " carnal knowledge ", outside of marriage , of a female against her will. The common law definition of rape continued to apply in some states, while others codified the definition, which in each case included a marital exemption. In Queensland , for example, the provision read: "Any person who has carnal knowledge of a woman or girl, not his wife , without her consent, or with her consent, if the consent is obtained by force, or by means of threats or intimidation of any kind, or by fear of bodily harm, or by means of false and fraudulent representations as to the nature of the act, or, in the case of a married woman, by personating her husband, is guilty of a crime, which is called rape." [ 166 ] The first Australian state to deal with marital rape was South Australia , under the progressive initiatives of Premier Don Dunstan , which in 1976 partially removed the exemption. Section 73 of the Criminal Law Consolidation Act Amendment Act 1976 (SA) read: "No person shall, by reason only of the fact that he is married to some other person, be presumed to have consented to sexual intercourse with that other person".

[ 167 ] Nevertheless, the laws did not go as far as equating marital with non-marital rape; the law required violence or other aggravating circumstances, in order for an act of marital intercourse to be rape.

The first Australian jurisdiction to completely remove the marital exemption was New South Wales in 1981.

Western Australia , Victoria , and ACT did the same in 1985; and Tasmania in 1987. Discussions of criminalization of marital rape were already taking place in Queensland in the late 1970s, [ 166 ] but it was not until 1989 that the exemption was removed [ 168 ] and the Northern Territory did the same in 1994. In 1991, in R v L , the High Court of Australia ruled that "if it was ever the common law that by marriage a wife gave irrevocable consent to sexual intercourse by her husband, it is no longer the common law." [ 169 ] [ 150 ] The case led to South Australia changing its law in 1992.

[ citation needed ] India and Pakistan [ edit ] In India and Pakistan there are no law provisions related to the marital rape but they are being demanded by the commission to enact laws to bring it in the criminal jurisdiction.

[ 170 ] In India, the controversies persist in the socio-legal discourse surrounding the issue of marital rape.

[ 171 ] These debates not only ignore the pain, trauma and suffering women face because of sexual violence within an unequal marriage relationship but also overlook the fact that women are powerless and vulnerable in such a patriarchal setup [ 172 ] Marriage after rape [ edit ] Main article: Marry-your-rapist law See also: Bride kidnapping In a variety of cultures, marriage after a rape of an unmarried woman has been treated historically as a "resolution" to the rape, that is, a "reparatory marriage". In some countries, the mere offer to marry the person one has raped is sufficient to exonerate the perpetrator from criminal prosecution. Although laws that exonerate the perpetrator if he marries his victim after the rape are often associated with the Middle East, [ 173 ] such laws were very common around the world until the second half of the 20th century. For instance, as late as 1997, 14 Latin American countries had such laws, [ 174 ] although most of these countries have now abolished them.

[ citation needed ] Whether women were forced to marry their rapist, or the marriage was concluded before the violence began, many victims remain in chronically violent relationships. While there are many reasons for which victims of marital rape remain in their marriages, one important reason is that divorce may be hard to obtain and/or is stigmatized.

[ 175 ] : 70 Cross-culturally, one of the barriers that keep victims within their marriages is the shame and guilt they feel surrounding marital rape, [ 9 ] or general taboos around sexuality.

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] Lastly, some victims do not categorize their abuse as marital rape in order to minimize the violence they endure. This is used as a defense mechanism so they can continue to endure their abuse.

[ 177 ] In the context of forced and child marriage [ edit ] Forced marriage and child marriage are prevalent in many parts of the world, especially in parts of Asia and Africa . A forced marriage is a marriage where one or both participants are married without their freely given consent; [ 178 ] while a child marriage is a marriage where one or both parties are younger than 18.

[ 179 ] These types of marriages are associated with a higher rate of domestic violence, including marital rape.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] [ 181 ] [ 182 ] These forms of marriage are most common in traditional societies which have no laws against sexual violence in marriage, and where it is also very difficult to leave a marriage. Incidents taking place in some of these countries (such as Yemen ) have received international attention.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] The World Health Organization states, under the rubric "Customary forms of sexual violence", (pp. 156): [ 185 ] "Marriage is often used to legitimize a range of forms of sexual violence against women. The custom of marrying off young children , particularly girls, is found in many parts of the world. This practice – legal in many countries – is a form of sexual violence, since the children involved are unable to give or withhold their consent. The majority of them know little or nothing about sex before they are married." One type of forced marriages occurs in Guatemala (called robadas) and Mexico (called rapto). Robadas refers to "...abductions, in which women are 'taken' during the period of courtship, sometimes semivoluntarily but other times by force, by a suitor who wants to start a marital relationship with them".

[ 177 ] Rapto refers to "...an abduction for sexual or erotic purposes or marriage".

[ 5 ] Following the abduction, marriage is often encouraged to maintain the family honor.

[ 5 ] In these types of forced marriages, the marital union begins with the man's intense sense of control over the woman, combined with the understanding that the wife is the possession of her husband.

[ 177 ] This foundation of marriage had direct implications for sexual violence within the marriage. In reference to the practice of robadas, Cecilia Menjívar writes, "...unions that start out from the violent act of a robada can continue to breed violence, abuse, and mistreatment in the union." [ 177 ] In addition, women victims of robadas often face embarrassment and blame, despite the act usually being initiated by male perpetrators.

[ 177 ] Women are blamed for disobeying their parents or not resisting their abductor strong enough.

[ 177 ] This notion of blaming the woman also occurs in reference to rapto in rural Mexico. Silvie Bovarnick writes, "In many cases, men and women alike look for the fault of responsibility in women's behavior due to traditional conceptualisations of women as 'pillars of honour.'" [ 5 ] Abduction and rape compromises a woman's moral integrity, and therefore her honor.

[ 5 ] Many of these women, who were given little choice in their marriage, are left to live with their abusers.

[ 5 ] Prevalence [ edit ] According to a study cited by Gary F. Kelly (2011), 9% of female rape victims were raped by their spouse.

The prevalence of marital rape is difficult to assess, especially outside the Western World. Discussing sexual matters in many cultures is taboo. One problem with studies on marital rape is that the Western concept of consent is not understood in many parts of the world. Because many societies operate on social norms which create a dual system of sexual morality—one for sexual intercourse that is marital which is seen as an obligation that cannot be refused, and extra-marital , which is seen as wrong (or illicit/illegal).  Issues of consent are poorly understood, especially by young wives (which are often young girls who do not have a proper understanding of sexual rights). For instance in an interview in a study for the World Health Organization, a woman from Bangladesh who described being hit by her husband and forced to have sex said that: " I thought this is only natural. This is the way a husband behaves ." [ 186 ] Research has, nevertheless, associated specific regions with a very high level of violence, including sexual violence, against women by husbands/partners. An example of such a place is Ethiopia .

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] [ 189 ] The prevalence of marital rape depends on the particularly legal, national, and cultural context. In 1999, the World Health Organization conducted a study on violence against women in Tajikistan , surveying 900 women above the age of 14 in three districts of the country and found that 47% of married women reported having been forced to have sex by their husband.

[ 190 ] In Turkey 35.6% of women have experienced marital rape sometimes and 16.3% often.

[ 191 ] The earliest study in the Western World attempting to survey marital rape was an unpublished study by Joan Seites in the spring of 1975.  Seites sent questionnaires to 40 rape-crisis centers from a list compiled by the Center for Women Policy Studies (Washington, DC).  16 Centers completed questionnaire for a response rate of 40%.  Of the 3,709 reported calls dealing with rape and attempted rape received by the 16 centers, 12 calls dealt with marital rape (0.3%).  Because rape-crisis centers did not always record the relationships of the callers, whether the 12 reported calls fully represent the number of married relationships cannot be certainly known.

[ 192 ] In 1982 Diana E. H. Russell , a feminist writer and activist, conducted the seminal study on marital rape.  Her study surveyed a total of 930 women from San Francisco , California (50% non-response rate, non-English speaking Asian women were specifically excluded as non-reliable respondents), of whom 644 were married, divorced, or who self-identified as having a husband although not married. Six of these women (1%) self-assessed that they had been raped by their husbands, ex-husband, or de facto husbands. The survey interviewers, however, classified 74 (12%) of these women as having been raped. Of the 286 non-married women in the sample, 228 (80%) were classified by the survey interviewers as having been raped. Russell found that when repeated instances of rape as classified by the survey interviewers, by husbands or ex-husbands, over the entire course of the marriage are included, these account for 38% of all rape instances, in comparison to the remaining 62% occurring in non-marital instances.

[ 193 ] David Finkelhor and Kersti Yllö published a study in 1985 on marital rape that drew on a scientifically selected area probability sample from the metropolitan Boston area of 323 women who were either married or previously married who had a child living with them between the ages of six and fourteen. The study found that of the women who were married the instance of sexual relations through physical force or the threat thereof was 3%.

[ 140 ] In 1994, Patricia Easteal, then Senior Criminologist at the Australian Institute of Criminology, published the results of survey on sexual assault in many settings. The respondents had all been victims of numerous forms of sexual assault. Of the victim sub-sample, 10.4% had been raped by husbands or de facto husbands, with a further 2.3% raped by estranged husbands/ de factos .

[ 194 ] In 2002 Basile published research intended to address the lack of a nationally probability sample to-date that measured intimate sexual coercion faced by married women. Data were collected in a 1997 national poll by a random telephone survey of 1,108 residents in the continental U.S. of persons 18 years old or older. The survey had a 50% response rate. Of the 1,108 respondents, the 506 men were excluded from any inquiry into unwanted sexual experiences, leaving 602 (54%) women respondents for the study. 398 (66%) women indicated no unwanted sexual relations (their marital status is not given), and 204 (34%) women responded as having engaged in unwanted sex after being subject to some level of sexual coercion; types of sexual coercion included receiving 'a gift', 'a nice dinner', 'a back rub', 'kissing', etc. through threatened harm and physical coercion. Of this group, a sub-sample of 120 (59%) were married, of which 9% responded as having been subject to physical force.

[ 195 ] Physical and psychological damage [ edit ] Main article: Effects and aftermath of rape Rape by a spouse, partner or ex-partner is more often associated with physical violence. A nine-nation study within the European Union found that current or ex-partners were the perpetrators of around 25% of all sexual assaults, and that violence was more common in assaults by ex-partners (50% of the time) and partners (40%) than in assaults by strangers or recent acquaintances (25%).

[ 196 ] Attributing the effects of marital rape in research is problematic as it is nearly impossible to find a large enough sample of spouses to study who have experienced sexual violence but have not also been physically assaulted by their spouse.

[ 197 ] Marital rape can spread sexually transmitted infections and HIV , adversely affecting a victim's physical and psychological health. In sub-Saharan countries with very high prevalence rates of HIV, such as Lesotho , instances of multiple partnerships and marital rape exacerbate the spread of HIV.

[ 198 ] While rape by a stranger is highly traumatic , it is typically a one-time event and is clearly understood as rape. In the case of rape by a spouse or long term sexual partner, the history of the relationship affects the victim's reactions.  There is research showing that marital rape can be more emotionally and physically damaging than rape by a stranger.

[ 199 ] Marital rape may occur as part of an abusive relationship . Trauma from the rape adds to the effect of other abusive acts or abusive and demeaning talk. Furthermore, marital rape is rarely a one-time event, but a repeated if not frequent occurrence.

[ 200 ] Whether it takes place once or is part of an established pattern of domestic violence, trauma from rape has serious long-term consequences for victims regardless of whether the assault is prosecuted or not.

[ citation needed ] Unlike other forms of rape, where the victim can usually remove themselves from the company of the rapist and never interact with them again, in the case of marital rape the victim often has no choice but to continue living with their spouse. This is exacerbated by the fact that in many parts of the world divorce is very difficult to obtain and is also highly stigmatized. The researchers Finkelhor and Yllö remarked in their 1985 metropolitan Boston area study that: [ 140 ] : 138 "When a woman is raped by a stranger, she has to live with a frightening memory. When she is raped by her husband, she has to live with the rapist".

Relation to other forms of marital violence [ edit ] The historical (and present day in jurisdictions where it still applies) immunity of husbands to have sexual relations with their wives without consent was not the only marital immunity in regard to abuse; immunity from the use of violence was (and still is in some countries) common—in the form of a husband's right to use "moderate chastisement" against a 'disobedient' wife. In the US, many states, especially Southern ones, maintained this immunity until the mid-19th century. For instance, in 1824, in Calvin Bradley v. the State , the Mississippi Supreme Court uphold this right of the husband; ruling as follows: [ 201 ] Family broils and dissentions cannot be investigated before the tribunals of the country, without casting a shade over the character of those who are unfortunately engaged in the controversy. To screen from public reproach those who may be thus unhappily situated, let the husband be permitted to exercise the right of moderate chastisement, in cases of great emergency, and use salutary restraints in every case of misbehaviour, without being subjected to vexatious prosecutions, resulting in the mutual discredit and shame of all parties concerned Although by the late 19th century courts were unanimously agreeing that husbands no longer had the right to inflict "chastisement" on their wives, the public policy was set at ignoring incidents deemed not 'serious enough' for legal intervention. In 1874, the Supreme Court of North Carolina ruled: [ 202 ] We may assume that the old doctrine, that a husband had a right to whip his wife, provided he used a switch no larger than his thumb, is not law in North Carolina. Indeed, the Courts have advanced from that barbarism until they have reached the position, that the husband has no right to chastise his wife, under any circumstances.

But from motives of public policy, – in order to preserve the sanctity of the domestic circle, the Courts will not listen to trivial complaints.

If no permanent injury has been inflicted, nor malice, cruelty nor dangerous violence shown by the husband, it is better to draw the curtain, shut out the public gaze, and leave the parties to forget and forgive.

No general rule can be applied, but each case must depend upon the circumstances surrounding it.

Today, husbands continue to be immune from prosecution in case of certain forms of physical abuse against their wives in some countries. For instance, in Iraq husbands have a legal right to "punish" their wives. The criminal code states that there is no crime if an act is committed while exercising a legal right. Examples of legal rights include: "The punishment of a wife by her husband, the disciplining by parents and teachers of children under their authority within certain limits prescribed by law or by custom".

[ 203 ] In 2010, the United Arab Emirates's Supreme Court ruled that a man has the right to physically discipline his wife and children as long as he does not leave physical marks.

[ 204 ] Sustaining factors [ edit ] Legal [ edit ] Legally, governments have direct impact on the occurrence of marital rape. The state "…engages in the definition, monitoring, and sanctioning of appropriate behavior".

[ 176 ] This can play out in criminalizing or not criminalizing marital rape and therefore deeming what is appropriate.

Catharine MacKinnon argues that rape laws in male dominated societies exist to regulate access to women from a male perspective, not to protect women's right to freely decide whether to engage in sexual intercourse or not.

[ citation needed ] Whatever the reason behind such laws, even when state laws have criminalized marital rape, state institutions perpetuate it. For example, although marital rape has been criminalized throughout the United States, the original laws of the 1980s and 1990s treated marital rape differently from non-marital rape, and in some states this continues to be the case even today (see Marital rape (United States law) ). As these laws exemplify, marital rape is seen as somehow less reprehensible than rape outside of marriage.

[ 9 ] Even when marital rape is prosecuted successfully, courts often pass shorter sentences – even if the law itself does not stipulate this – based on the view that sexual violation is less serious if it occurs within marriage. Following this same understanding, British courts often pass lower sentences to marital rape than to other cases of rape because it is believed that it causes less harm to the victim [ 205 ] Police departments are another state institution that treats domestic violence differently than other forms of violence. Police often label domestic abuse calls as low priority, respond slower, and focus on what provoked the abuse rather than the violent actions of the perpetrator.

[ 10 ] Also, they often act as mediators in the situation because they may feel that domestic violence is a family matter and therefore not their business.

[ 10 ] While government institutional influences are vast, marital rape is often sustained by cultural ideologies. According to Catharine MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin, the issue of sexual violence, including within marriage, has not been a political spectrum issue – that is a left wing vs . right wing issue – but a general ubiquitous part of the culture, "The Left and the Right have consistently had different positions on rape; but neither has acknowledged rape from the point of view of the women who experienced it." [ 206 ] Culturally unrecognizable [ edit ] For many cultures, ideas of marital rape seem often foreign imposed and contradict the belief that such matters should be dealt with privately rather than by the government.

[ 207 ] In other instances, notably in the country of India, members of the government have spoken publicly that marital rape cannot be recognized in their culture. The Indian Minister of State for Home Affairs, Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary , stated in April 2015, "The concept of marital rape, as understood internationally, cannot be suitably applied in the Indian context due to various factors, including levels of education, illiteracy, poverty, myriad social customs and values, religious beliefs, [and] the mindset of the society to treat the marriage as sacrament".

[ 176 ] For many other countries, the concept of marital rape is itself an oxymoron.

[ 207 ] Women in these cultures largely "share the cultural logic that marital rape is a contradiction in terms" while men simultaneously "see women's sexual consent in marriage as taken for granted" and therefore "reject the very concept of marital rape".

[ 207 ] The act of imposing sexual intercourse against the will of the wife is often not identified as morally wrong, and so it is difficult to attempt to stop the practice, "Often, men who coerce a spouse into a sexual act believe their actions are legitimate because they are married to the woman." (WHO, pp. 149).

[ 185 ] This idea that sexual intercourse in marriage is 'legitimate' and so it cannot be illegal even when forced, is in some parts of the world fueled by the custom of bride price : its paying is seen as earning the man the right to sexual and reproductive control of his wife.

UN Women recommended the abolition of giving bride price, and stated that: "Legislation should [...] State that a perpetrator of domestic violence, including marital rape, cannot use the fact that he paid bride price as a defense to a domestic violence charge. (pp. 25) " [ 208 ] Young women from various settings in South Asia explained in surveys that even if they felt discomfort and did not want to have sex, they accepted their husbands' wishes and submitted, fearing that otherwise they would be beaten.

[ 209 ] In many developing countries it is believed – by both men and women – that a husband is entitled to sex any time he demands it, and that if his wife refuses him, he has the right to use force.

[ 209 ] These women, most of them either illiterate or very poorly educated, are married at very young ages (in Bangladesh , for example, according to statistics from 2005, 45% of women then aged between 25 and 29 had been married by the age of 15 [ 210 ] ), and depend on their husbands for their entire life. This situation leaves women with very little sexual autonomy. The notion that women are sexually autonomous and therefore have the ability to give or retract consent is not universally understood. Gabriella Torres writes, "The degree to which women and men view themselves as unique social beings with a full ability to make choices and suffer consequences varies by culture." [ 176 ] : 14 As a result, in cultures where women are not considered autonomous, they are not in a position to refuse sex: they have to choose between unwanted sex and being subjected to violence; or between unwanted sex and being abandoned by their husbands and ending up living in abject poverty.

[ citation needed ] According to Sheila Jeffreys , in Western countries, " sexual liberation " ideologies have aggravated the problem of male sexual entitlement, leading to women submitting to unwanted sex not only due to physical force or illegal threat, but due to societal pressure: "The force which has operated on them [women] all their lives and continues to operate on them within marriages and relationships remains largely invisible. [...] Such forces include the massive industry of sexology , sex therapy , sex advice literature, all of which make women feel guilty and inadequate for any unwillingness to fulfill a man's sexual desires." [ 211 ] The prohibition of rape serves other purposes, such as protection of the rights of male relatives or husband, enforcing of religious laws against sex outside of marriage, or preservation of a woman's respect and reputation in society. Under such ideologies it is difficult to accept the concept of marital rape.

Richard A. Posner writes that, "Traditionally, rape was the offense of depriving a father or husband of a valuable asset – his wife's chastity or his daughter's virginity".

[ 212 ] In many countries of the world, including Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Jordan, the severity of the legal punishment for rape depends on whether the victim was a virgin .

[ 213 ] [ 214 ] Rhonda Copleon writes that, "Where rape is treated as a crime against honor, the honor of women is called into question and virginity or chastity is often a precondition." [ 215 ] The way marriages are arranged [ edit ] In many cultures, marriages are still arranged for the purpose of procreation, property, and consolidation of extended family relations, often including a bride price or a dowry . In such situations, marriages are pre-arranged as an affair between families and clans. In some cultures, refusal of an arranged marriage is often a cause of an honor killing , because the family which has prearranged the marriage risks disgrace if the marriage does not proceed.

[ 216 ] [ 217 ] [ 218 ] Although laws that prohibiting dowries exist in many countries, men continue to demand a dowry in exchange for marriage, especially in rural areas where law enforcement is weak. In Bangladesh, dowry demand at marriage is linked to increased sexual violence.

[ 219 ] A woman attempting to obtain a divorce or separation without the consent of the husband/extended family can also be a trigger for honor killings. In cultures where marriages are arranged and goods are often exchanged between families, a woman's desire to seek a divorce is often viewed as an insult to the men who negotiated the deal.

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] However, the fact that people in developing countries are increasingly selecting marriage partners by whether they are in love – a much more Western world view – does not necessarily improve the situation. These types of marriages, especially in southeastern Nigeria, are putting women in more difficult positions: if one chooses to marry based on love against their family's wishes, admitting violence in the relationship is a disgrace because it means admitting that one made the wrong judgement.

[ 207 ] Religion [ edit ] Christianity [ edit ] Most of the Western World has been strongly influenced by the Christian Bible . The paradisaical narrative of man and woman in Genesis establishes a foundation of marriage: So God created man in His own image; in the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. [...] Therefore, a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and they shall become one flesh.

[ 222 ] This doctrine is repeated in the Gospel by Jesus , but with the added conclusion "so then they are no longer two, but one flesh." [ 223 ] The same doctrine is continued in the Epistles in the writings of the Apostle Paul.

[ 224 ] It is further explicated by the Apostle Paul, who asserts that neither spouse should deny their partner sex: The wife does not have authority over her own body, but the husband does. And likewise the husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife does. Do not deprive one another except with consent for a time, that you may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together again.

[ 225 ] On the standing of each party to determine how this biblical principle—denial of conjugal relations—was to be effected was codified as an ecclesiastical canon in 280 A.D. by St. Dionysian of Alexandria : "Persons who are self-sufficient and married ought to be judges of themselves." [ 226 ] [ 227 ] The canon was given ecumenical application by the Sixth Ecumenical Council in 691 A.D.

[ 226 ] : 294 Ecclesiastical canons continued to adjudicate marital issues well into the modern era until all but entirely superseded by the civil courts.

The Christian religion teaches that pre-marital sex is fornication , and sexual relations by a married person with someone other than their spouse is adultery , both of which are sins , while sex within marriage is a duty . This concept of 'conjugal sexual rights' has the purpose to prevent sin (in the form of adultery and temptation) as well as to enable procreation.

The above is interpreted by some religious figures as to render marital rape an impossibility.

[ 228 ] [ 229 ] However, not all religious figures hold this view.

[ 230 ] Further, Pentecostal Christianity prescribes gender expectations for married individuals that "…reestablish a patriarchal bargain…" in which "…women acquiesce to men's authority in return for certain kinds of support".

[ 207 ] Husbands are expected to provide for the family, and in return, wives are to submit to their husband's authority.

[ 207 ] Ultimately, this "…strengthens some of the gender dynamics that make intimate partner violence possible in the first place".

[ 207 ] By contrast, Pope Paul VI in his 1968 encyclical letter Humanae vitae wrote that "Men rightly observe that a conjugal act imposed on one's partner without regard to his or her condition or personal and reasonable wishes in the matter, is no true act of love, and therefore offends the moral order in its particular application to the intimate relationship of husband and wife." [ 231 ] This teaching, which has been reaffirmed more recently by Pope Francis , [ 232 ] and has been interpreted by Bertrand de Margerie to condemn "intra-marital rape", and the use of force in marriage more generally.

[ 233 ] Islam [ edit ] Further information: Rape in Islamic law Judaism [ edit ] Marital or spousal rape is prohibited by Jewish law . Rabbinic Jewish law is generally based on rabbinic extrapolation from the Torah, and debate by generations of sages around various moral, ethical, and practical topics. The laws derived from these debates govern religious and social life. In the case of spousal rape, the law is derived in part from Proverbs 19:2, "Also, it is not good for the soul to be without knowledge [or wisdom], and he that hastens with his feet sins".

[ 234 ] This was stated by Rabbi Rami bar Ḥama said in the name of Rav Assi : "It is prohibited for a man to force his wife in the conjugal mitzvah, [i.e., sexual relations,] as it is stated: “And he who hastens with his feet sins” (Proverbs 19:2). [The term “his feet” is understood here as a euphemism for intercourse.]" [ 235 ] Separately, Rava wrote (Ketubot 51b): "'Any woman against whom assault began under compulsion, even if it terminated with her consent,' is not considered to have committed adultery, but rather to have been raped." [ 236 ] Maimonides wrote that while a man's wife is "permitted to him at all times", a "husband may not force himself sexually on his wife, if she does not consent. Rather [intercourse] should be with the consent and happiness of both husband and wife." [ 237 ] The Shulchan Aruch , a major code of Jewish law, addresses this concept in two separate rulings: "A man is forbidden to have intercourse with his wife if he is angry with her", [ 238 ] and "He may not have intercourse without her consent, and if she is not interested he should appease her until she is interested." [ 239 ] Gender expectations [ edit ] Further information: Gender roles Another sustaining factor is the obligatory roles placed on wives and what they come to understand as their "duty". For example, "Vietnamese women are expected to sacrifice for their families, especially for their children, which includes, for some, acceding to husbands’ sexual demands".

[ 175 ] [ page needed ] Their "duty" is to maintain family harmony and happiness.

[ 175 ] [ page needed ] In Guatemala, violence within marriage is so normalized that wives come to believe that this is 'the way things are' and it is simply their role as a wife to endure the violence.

[ 177 ] [ page needed ] This "normalization of violence [...] rests on a continuum of coercive power that makes possible the mistreatment of women not only in their homes but also in the community, neighborhood, and society at large".

[ 177 ] [ page needed ] Further, because many of these women believe giving sex is their duty, they do not characterize their experience as marital rape.

[ 9 ] [ page needed ] However, "women who have experienced forced sex in marriage understand this experience as an abuse or violation", they just may not characterize it as marital rape.

[ 176 ] Violence is so entrenched in many cultures it simply becomes a way of life, and wives are left to believe they must learn to endure it.

[ 177 ] [ page needed ] On the other hand, husbands are influenced by the expectations of their masculinity. In Africa, these expectations include being a husband, father, and head of the household which requires men to provide food, shelter and protection.

[ 207 ] [ page needed ] Along with this "obligation of being the provider comes the privilege and authority of patriarchy".

[ 207 ] [ page needed ] As a result, it is often the man's perception that his wife has challenged his authority that leads to the violence.

[ 207 ] [ page needed ] In the United States, masculinity is understood as a fixed entity that exists despite the changes of everyday life.

[ 240 ] It is understood as being in comparison to femininity, and more specifically, in opposition to femininity: Masculinity is to superiority as femininity is to subservience.

[ 241 ] [ page needed ] Therefore, masculinity is correlated with aggression in such a way that scholars argue violence is a way for men to show their masculine identity.

[ 242 ] [ page needed ] Another expectation of masculinity is that men are not to show their emotion.

[ 242 ] [ page needed ] Instead, as Robert Connell argues, the "masculine prototype" is a strong and stoic man who appears to remain in control of the situation and his emotions.

[ 242 ] [ page needed ] This sense of control in Western masculinity has direct implications for domestic violence. Scholars argue that some men use violence to regain this sense of control when it is lost.

[ 242 ] [ page needed ] However, not all men who subscribe to masculinity expectations are violent. In fact, most men, in general, are not violent.

[ 242 ] [ page needed ] For those who are violent, ideals of masculinity seem to play some causal role in their violence. Research shows that "violence is more likely among men who experience a disconnection between their personal circumstances and their emotions".

[ 242 ] [ page needed ] Evidently, there seems to be some connection between the masculine expectation of suppressing or disconnecting from one's emotions, and one's tendency to be violent.

[ 242 ] [ page needed ] Marital rape that occurs in same-sex relationships or is perpetrated by women in heterosexual relationships is even less well studied.

[ 243 ] [ 244 ] Universal lived experience [ edit ] Although marital rape is not always defined as such in different cultures, there is a universal understanding of the violation that comes with rape. Yllö & Torres argue that "marital rape is regularly constituted across cultures as a locally recognized social violation—one that is understood to impede women in those particular cultural contexts from aspiring to a good human life." [ 176 ] : 10 An aspect of this violation is the notion that the victim has not given their consent, however, historically and presently, consent is not always connected to marital sex.

[ 176 ] In the United States, a woman's personhood, and therefore her consent, only began with the suffragist movement that sought women's access to equal citizenship.

[ 176 ] : 14 Globally, many cultures do not require a woman's consent in marriage because procreation is at the root of such an alliance.

[ 176 ] Further, some women are forced into marriage where her consent is not considered or required.

[ 176 ] Despite this cultural variance, "women across many cultures do experience the violation of rape in marriage—even if the way that such violations are experienced and understood differs from culture to culture".

[ 176 ] : 14 Problems in prosecuting marital rape [ edit ] The criminalization of marital rape does not necessarily mean that these laws are enforced. A lack of public awareness, as well as reluctance or outright refusal of authorities to prosecute is common globally. For instance, in Ireland, where marital rape was made illegal in 1990, by 2016 there had been only two persons convicted of marital rape.

[ 78 ] Additionally, gender norms that place wives in subservient positions to their husbands, make it more difficult for women to recognize spousal rape or feel confident that it will be addressed by law enforcement.

[ citation needed ] There are, and have been, both contemporary and historic problems with prosecuting the perpetrators of spousal rape.  One author [ who?

] concluded that chief amongst them has been the reluctance of the various legal systems to recognize it as a crime at all. For example, in the United Kingdom , rape by one's spouse was recognized by the House of Lords in R v R (1991), [1992] A.C. 599.

Another problem results from prevailing social norms that exist. Thus, if the norms within a society do not see spousal rape as violative of social norms, marital rape laws are unlikely to produce successful prosecutions. For example, in Mali, it is considered unthinkable for a woman to refuse her husband's sexual demands; far from being seen as an act of abuse of a wife, marital rape is seen as an incident provoked by the wife who refused to perform her duty: for instance one survey found that 74% of women in Mali said that a husband is justified to beat his wife if she refuses to have sex with him.

[ 245 ] Other problems arise from the fact that, in some countries where marital rape is illegal, many people are not aware of the existing laws.  In some parts of the world marital rape laws are new and rarely enacted, therefore, some people are not aware of their existence. Alternatively, traditional norms concerning marriage may be deeply rooted in the conscience of the population. Substantial segments of the population may therefore not conceptualize that in any modern views of sexuality, it is wroth to force a spouse to have sex is wrong, much less illegal. For instance, a report by Amnesty International showed that although marital rape is illegal in Hungary , in a public opinion poll of nearly 1,200 people in 2006, a total of 62% did not know that marital rape was a punishable crime: over 41% of men and nearly 56% of women thought it was not punishable as a crime in Hungarian law, and nearly 12% did not know.

[ 89 ] In Hong Kong , in 2003, 16 months after the criminalization of marital rape, a survey showed that 40% of women did not know it was illegal.

[ 246 ] A 2010 study in South Africa , (where marital rape was made illegal in 1993), showed that only 55% of respondents agreed with the affirmation "I think it is possible for a woman to be raped by her husband".

[ 247 ] Although in recent years some countries in Africa have enacted laws against marital rape, in most parts of the continent forced marital sex is not a criminal offense. A 2003 report by Human Rights Watch stated that: "With few exceptions across Africa, marital rape is not recognized as a crime, and domestic violence is seen as a right of married men." [ 248 ] The acceptability of domestic violence in most African countries is very high: surveys showed that the percentage of women aged 15–49 who think that a husband is justified in hitting or beating his wife under certain circumstances is, for example, 87% in Mali, 86% in Guinea, 80% in Central African Republic, 79% in South Sudan.

[ 249 ] Although more countries in Africa are now enacting laws against domestic violence, social norms make it difficult to enforce these laws; and many women are not aware of their rights: for instance in Ethiopia in a survey only 49% of women knew that wife-beating is illegal (it was made illegal under the 2004 Criminal Code).

[ 37 ] [ 250 ] The lack of legal and social recognition of marital rape in Africa has been cited as making the fight against HIV harder.

[ 251 ] Legislation by country [ edit ] Main article: Marital rape laws by country Marital rape legislation by country Country Criminalised Notes Afghanistan [ 252 ] No The EVAW law criminalizes 22 acts of violence against women, including rape, battery, or beating; forced marriage; humiliation; intimidation; and deprivation of inheritance. Under the law rape does not include spousal rape.

[ 253 ] Albania [ 252 ] Yes The Criminal Code was amended in 2012 and 2013 to criminalise marital rape.

[ 254 ] Algeria No The law criminalizes rape but does not address spousal rape.

[ 255 ] [ 256 ] : p.6 Andorra Yes Spousal rape can be punished by up to 15 years imprisonment.

[ 257 ] [ 258 ] Angola [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is illegal and punishable by up to eight years’ imprisonment.

[ 259 ] Antigua and Barbuda [ 252 ] [ 260 ] No The Sexual Offences Act, 1995, includes in the definition of rape: "with a female person who is not his wife".

[ 261 ] Argentina [ 252 ] Yes Rape of men and women, including spousal rape, can be punished by imprisonment from six months to up to 20 years.

[ 262 ] Armenia [ 252 ] Yes Rape is a criminal offense, and conviction carries a maximum sentence of 15 years; general rape statutes applied to the prosecution of spousal rape.

[ 263 ] Australia [ 252 ] Yes In 1990, the Criminal Law Act was amended to abolish the exemption from punishment in cases where a husband raped his wife.

[ 59 ] [ 264 ] The government enforced the law effectively. The laws of individual states and territories provide the penalties for rape.

[ 265 ] Austria [ 252 ] Yes Spousal rape can be punished by up to 15 years imprisonment.

[ 266 ] Azerbaijan [ 252 ] Yes Spousal rape is illegal, but observers stated police did not effectively investigate such claims.

[ 267 ] The Bahamas [ 252 ] [ 260 ] No Rape of men or women is illegal, but the law does not protect against spousal rape, except if the couple is separated or in the process of divorce, or if there is a restraining order in place.

[ 268 ] Bahrain [ 252 ] No Rape is illegal, although the criminal code allows an alleged rapist to marry his victim to avoid punishment. The law does not address spousal rape.

[ 269 ] Bangladesh [ 252 ] No The law prohibits rape of a female by a male and physical spousal abuse, but the law excludes marital rape if the female is above 13.

[ 270 ] Barbados [ 260 ] [ 271 ] No There are legal protections against spousal rape for women holding a court-issued divorce decree, separation order, or non-molestation order.

[ 272 ] Belarus Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Belgium [ 252 ] Yes Marital rape was criminalised by court decision in 1979.

[ 70 ] The criminal code was amended in 1989 to treat marital rape the same as other forms of rape.

[ 72 ] [ 264 ] Belize [ 252 ] Yes The criminal code criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape. The code states that a person convicted of rape shall be sentenced to imprisonment for eight years to life.

[ 273 ] Benin [ 252 ] Yes The law explicitly prohibits spousal rape and provides the maximum penalty of 5 years imprisonment for conviction of raping a domestic partner.

[ 274 ] Bhutan [ 252 ] Yes Spousal rape is illegal and prosecuted as a misdemeanor.

[ 275 ] Bolivia [ 252 ] Yes In 2013 the government passed the Law Guaranteeing Women a Life Free from Violence, [ 276 ] it included the repeal of the marital rape exemption in the Penal Code.

[ 277 ] Bosnia and Herzegovina [ 252 ] Yes The maximum penalty for rape, regardless of gender, including spousal rape, is 15 years in prison. The failure of police to treat spousal rape as a serious offense inhibited the effective enforcement of the law.

[ 278 ] Botswana [ 252 ] [ 279 ] No The law criminalizes rape but does not recognize spousal rape as a crime.

[ 280 ] Brazil [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape.

[ 281 ] Brunei [ 252 ] [ 282 ] No The law does not criminalize spousal rape and explicitly states that sexual intercourse by a man with his wife is not rape, as long as she is not younger than 14 years (15 years if she is ethnic Chinese).

[ 283 ] Bulgaria [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, and authorities generally enforced its provisions when violations came to their attention. Sentences for rape convictions range up 20 years in prison. While authorities could prosecute spousal rape under the general rape statute, they rarely did so.

[ 284 ] Burkina Faso Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Burundi [ 252 ] Yes The law prohibits rape, including spousal rape, with penalties of up to 30 years’ imprisonment. The government did not enforce the law uniformly, and rape and other domestic and sexual violence continued to be serious problems.

[ 285 ] Cameroon Yes As of 2018 [ 252 ] Canada [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape, as sexual assault, and the government enforces the law effectively.

[ 286 ] Cambodia [ 252 ] Yes Spousal rape is not specifically mentioned in the penal code, but the underlying conduct can be prosecuted as “rape,” “causing injury,” or “indecent assault.” Charges for spousal rape under the penal code and the domestic violence law were rare.

[ 287 ] Cape Verde [ 252 ] Yes Spousal rape is implicitly covered by the 2001 gender-based violence law; penalties for conviction range from one to five years’ imprisonment.

[ 288 ] Central African Republic [ 289 ] [ 290 ] No As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Chad Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Chile [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalises rape of men or women, including spousal rape. Penalties for rape range from five to 15 years’ imprisonment.

[ 291 ] China [ 289 ] [ 292 ] [ 293 ] No The law does not safeguard same-sex couples or victims of marital rape.

[ 294 ] Colombia [ 252 ] Yes Although prohibited by law, rape, including spousal rape, remained a serious problem.

[ 295 ] Comoros [ 296 ] Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Republic of the Congo No As of 2017, there were no specific provisions in the law outlawing spousal battery other than general statutes prohibiting assault. Rape is illegal, but the government did not effectively enforce the law, and women's rights groups have reported that spousal rape was common.

[ 297 ] Democratic Republic of Congo [ 289 ] [ 298 ] No The legal definition of rape does not include spousal rape.

[ 299 ] Costa Rica [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape and domestic violence, and provides penalties from 10 to 18 years in prison for rape. The judicial branch generally enforced the law.

[ 300 ] Croatia [ 252 ] Yes Conviction of rape, including spousal rape, is punishable by up to 15 years imprisonment.

[ 301 ] Cuba [ 302 ] [ self-published source?

] Yes The law specifically criminalizes rape of women, including spousal rape, and separately criminalizes “lascivious abuse” against both genders. The government enforced both laws. Penalties for rape are at least four years’ imprisonment.

[ 303 ] Cyprus [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, with a maximum sentence of life in prison for violations. The government enforced the law effectively.

[ 304 ] Spousal rape is also criminalzed in the area administered by Turkish Cypriots ( Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus ).

[ 305 ] Czech Republic [ 252 ] Yes The explicit exclusion of marital rape was removed from Czechoslovak penal code in 1950. Since then it is punishable as other cases of rape.

[ 28 ] The current law prohibits rape, including spousal rape, and provides a penalty of two to 15 years in prison for violations.

[ 306 ] Denmark [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape against women or men (the statute is gender neutral), including spousal rape, and domestic violence. Penalties for rape include imprisonment for up to 12 years.

[ 307 ] Djibouti Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Dominica [ 252 ] Yes The Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 2016 repealed the previous "marital exclusions" of the rape law and introduced a specific marital rape section [s3 (3)] to the Sexual Offences Act.

[ 308 ] Dominican Republic [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape, and other forms of violence against women, such as incest and sexual aggression. The sentences for conviction of rape range from 10 to 15 years in prison and a fine of 100,000 to 200,000 pesos.

[ 309 ] East Timor [ 252 ] Yes Although rape, including marital rape, is a crime punishable by up to 20 years in prison, failures to investigate or prosecute cases of alleged rape and sexual abuse were common.

[ 310 ] Ecuador [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape and domestic violence. Rape is punishable with penalties of up to 22 years in prison.

[ 311 ] Egypt No The law prohibits rape, prescribing criminal penalties of 15 to 25 years’ imprisonment, or life imprisonment for cases of rape involving armed abduction. Spousal rape is not illegal, [ 312 ] [ 289 ] [ 313 ] based on a 1928 Court of Cassation ruling that "a wife cannot withhold sex from her husband without a valid reason according to sharia ".

[ 314 ] [ 315 ] El Salvador Unclear Marital rape is not specifically addressed by statue. The World Bank's 2018 " "Women, Business and the Law" report states that the country's general rape laws apply to marital rape.

[ 252 ] The 2017 El Salvador Country Report on Human Rights Practices suggests this is only at a judge's discretion.

[ 316 ] An earlier (2011) report, the "UN Womens Justice Report" states there are no laws covering marital rape.

[ 289 ] Equatorial Guinea Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Eritrea No As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Estonia [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, and physical abuse, including domestic violence. The penalty for rape, including spousal rape, is imprisonment for up to 15 years.

[ 317 ] Eswatini (Swaziland) [ 279 ] Yes Ethiopia [ 318 ] No As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Fiji [ 252 ] Yes Rape (including spousal rape), domestic abuse, incest, and indecent assault were significant problems; there was a large increase in the reported number of rape cases this year, due at least in part to greater awareness that a spouse can be charged with rape of his/her partner. The law provides for a maximum punishment of life imprisonment for rape. The law recognizes spousal rape as a specific offense.

[ 319 ] Finland [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, and the government enforced the law effectively. Rape is punishable by up to four years’ imprisonment. If the offender used violence, the offense is considered aggravated, and the penalty may be more severe.

[ 320 ] France [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, and domestic violence, and the government generally enforced the law effectively. The penalty for rape is 15 years’ imprisonment, which may be increased. The government and NGOs provided shelters, counseling, and hotlines for rape survivors.

[ 321 ] Gabon Yes As of 2018 [ 252 ] Gambia [ 252 ] No Spousal rape is not illegal and was widespread;, police generally considered it a domestic issue outside its jurisdiction.

[ 322 ] Georgia [ 264 ] Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Germany [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, and provides penalties of up to 15 years in prison.

[ 323 ] Ghana Yes As of 2018 [ 252 ] Greece [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is a crime punishable by penalties ranging from five to 20 years’ imprisonment.

[ 324 ] Grenada [ 252 ] [ 325 ] Yes Marital rape was criminalized in a 2012 amendment to the Criminal Code.

[ 326 ] Guatemala [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape, and sets penalties between five and 50 years in prison. Police had minimal training or capacity to investigate sexual crimes or assist survivors of such crimes, and the government did not enforce the law effectively.

[ 327 ] Guinea Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Guinea-Bissau [ 252 ] Yes The law prohibits rape, including spousal rape, and provides penalties for conviction of two to 12 years in prison; however, the government did not effectively enforce the law.

[ 328 ] Guyana [ 252 ] [ 329 ] Yes Marital rape was criminalised by the Sexual Offenses Act 2010.

[ 330 ] Haiti [ 331 ] No While the law prohibits rape of men or women, it does not recognize spousal rape as a crime.

[ 332 ] Honduras [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes all forms of rape of men or women, including spousal rape, [ 333 ] but unlike other rapes is not a "public crime" and thereby requires the survivors to complain for prosecution to occur.

[ 334 ] Hong Kong Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Hungary [ 252 ] Yes Rape of men or women, including spousal rape, is illegal.

[ 335 ] Iceland [ 264 ] Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] India [ 252 ] No See also: Rape in India § Marital rape , and Violence against women in India § Marital rape The law criminalizes rape in most cases, although marital rape is not illegal when the woman is over the age of 18.

[ 336 ] [ 337 ] However, until 2017, men married to those between 15 and 18 could not be convicted of rape. Marital rape of an adult wife, who is unofficially or officially separated, is a criminal offence punishable by 2 to 7 year in prison; it is not dealt by normal rape laws which stipulate the possibility of a death sentence.

[ 338 ] According to the Protection of Women From Domestic Violence Act (2005), other married women subject to "sexual nature that abuses, humiliates, degrades or otherwise violates the dignity of woman” by their husband may demand for financial compensation including regular allowances and child custody. They also have the right to continue to live in their marital household if they wish, or may approach shelter or aid homes. However, marital rape is still not a criminal offence in this case and is only a misdemeanour.

[ 339 ] Indonesia [ 252 ] Yes Marital rape is not a specific criminal offense under the penal code, but it is covered under "forced sexual intercourse" in national legislation on domestic violence, and it can be punished with criminal penalties.

[ 340 ] [ 341 ] Nevertheless, marital rape can be considered a form of domestic violence under the Law Regarding the Elimination of Violence in the Household, 2004 .

[ 342 ] Iran [ 252 ] [ 343 ] No Rape is illegal and subject to strict penalties, including death, but it remained a problem. The law considers sex within marriage consensual by definition and, therefore, does not address spousal rape, including in cases of forced marriage.

[ 344 ] Iraq [ 345 ] No The law criminalizes rape (but not spousal rape) and permits a maximum sentence of life imprisonment if the victim dies. The law allows authorities to drop a rape case if the perpetrator marries the victim.

[ 346 ] Ireland [ 252 ] [ 59 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, and the government enforced the law. Most persons convicted received prison sentences of five to 12 years.

[ 347 ] Israel [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is a felony punishable by 16 years in prison, or up to 20 years' imprisonment for rape under aggravated circumstances or if the perpetrator rapes or commits a sexual offense against a relative. The government effectively enforced rape laws.

[ 348 ] Italy [ 252 ] Yes The prescribed penalty for rape, including spousal rape, is five to 12 years in prison.

[ 349 ] Ivory Coast Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Jamaica [ 252 ] [ 260 ] No The law criminalizes spousal rape only when spouses have separated or begun proceedings to dissolve the marriage; when the husband is under a court order not to molest or cohabit with his wife; or when the husband knows he suffers from a sexually transmitted infection.

[ 350 ] Japan [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes all forms of rape involving force against women. The law does not deny spousal rape, but no court has ever ruled on such a case, except in situations of marital breakdown (i.e., formal or informal separation, etc.).

[ 351 ] Jordan [ 252 ] No The law stipulates a sentence of at least 10 years of imprisonment with hard labor for the rape of a girl or woman 15 years of age or older. Spousal rape is not illegal.

[ 352 ] Kazakhstan [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape. The punishment for rape, including spousal rape, ranges from three to 15 years’ imprisonment. There were reports of police and judicial reluctance to act on reports of rape, particularly in spousal rape cases.

[ 353 ] Kenya [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, defilement, sexual violence within marriage, but enforcement remained limited.

[ 354 ] Kiribati [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is a crime, with a maximum penalty of life in prison, but sentences typically were much shorter.

[ 355 ] Kosovo [ 356 ] Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] North Korea No As of 2018.

[ 357 ] South Korea [ 252 ] Yes/No There is no specific statute in South Korean law that defines spousal rape as illegal. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court acknowledged marital rape as illegal. The penalty for rape ranges from a minimum of three years’ to life imprisonment although it depends on various specific circumstances.

[ 358 ] [ 359 ] Kuwait [ 360 ] No Rape carries a maximum penalty of death, which the courts occasionally imposed for the crime; spousal rape and domestic violence are not considered crimes.

[ 361 ] Kyrgyzstan [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is illegal, but the government failed to enforce the law effectively. Police generally regarded spousal rape as an administrative, rather than a criminal, offense.

[ 362 ] Laos [ 363 ] No Domestic violence is illegal, but there is no law against marital rape, and domestic violence often went unreported due to social stigma.

[ 364 ] Latvia [ 252 ] Yes Spousal rape is explicitly considered rape with “aggravated circumstances.” [ 365 ] [ 258 ] Lebanon Yes/No Article 503 of the Penal Code defines rape as "forced sexual intercourse [against someone] who is not his wife by violence or threat." [ 366 ] In May 2014 the Protection of Women and Other Family Members from Domestic Violence Law added new offences of the use of threats or violence to claim a "marital right to intercourse." [ 366 ] [ 367 ] [ 368 ] Lesotho [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes the rape of women or men, including spousal rape, and domestic violence. Rape convictions carry a minimum sentence of 10 years’ imprisonment.

[ 369 ] Liberia Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Libya [ 252 ] [ 370 ] No The law criminalizes rape but does not address spousal rape. By law a convicted rapist may avoid a 25-year prison sentence by marrying the survivor, regardless of her wishes—provided her family consents.

[ 371 ] Liechtenstein [ 264 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is a criminal offense. Penalties for rape and sexual violence vary between one and 15 years' imprisonment, depending on the degree of violence and humiliation of the victim, and between 10 years' and lifetime imprisonment if the victim is killed.

[ 372 ] Lithuania Yes Rape and domestic violence are criminal offenses, and although no law specifically criminalises spousal rape, [ 373 ] a wife can file a complaint against her husband for rape or sexual assault under Article 149 of the Criminal Code.

[ 374 ] Luxembourg [ 252 ] Yes The law prohibits rape, including spousal rape, and the government enforced the law effectively. Penalties for violations range from five to 10 years’ imprisonment.

[ 375 ] Madagascar Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Malawi [ 279 ] Yes The Marriage, Divorce, and Family Relations Act enacted in 2015 explicitly introduces the concept of spousal rape, but the act does not prescribe specific penalties and applies only to legally separated spouses. Spousal rape may be prosecuted under the rape provisions of the penal code.

[ 376 ] Malaysia Yes/No The concept of rape within marriage is not recognised. However, if a man "uses harm or the threat of violence to obtain sex from his wife, or any other person", he may be imprisoned up to five years if convicted according to Section 375A of the Penal Code (adopted on 7 September 2007).

[ 377 ] [ 378 ] [ 379 ] Maldives [ 252 ] No The Sexual Offences Act (Act 17/2014) excludes marital rape, except in very narrow circumstances such as the couple are legally separated or one has a STI .

[ 380 ] [ 381 ] Mali [ 252 ] Yes No law specifically prohibits spousal rape, but law enforcement officials stated criminal laws against rape apply to spousal rape.

[ 382 ] Malta [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including, spousal rape, carries a sentence of up to nine years in prison with increased penalties in aggravated circumstances.

[ 383 ] Marshall Islands [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, and establishes penalties of up to 25 years’ imprisonment for first-degree sexual assault.

[ 384 ] Mauritania [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is illegal. Rapists who are single men face penalties of forced labor and whipping, and married rapists are subject to the death penalty.

[ 385 ] Mauritius [ 252 ] Yes Amendments to the Protection from Domestic Violence Act (PDVA) came into force in September 2016. The amendments redefine the term "spouse" to include unmarried couples of the opposite sex; redefine "domestic violence" to include verbal, psychological, economic, and sexual abuses. Although the amendments do not mention spousal rape, section 2.d. stipulates that a spouse cannot force or threaten the other partner into a sexual act "from which the spouse or the other person has the right to abstain." [ 386 ] Mexico [ 252 ] Yes Federal law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape, and conviction carries penalties of up to 20 years’ imprisonment. Twenty-four states have laws criminalizing spousal rape.

[ 387 ] Federated States of Micronesia No As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Moldova [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape or forcible sexual assault and establishes penalties for violations ranging from three years to life in prison. The law also criminalizes spousal rape.

[ 388 ] Monaco Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is a criminal offense with penalties of five, 10, and up to 20 years in prison, depending on the type of offense.

[ 389 ] [ 258 ] Mongolia [ 252 ] Yes The criminal code outlaws sexual intercourse through physical violence, or threat of violence, and provides for sentences of one to 20 years’ imprisonment or life imprisonment, depending on the circumstances. Under the new criminal code, spousal rape was criminalized.

[ 390 ] Montenegro [ 252 ] Yes In most cases the penalty provided by law for rape, including spousal rape, is one to 10 years in prison. In practice, the average conviction resulted in 3 years.

[ 391 ] [ 258 ] Morocco No Spousal rape is not a crime.

[ 392 ] "Hakkaoui Law" (named after Minister for Family Affairs and Women's Issues, Bassima Hakkaoui , criminalising violence against women has come into force in September 2018 but failed to address marital rape.

[ 393 ] [ 394 ] Mozambique [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, and domestic violence. Penalties for conviction range from two to eight years’ imprisonment if the victim is 12 years of age or older and 20 to 24 years’ imprisonment if the victim is under 12.

[ 395 ] Myanmar [ 252 ] No Spousal rape is not a crime unless the wife is younger than 13 years.

[ 396 ] Namibia [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men and women, including spousal rape. By law rape is defined as the commitment of any sexual act under coercive circumstances. The courts tried numerous cases of rape during the year, and the government generally enforced court sentences providing between five and 45 years’ imprisonment for those convicted.

[ 397 ] Nauru [ 398 ] Yes Rape is a crime and carries a maximum penalty of 25 years’ imprisonment. The 2016 Crimes Act specifically applies penalties for rape of married and de facto partners.

[ 399 ] Nepal [ 252 ] Yes Section 219 (4) of the 2017 Criminal Code Bill states, "If a man rapes his wife when he is still in marital relationship with her, he shall be sentenced to up to five years in jail." [ 400 ] Marital rape was also criminalised under the previous Criminal Code.

[ 264 ] Netherlands [ 252 ] Yes The law in all parts of the kingdom criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, and domestic violence. The penalty is imprisonment not exceeding 12 years, a fine not exceeding 78 thousand euros ($93,600), or both. In case of violence against a spouse, the penalty for various forms of abuse can be increased by one-third.

[ 401 ] New Zealand [ 252 ] [ 59 ] [ 402 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape. The maximum penalty is 20 years’ imprisonment.

[ 403 ] Nicaragua [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes all forms of rape of men or women, regardless of the relationship between the victim and the accused. Sentences for those convicted of rape range from eight to 12 years’ imprisonment.

[ 404 ] Niger Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Nigeria No As of 2018.

[ 252 ] North Macedonia [ 252 ] Yes The penalties for rape, including spousal rape, range from one to 15 years’ imprisonment.

[ 405 ] Norway [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, and the government generally enforced the law. The penalty for rape is up to 21 years in prison, depending on the severity of the assault, the age of the victim, and the circumstances in which the crime occurred.

[ 406 ] Oman [ 252 ] No The law criminalizes rape with penalties of up to 15 years in prison but does not criminalize spousal rape.

[ 407 ] Pakistan Yes The Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance, 1979 included in its definition of rape "to whom he or she is not validly married". This ordinance was repealed by the Protection of Women (Criminal Laws Amendment) Act, 2006 and rape was now defined in Section 375 of the Penal Code. The new definition did not include a reference to marriage. It was argued that the intent was to include marital rape in the offence.

[ 408 ] [ 409 ] [ 410 ] However, as of February 2015, there were no reports of a case being brought before a superior court to clarify the law.

[ 408 ] Palau [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is a crime punishable by a maximum 25 years' imprisonment, a fine of $50,000 (national currency is U.S. dollar), or both.

[ 411 ] Palestine [ 412 ] No As of 2018 [ 413 ] Panama [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape, with prison terms of five to 10 years.

[ 414 ] Papua New Guinea [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is a crime punishable by imprisonment ranging from 15 years to life. The legal system allows village chiefs to negotiate the payment of compensation in lieu of trials for rapists.

[ 415 ] Paraguay [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape, and provides penalties of up to 10 years in prison for rape or sexual assault.

[ 416 ] Peru [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape, with penalties of six to eight years in prison.

[ 417 ] Philippines [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is illegal, with penalties ranging from 12 to 40 years' imprisonment.

[ 418 ] An anti-rape law covering marital rape was passed in 1997.

[ 419 ] [ 264 ] Poland [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is illegal and punishable by up to 12 years in prison.

[ 420 ] Portugal [ 252 ] Yes The law makes rape, including spousal rape, illegal, with a penalty of three to 10 years’ imprisonment.

[ 421 ] Peru [ 422 ] [ 423 ] Yes Qatar [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape. Spousal rape is not explicitly criminalized, but a woman may file a complaint. The penalty for rape is life imprisonment, regardless of the age or gender of the victim.

[ 424 ] Romania [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is illegal. The law provides for three to 10 years' imprisonment for rape and two to seven years' imprisonment for sexual assault.

[ 425 ] Russia Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Rwanda [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men and women and spousal rape, and the government handled rape cases as a judicial priority. Penalties for conviction of spousal rape range from two months’ to life imprisonment with fines of 100,000 to 300,000 Rwandan francs.

[ 426 ] Saint Kitts and Nevis [ 252 ] Yes [ needs update ] Saint Lucia [ 252 ] [ 260 ] No The law criminalizes spousal rape only when a couple is divorced or separated or when there is a protection order from the Family Court.

[ 427 ] Saint Vincent and the Grenadines [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is illegal, and the government generally enforced the law when victims came forward. Sentences for rape begin at 10 years' imprisonment.

[ 428 ] Samoa Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] San Marino [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is a criminal offense, and the government effectively prosecuted persons accused of such crimes. The penalty for rape is two to six years in prison.

[ 429 ] São Tomé and Príncipe Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is illegal and punishable by two to 12 years' imprisonment.

[ 430 ] Saudi Arabia [ 252 ] No Rape is a criminal offense under sharia with a wide range of penalties from flogging to execution. The law does not recognize spousal rape as a crime.

[ 431 ] Senegal Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Serbia [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is punishable by up to 40 years in prison. The government did not enforce the law effectively.

[ 432 ] Seychelles [ 252 ] Yes Rape, spousal rape, and domestic abuse are criminal offenses for which conviction is punishable by a maximum of 20 years’ imprisonment. Nevertheless, rape was a problem, and the government did not enforce the law effectively.

[ 433 ] Sierra Leone [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape for which conviction is punishable by between five and 15 years’ imprisonment. Rape was common and viewed more as a societal norm than a criminal problem. The law specifically prohibits spousal rape.

[ 434 ] Singapore [ 252 ] [ 435 ] Yes In 2019, the Penal Code was amended under the Criminal Law Reform Act and Protection from Harassment (Amendment) Act to abolish the exemption from punishment in cases of marital rape.  It went into force on January 1, 2020, criminalizing marital rape.

[ 436 ] Slovakia [ 252 ] Yes The explicit exclusion of marital rape was removed from Czechoslovak penal code in 1950. Since then it is punishable as other cases of rape.

[ 28 ] The current law prohibits rape and sexual violence, which carry a penalty of five to 25 years in prison.

[ 437 ] Slovenia [ 56 ] [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape and domestic violence, is illegal. Sexual violence is a criminal offense carrying a penalty from six months’ to eight years’ imprisonment. The penalty for rape is one to 10 years in prison. Police actively investigated accusations of rape and prosecuted offenders.

[ 438 ] Solomon Islands [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, with a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.

[ 439 ] Somalia [ 440 ] Yes There are no federal laws against spousal violence, including rape, although in May 2016, the Council of Ministers approved a national gender policy that gives the government the right to sue anyone convicted of committing gender-based violence, such as the killing or rape of a woman.

[ 441 ] South Africa [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, is illegal and remained a serious and pervasive problem. The minimum sentence for rape is 10 years in prison for the first offense.

[ 442 ] South Sudan [ 38 ] [ 252 ] No The law defines sexual intercourse within marriage as “not rape.” [ 443 ] Spain [ 252 ] Yes The law prohibits rape, including spousal rape, and the government generally enforced the law effectively. The penalty for rape is six to 12 years in prison.

[ 444 ] Sri Lanka [ 252 ] [ 445 ] No The law only prohibits spousal rape if the spouses are legally separated.

[ 446 ] Sudan [ 252 ] Yes In February 2015, an amendment to Article 149 of the Criminal Code changed the definition of rape. Under the new definition of rape, rape victim could no longer be prosecuted for adultery.

[ 447 ] Although there is no specific prohibition of marital rape, the amendment makes it possible to prosecute marital rape.

[ 448 ] Suriname [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of women, including spousal rape, and prescribes penalties for rape or forcible sexual assault of between 12 and 15 years’ imprisonment, and fines up to 100,000 Surinamese dollars.

[ 449 ] Sweden [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape and domestic violence, are illegal, and the government enforced the law effectively. Penalties range from two to 10 years in prison.

[ 450 ] Switzerland [ 252 ] Yes Rape, including spousal rape, and domestic violence, are statutory offenses for which penalties range from one to 10 years in prison. The government effectively prosecuted individuals accused of such crimes.

[ 451 ] Syria [ 252 ] No Rape is a felony, subject to punishment by at least 15 years in prison, but the government did not enforce the law. The law further stipulates that if the rapist marries the victim, the rapist receives no punishment. The victim's family sometimes agreed to this arrangement to avoid the social stigma attached to rape. There are no laws against spousal rape.

[ 452 ] Taiwan [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, and domestic violence.

[ 453 ] Tajikistan [ 454 ] No Marital rape is not recognised as a criminal offence.

[ 455 ] Tanzania [ 252 ] [ 456 ] No The law provides for life imprisonment for persons convicted of rape, including spousal rape during periods of legal separation.

[ 457 ] Thailand [ 252 ] Yes Rape is illegal, [ 125 ] although the government did not always enforce the law effectively. The law permits authorities to prosecute spousal rape, and prosecutions occurred. The law specifies penalties for conviction of rape or forcible sexual assault ranging from four years’ imprisonment to the death penalty as well as fines.

[ 458 ] Togo [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, but if reported, the law was often not enforced effectively by authorities. The law provides for five to 10 years’ imprisonment for conviction of rape and a fine of two million to 10 million CFA francs. Conviction of spousal rape is punishable by up to 720 hours of community service and a fine of 200,000 to one million CFA francs.

[ 459 ] Tonga [ 134 ] Yes Rape is punishable by a maximum of 15 years in prison. The law recognizes spousal rape.

[ 460 ] Trinidad and Tobago [ 252 ] Yes Rape of men or women, including spousal rape, is illegal and punishable by up to life imprisonment, but the courts often imposed considerably shorter sentences.

[ 461 ] Tunisia [ 252 ] Yes Prior to June 2017, marital rape was not considered a crime. Although Article 227 of the Penal Code does not exclude marital rape from its provisions, Article 23 of the Personal Status Code mandated partners in marriage to “fulfil their conjugal duties according to practice and customs,” [ 462 ] On June 27, 2017, the Tunisian Parliament unanimously passed a comprehensive law addressing all forms of gender-based violence, including physical, economic, and social violence.

[ 463 ] The provisions of this law include marital rape.

[ 464 ] [ 465 ] Turkey [ 252 ] Yes The law prohibits sexual assault, including rape and spousal rape, with penalties of two to 10 years’ imprisonment for conviction of attempted sexual violation and at least 12 years’ imprisonment for conviction of rape or sexual violation.

[ 466 ] Turkmenistan Yes Marital rape is illegal and punishable by sentences ranging from 3 to 25 years imprisonment.

[ 467 ] [ 468 ] Tuvalu [ 469 ] No Rape is a crime punishable by a minimum sentence of five years’ imprisonment, but spousal rape is not included in the legal definition of this offense.

[ 470 ] Uganda Yes As of 2018.

[ 252 ] Ukraine [ 252 ] Yes The law prohibits rape of men or women but does not explicitly address spousal rape or domestic violence. The courts may use a law against "forced sex with a materially dependent person" as grounds to prosecute spousal rape.

[ 471 ] [ 472 ] United Arab Emirates [ 473 ] [ 474 ] No The penal code does not address spousal rape. In October the Dubai Court of First Instance sentenced a policeman to six months in jail for raping his fiancée. The defendant argued that he considered the two married at the time of the offense.

[ 475 ] United Kingdom [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape, spousal rape, and domestic violence. The maximum legal penalty for rape is life imprisonment. The law also provides for injunctive relief, personal protection orders, and protective exclusion orders (similar to restraining orders) for female victims of violence.

[ 476 ] United States [ 252 ] Yes Main article: Marital rape (United States law) Marital rape is illegal in all 50 US states .

Uruguay [ 252 ] [ 477 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape, and domestic violence. The law allows for sentences of two to 12 years' imprisonment for a person found guilty of rape, and authorities effectively enforced the law.

[ 478 ] Uzbekistan Yes Rape, including marital rape, is prohibited, [ 252 ] [ 479 ] however the courts did not try any rape cases as of 2017, according to human rights activists.

[ 480 ] Vanuatu [ 252 ] Yes/No The law does not specifically criminalize spousal rape, but it can be prosecuted under related statutes that cover assault and domestic violence. Police, however, were frequently reluctant to intervene in what they considered domestic matters.

[ 481 ] Venezuela [ 252 ] Yes The law criminalizes rape of men or women, including spousal rape, making it punishable by a prison term of eight to 14 years.

[ 482 ] Vietnam [ 252 ] Yes The Law criminalizes rape, including spousal rape, for men and women. The law subjects rapists to two to seven years’ imprisonment, or up to 15 years in severe cases.

[ 483 ] Yemen [ 318 ] [ 484 ] No The law criminalizes rape, but it does not criminalize spousal rape because the law states a woman may not refuse sexual relations with her husband.

[ 485 ] Zambia [ 252 ] Yes The 2010 Anti-Gender-based Violence Act criminalizes spousal rape.

[ 486 ] Zimbabwe [ 116 ] [ 487 ] Yes While the law criminalizes sexual offenses, including rape and spousal rape, these crimes remained widespread problems. Spousal rape received less attention than physical violence against women.

[ 488 ] See also [ edit ] Outline of domestic violence Criticism of marriage Implied consent Maouloud Baby v. State of Maryland , court case having to do with the withdrawing of sexual consent Marital rape in India National Clearinghouse on Marital and Date Rape Sexual violence by intimate partners Types of rape Victimology Women Against Rape References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Grabanski, Chloe R.; Lamade, Raina V.; Guarini, Brandon C.; Rosa, Angie M. (2023).

"Intimate Partner Rape" .

Encyclopedia of Sexual Psychology and Behavior .

Springer, Cham . pp.

1– 11.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-08956-5_1241-1 .

ISBN 978-3-031-08956-5 .

^ Herring, Jonathan (February 2014).

Family Law: A Very Short Introduction . OUP Oxford. p. 35.

ISBN 9780199668526 .

^ "Extracts from William Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England 1765-1769" . Archived from the original on 5 October 2008 . Retrieved 15 March 2015 .

^ Anderson, Michelle J. (2016). "Marital Rape Laws Globally".

Marital Rape . pp.

177– 186.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190238360.003.0012 .

ISBN 978-0-19-023836-0 .

^ a b c d e f Bovarnick, Silvie (2007).

"Universal Human Rights and Non-Western Normative Systems: A Comparative Analysis of Violence against Women in Mexico and Pakistan" .

Review of International Studies .

33 (1): 59– 74.

doi : 10.1017/S0260210507007309 .

JSTOR 20097950 .

S2CID 143580570 .

^ a b c Yllö, Kersti; Torres, M. Gabriela, eds. (2016).

Marital Rape: Consent, Marriage and Social Change in Global Context . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190238360.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-023836-0 .

^ Pillsbury, Samuel H (1 July 2000).

Judging Evil: Rethinking the Law of Murder and Manslaughter . NYU Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-6680-4 .

^ Hasday, Jill Elaine (October 2000).

"Contest and Consent: A Legal History of Marital Rape" .

California Law Review .

88 (5): 1373– 1505.

doi : 10.2307/3481263 .

JSTOR 3481263 .

^ a b c d e f Bergen, Raquel Kennedy (2016). "An Overview of Marital Rape Research in the United States: Limitations and Implications for Cross-Cultural Research.".

Marital Rape . pp.

19– 28.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190238360.003.0002 .

ISBN 978-0-19-023836-0 .

^ a b c d Schelong, K.M. (1994).

"Domestic Violence and the State: Response to and Rationales for Spousal Battering, Marital Rape and Stalking" .

Marquette Law Review .

78 (1): 79– 120.

^ Kamyongolo, Ngeyi Ruth; Malunga, Bernadette (May 2011).

"The Treatment of Consent in Sexual Assault Law in Malawi" (PDF) .

Theequalityeffect.org . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Treaties, States parties, and Commentaries – Geneva Convention (IV) on Civilians, 1949 - - Section I : Provisions common to the territories of the parties to the conflict and to occupied territories" .

Icrc.org . 12 August 1949 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ a b Rana Lehr-Lehnardt.

"One Small Step for Women: Female-Friendly Provisions in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court" (PDF) .

Digitalcommons.law.byu.edu . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Sex a conjugal right" . 6 September 2004.

Archived from the original on 8 September 2004 . Retrieved 8 September 2004 .

^ Historia Placitorum Coronæ page629 ^ Geis, Gilbert (1978).

"Rape in Marriage: Law and Law Reform in England, the United States, and Sweden" (PDF) .

Adelaide Law Review .

6 (2): 285.

^ R v Clarence (1888) 22 QBD 23 ^ "R. v R [1991] UKHL 12 (23 October 1991)" .

^ Hasday, Jill Elaine (2000).

"Contest and Consent: A Legal History of Marital Rape" .

California Law Review (Submitted manuscript).

88 (5): 1373– 1505.

doi : 10.2307/3481263 .

JSTOR 3481263 .

^ Hasday, Jill Elaine (2000).

"Contest and Consent: A Legal History of Marital Rape" .

California Law Review (Submitted manuscript).

88 (5): 1373– 1505.

doi : 10.2307/3481263 .

JSTOR 3481263 .

Stanton: "'Woman's degradation is in man's idea of his sexual rights,' Stanton wrote to Anthony. 'How this marriage question grows on me. It lies at the very foundation of all progress.'" Stone: "It is clear to me, that [the marriage] question underlies, this whole movement and all our little skirmishing for better laws, and the right to vote, will yet be swallowed up, in the real question, viz, has woman, as wife, a right to herself? It is very little to me to have the right to vote, to own property &c. if I may not keep my body, and its uses, in my absolute right. Not one wife in a thousand can do that now, & so long as she suffers this bondage, all other rights will not help her to her true position.

^ Hasday, Jill Elaine (2000).

"Contest and Consent: A Legal History of Marital Rape" .

California Law Review (Submitted manuscript).

88 (5): 1435– 43.

doi : 10.2307/3481263 .

JSTOR 3481263 .

^ Zakaras, Alex; Maria Morales (2007). "Rational freedom in John Stuart Mill's feminism". In Nadia Urbinati (ed.).

J.S. Mill's political thought: A bicentennial reassessment . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 52.

ISBN 978-0-521-86020-8 . . .

^ Hasday, Jill Elaine (2000).

"Contest and Consent: A Legal History of Marital Rape" .

California Law Review (Submitted manuscript).

88 (5): 1444– 51.

doi : 10.2307/3481263 .

JSTOR 3481263 .

^ Palczewski, Catherine Helen (1 October 1995). "Voltairine de Cleyre: Sexual Slavery and Sexual Pleasure in the Nineteenth Century".

NWSA Journal .

7 (3): 54–68 [60].

ISSN 1040-0656 .

JSTOR 4316402 .

^ "Bertrand Russell Quotes" . Notable-quotes.com . Retrieved 15 June 2013 .

^ Rule, Wilma (1996).

Russian women in politics and society . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 160.

ISBN 978-0-313-29363-4 .

...although the Tsarist law explicitly excluded marital rape, the Soviet law code of 1922 did not.

Marital rape was explicitly included in the 1960 code.

^ "Chapter XXXII., Art. 204".

Rozporządzenie Prezydenta Rzeczypospolitej z dnia 11 lipca 1932 r. Kodeks karny (PDF) (in Polish). Prezydent Rzeczypospolitej. 11 July 1932. pp.

107– 109 . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ a b c "Chapter 7, Section 2, § 238. Znásilnění".

Trestní zákon . Ministry of Interior. 18 July 1950. pp.

248– 249 . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ a b c Elman, R Amy (1996).

Sexual subordination and state intervention: comparing Sweden and the United States . Berghahn Books. p. 90.

ISBN 978-1-57181-071-7 .

^ Brownmiller, Susan (1975).

Against Our Will (PDF) . Simon & Schuster. pp.

381– 382 . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ Hasday, Jill Elaine (2000).

"Contest and Consent: A Legal History of Marital Rape" .

California Law Review (Submitted manuscript).

88 (5): 1482– 1505.

doi : 10.2307/3481263 .

JSTOR 3481263 .

^ Frank, David John; Bayliss J. Camp; Steven A. Boutcher (1 December 2010). "Worldwide Trends in the Criminal Regulation of Sex, 1945 to 2005".

American Sociological Review .

75 (6): 867–893 [871].

doi : 10.1177/0003122410388493 .

S2CID 5216878 .

^ "UNIVERSITY OF PRETORIA - CENTRE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS : Helen Kanzira Lecture" (PDF) .

Chr.up.ac.za . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 March 2017 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ Ending Violence Against Women: From Words to Action (PDF) . United Nations. 2006. p. 113.

ISBN 9789211127034 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Progress of the World's Women 2015-2016" (PDF) .

My Favorite News . p. 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 July 2011 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Domestic Criminal Laws that Conflict with International Law - Burma's Abortion and Rape Laws: a Case Study" . Archived from the original on 9 January 2014 . Retrieved 5 August 2013 .

^ a b "THE CRIMINAL CODE OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 February 2014 . Retrieved 3 December 2013 .

^ a b "Government of the Republic of South Sudan - Official Portal" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 September 2013 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Combating of Rape Act, No. 8 of 2000" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 February 2014 . Retrieved 5 February 2014 .

^ "PENAL CODE OF BHUTAN, 2004" (PDF) .

Unodc.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 August 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ The Routledge Handbook of European Criminology , p. 1, at Google Books ^ "On The Protection Of Women Against Violence" . Council of Europe. 30 April 2002 . Retrieved 7 October 2018 .

^ " "There are many examples from different countries, mainly from the 1990s, but some even more recent than that, where judges handed down lenient sentences simply because the perpetrator claimed to have acted out of respect for his culture, tradition, religion or custom or to restore his so-called honour " (explanations regarding the Istanbul Convention)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 September 2015.

^ Council of Europe Committee of Ministers Plenary.

"Committee of Ministers - on the protection of women against violence" . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "CASE CLOSED - RAPE AND HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE NORDIC COUNTRIES" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved 3 December 2013 .

^ a b "DENMARK : Human rights violations and concerns in the context of counter-terrorism, immigration-detention, forcible return of rejected asylum-seekers and violence against women" (PDF) .

Ohchr.org . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Voldtægt" . Archived from the original on 2 July 2015 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Slut med "konerabat" for voldtægt" .

www.b.dk . 3 June 2013 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Straffeloven - Bekendtgørelse af straffeloven - retsinformation.dk" . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ Mala Htun (25 October 2007).

"When and Why do Governments Promote Women's Rights? Toward a Comparative Politics of States and Sex Equality" .

Delivery at the Conference Toward a Comparative Politics of Gender: Advancing the Discipline Along Interdisciplinary Boundaries, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, October . Retrieved 14 June 2015 .

^ "Second Opinion: School-based consent education won't stop sexual violence" .

The Irish Times . 7 April 2015 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "The Convention of Belem do Para and the Istanbul Convention" (PDF) .

Oas.org . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Full list" .

Treaty Office .

^ "Liste complète" . Retrieved 14 July 2016 .

^ Rule, Wilma (1996).

Russian women in politics and society . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 160.

ISBN 978-0-313-29363-4 .

...although the Tsarist law explicitly excluded marital rape, the Soviet law code of 1922 did not.

Marital rape was explicitly included in the 1960 code.

^ a b With the new 1974 Yugoslav Constitution each republic adopted their own Criminal Act, with Socialist Republic of Slovenia introducing rape of wife in its 1977 Criminal Act ; (any) rape is not gender specific since 1995 Criminal Code (Art. 180), current Criminal Code is from 2008 (Art. 170) ^ Geis, Gilbert (1977). "Rape-in-marriage: Law and law reform in England, the United States, and Sweden".

Adelaide Law Review .

6 : 284.

^ Kauzlarich, David (2008).

Introduction to Criminology . p. 79.

^ a b c d e Temkin, Jennifer (2002). "Defining and redefining rape". In Temkin, Jennifer (ed.).

Rape and the legal process (2nd ed.). Oxford New York: Oxford University Press. p. 86.

ISBN 9780198763543 .

Citing : "Criminal Law (Rape) (Amendment) Act, 1990, section 5" .

irishstatutebook.ie .

Irish Statute Book . Archived from the original on 29 April 2017 . Retrieved 21 December 2017 .

^ "Legislative Influences" . Statcan.gc.ca. 18 August 2010 . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

^ "Selected Changes in Justice Legislation" (PDF) . 17 May 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

^ "Legislation in the member States of the Council of Europe in the field of violence against women" (PDF) .

Bizkaia.net . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "The Secretary General's database on violence against women" . Sgdatabase.unwomen.org. Archived from the original on 25 July 2013 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "Rape: Still a forgotten issue" (PDF) . Archived from the original on 21 August 2004 . Retrieved 21 August 2004 .

^ 96.464 Parlamentarische Initiative Gewalt gegen Frauen als Offizialdelikt: Revision von Artikel 123 StGB. 96.465 Parlamentarische Initiative: Sexuelle Gewalt in der Ehe als Offizialdelikt: Revision von Artikel 189 und 190 StGB: Bericht der Kommission für Rechtsfragen des Nationalrates .

Admin.ch (Report) (in German) . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ Spain. Tribunal, Supremo (May 1992). "[Judgment of 24 April 1992]".

Actual Jurid Aranzadi (54): 1, 7.

PMID 12293730 .

^ "Ministry of Justice, Finland - Entry page" . 17 February 2013. Archived from the original on 17 February 2013.

^ "Helsingin Sanomat - International Edition - Foreign" . Hs.fi. Archived from the original on 29 August 2006 . Retrieved 15 June 2013 .

^ "Microsoft Word - Report5811JLSdomesticviolenceEN_Word_finalRV.doc" (PDF) .

Ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ a b "Country Details" . Lawschool.cornell.edu . Retrieved 15 June 2013 .

^ Corps de femmes: sexualité et contrôle social . Retrieved 15 June 2013 .

^ a b c "Legislation Dans Les Etats Membres du Conseil de L'Europe en Matiere de Violence A L'Egard des Femmes" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 December 2009 . Retrieved 20 December 2009 .

^ "Criminal Law (Rape) Act 1981, Section 2" .

Irish Statute Book . Retrieved 26 April 2016 .

^ a b "Criminal Law (Rape) Bill, 1980: Committee Stage (Resumed)" .

Dáil Éireann debates . Oireachtas. 25 February 1981. Vol.327 cc.296–341 . Retrieved 26 April 2016 .

^ "Consultation Paper: Rape" . Dublin: Law Reform Commission. 1 December 1987. §21 . Retrieved 26 April 2016 .

^ "Report: Rape and Allied Offences" .

LRC 24 . Dublin: Law Reform Commission. May 1988. §18 . Retrieved 26 April 2016 .

^ "Criminal Law (Rape) (Amendment) Act, 1990" .

Irish Statute Book . Section 21 and Schedule, No.5, Section 5 . Retrieved 26 April 2016 .

^ a b Holland, Kitty (26 July 2016).

"Marital rape remains extremely difficult to prosecute" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 26 July 2016 .

^ a b Simon, Rita James (May 2001).

A comparative perspective on major social problems . Lexington Books. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-7391-0248-0 .

^ Bensussan, P. (2009). "Marital rape according to French law: Desire, need and consent".

Sexologies .

18 (3): 182– 185.

doi : 10.1016/j.sexol.2009.04.001 .

ISSN 1158-1360 .

^ "German Law Criminalizes Marital Rape" .

Msmagazine.com . 16 June 1997. Archived from the original on 24 February 2012 . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

^ a b "Kunarac, Vukovic and Kovac - Judgement - Part IV" . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "German Criminal Code" .

Strafgesetzbuch . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Microsoft Word - 1Deckblatt.doc" (PDF) .

Jurawelt.com . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Criminal Code of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 2003" (PDF) .

UNODC . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ "Quality in Gender+ Equality Policies : European Commission Sixth Framework Programme Integrated Project" (PDF) .

Quing.eu . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Microsoft Word - 4_1-Manual Capitulo II_01.doc" (PDF) .

Cite.gov.pt . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "The War At Home : Gender Based Violence Indicators Project" .

Stopvaw.org . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ a b "Hungary - Cries unheard, The failure to protect women from rape and sexual violence in the home" . 10 May 2007 . Retrieved 11 March 2015 .

^ Simon, Rita James (May 2001).

A comparative perspective on major social problems . Lexington Books. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0-7391-0248-0 .

^ "The Secretary General's database on violence against women" . Sgdatabase.unwomen.org. Archived from the original on 25 July 2013 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ A Comparative Perspective on Major Social Problems . Retrieved 15 June 2013 .

^ "Nothing But The Legal Truth" (DOC) .

Legalresearchnetwork.eu . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "An overview of the legal and cultural issues for migrant Muslim women of the European union: A focus on domestic violence and Italy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 11 March 2015 .

^ "Quality in Gender+ Equality Policies : European Commission Sixth Framework Programme Integrated Project" (PDF) .

Quing.eu . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Sesso, matrimonio e legge" .

WOMAN's JOURNAL . 8 December 2011 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Intercultural Dialogue on Violence against Women" (PDF) .

Retepariopportunita.it . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "CRIMINAL CODE OF 1996, AMENDED IN 2004" . Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 3 November 2013 .

^ Social Change, Gender and Violence: Post-Communist and War Affected Societies at Google Books ^ "AMENDMENT TO PENAL CODE 1998" . Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 3 November 2013 .

^ "Croatia" . Archived from the original on 5 September 2015 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "The Secretary General's database on violence against women" . Sgdatabase.unwomen.org. 24 October 2006. Archived from the original on 25 July 2013 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "The Secretary General's database on violence against women" . Sgdatabase.unwomen.org. 13 December 2000. Archived from the original on 1 August 2013 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "Violence Against Women in Colombia" (PDF) .

Omct.org . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Concluding comments of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women: Chile" (PDF) .

Un.org . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Thailand outlaws marital rape" . The China Post. 22 June 2007 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "Asia-Pacific | Thailand passes marital rape bill" .

BBC News . 21 June 2007 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "Anger over proposed change to rape laws" .

Nationmultimedia.com . 28 February 2007. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Child Rights Information Network - Resources" . CRIN . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "Refworld | Namibia: Domestic violence, including state protection, services and recourse available to victims" . Unhcr.org . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "Criminal recognition to marital rape in India is long overdue" .

The Times of India . 4 December 2012.

Archived from the original on 11 November 2013 . Retrieved 28 December 2012 .

^ "An offence, of course" .

Indian Express . 15 January 2011 . Retrieved 28 December 2012 .

^ Peter Foster (27 October 2006).

"India outlaws wife-beating and marital rape" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 28 December 2012 .

^ Kalpana Sharma (10 November 2010).

"Contradictions and confusion cloud rape laws. The result is miscarriage of justice" . Tehelka. Archived from the original on 3 February 2013 . Retrieved 28 December 2012 .

^ a b "Marital Rape: OK or not ok?" .

Deccan Chronicle . 19 March 2016 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ a b "CRIMINAL LAW (CODIFICATION AND REFORM) ACT [CHAPTER 9:23]" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 August 2012 . Retrieved 13 January 2013 .

^ "Anti-Discrimination Committee Takes Up Situation of Women in Turkey" .

UN Information Service . 21 January 2005.

^ UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) (20 January 2011).

Concluding observations of the Committee against Torture: Cambodia (PDF) (Report). CAT/C/KHM/CO/2 . Retrieved 8 March 2011 .

^ O'Reilly, Devon.

"Women's Transformations during Conflict" .

Perspectives on Global Issues; NYU Center for Global Affairs . Archived from the original on 31 December 2012 . Retrieved 24 January 2013 .

^ Bhattarai, Tara (18 January 2012).

"Taboos Undercut Nepal's Marital Rape Law | Women's eNews" .

Women's eNews . Retrieved 31 January 2012 .

^ Collen, Lindsey; Kistnasamy, Kisna; Lallah, Rajni (23 April 2007).

"Rape and the Sexual Offences Bill: Beyond the illogical, punitive attitude…" .

l'express . Archived from the original on 27 September 2007.

^ "Report of the Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women, Its Causes and Consequences, Yakin Ertürk : addendum: mission to Ghana" . 2008.

^ Kok, Teresa (15 September 2007).

"Mixed reaction to marital rape reform" .

Sassy MP . Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 15 February 2010 .

^ "Malaysian jailed for marital rape" .

Sydney Morning Herald . 6 August 2009 . Retrieved 17 February 2023 .

^ a b "Thailand outlaws marital rape" . AFP. 22 June 2007. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007.

^ "Rwanda: Final steps towards the adoption of a law to combat gender violence" . Africa4womensrights.org. 13 February 2009. Archived from the original on 4 August 2020 . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

^ "The Secretary General's database on violence against women" . Sgdatabase.unwomen.org. 25 September 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2014 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "Ley No. 779" (PDF) .

Legislacion.asamblea.gob.ni . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "The Secretary General's database on violence against women" . Sgdatabase.unwomen.org. 28 August 2012. Archived from the original on 25 July 2013 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "Top court recognizes marital rape as crime for first time - YONHAP NEWS" . 15 May 2013 . Retrieved 13 July 2021 .

^ Robinson, Jessica (21 March 2013).

"New Law Mandates Harsh Penalties and Broad Services to Address Violence Against Woman in Bolivia" . Andean Information Network . Retrieved 24 March 2013 .

^ "Crimes Act – 2013" (PDF) .

Legislative Assembly of Samoa . 2013 . Retrieved 17 February 2023 .

^ "The Criminal Offences (Amendment) Act 1999 reads at section 5 "Section 118 of the Principal Act is amended by deleting sub-section (2) and renumbering the subsequent sub-sections accordingly" (removed the exemption from the rape law)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 .

^ a b "Section 29 of the Family Protection Act 2013 reads: "Subject to clause 12 of the Constitution, in addition to liability under this Act, a respondent may also be prosecuted under other criminal laws for the time being in force for his acts if the facts disclose the commission of a separate criminal offence under those provisions.

Note : For example, (without limitation), assault, offences endangering life and health, grievous bodily harm, rape , other sexual offences, murder and manslaughter and sexual exploitation through people trafficking and smuggling" " (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 February 2016 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 .

^ "Kazakhstan".

Women 2000: An Investigation into the Status of Women's Rights in Central and South-Eastern Europe and the Newly Independent States . International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights. 9 November 2000. Archived from the original on 30 July 2009.

^ "Marital Rape in South Africa – Enough is Enough | Open Society Initiative of Southern Africa" . OSISA. 25 October 2012. Archived from the original on 15 September 2013 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ Chelemu, Khethiwe.

"Wife's seven-year wait for justice" .

Times . Johannesburg . Retrieved 29 January 2012 .

The Krugersdorp Magistrate's Court sentenced her 48-year-old former husband [Frederik Christiaan Bossert] to an effective 12 years in jail last week for physically abusing and repeatedly raping [Annelise] Kriek during their marriage.  Kriek's court action became the first reported case of rape in a marriage since the Domestic Violence Act was introduced in 1996.

^ "SELECTED MODEL PENAL CODE PROVISIONS" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 August 2013 .

^ Johnson, Mollie C. (2018).

The Gradual Fall of the Marital Rape Exemption: The Curious Case of South Dakota (Thesis). Yale University.

^ a b c Finkelhor, David; Yllö, Kersti (1985).

License to Rape . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. pp.

204–205, Table A–2 .

ISBN 978-0-03-059474-8 .

^ "The National Center for Victims of Crime - Library/Document Viewer" . Ncvc.org . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

^ "Marital Rape" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 July 2013 . Retrieved 8 March 2013 .

^ "Tennessee General Assembly » Legislation" . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "LexisNexis® Custom Solution: Tennessee Code Research Tool" . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Code of Laws - Title 16 - Chapter 3 - Offenses Against The Person" .

www.scstatehouse.gov .

^ "RCSD Sex Offender Registry Information" . Archived from the original on 4 May 2016 . Retrieved 9 September 2013 .

^ For example, People v. Liberta 64 N.Y.2d 152, 474 N.E.2d 567, 485 N.Y.S.2d 207 (1984) New York, in 1984, in People v. Liberta at the Wayback Machine (archived August 7, 2015) ^ "CA Codes (pen:261-269)" . Archived from the original on 8 January 2016 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ a b Celia Wells, University of Bristol (28 June 2010).

"Lacey, Wells and Quick Reconstructing Criminal Law" .

Cambridge University Press . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ a b "Acting Like a Man: Seduction and Rape in the Law" (PDF) .

Griffith Law Review . 1993.

ISSN 1038-3441 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 January 2022 – via commonlii.org.

^ "[1991] UKHL 12" .

BAILII . Retrieved 19 December 2010 .

^ [1992] 1 AC 599, [1991] 3 WLR 767, [1991] 4 All ER 481, (1991) 135 SJLB 181,  [1992] 1 FZR 217, (1991) 155 JP 989, (1992) 94 Cr App R 216, [1992] Fam Law 108, [1992] Crim LR 207, (1991) 155 JPN 752, (1991) 141 NLJ 1481, [1991] UKHL 12, (1991) The Times , 24 October 1991, (1991) The Independent , 24 October 1991, (1991) The Guardian , 30 October 1991, HL , affirming [1991] 2 WLR 1065, [1991] 2 All ER 257, (1991) 135 SJ 384, (1991) 93 Cr App R 1, (1991) 155 JP 373, [1991] Crim LR 475, (1991) 155 JPN 236, (1991) 141 NLJ 383, (1991) The Times, 15 March 1991, (1991) The Independent , 15 March 1991, (1991) The Guardian , 15 March 1991, CA , affirming [1991] 1 All ER 747 ^ R v Clarke [1949] 2 All ER 448 ^ R v O'Brien [1974] 3 All ER 663 ^ R v Steele (1976) 65 Cr.App.R. 22 ^ R v Roberts [1986] Crim LR 188 ^ R v Miller [1954] 2 QB 282 ^ R v Kowalski (1988) 86 Cr. App. R. 339 ^ R v Sharples [1990] Crim LR 198 ^ "Domestic Violence" . Archived from the original on 7 September 2014 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Matrimonial Rape - Exemption from Prosecution for Husband - State of the Law in England, Scotland, and India" .

Criminal Law Journal, Nagpur : 357– 368. 2005.

ISSN 0011-1325 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 – via Goforthelaw.com.

^ Molan, Michael T. (2005).

Cases & Materials on Criminal Law . Psychology Press.

ISBN 9781859419359 . Retrieved 18 February 2023 .

^ "S1 Rape:Sexual offences: Sentencing Manual: Legal Guidance: The Crown Prosecution Service" . Archived from the original on 8 October 2008 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Husband jailed for raping wife" .

BBC News . 7 March 2000 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Policy for Prosecuting Cases of Rape" (PDF) . Public Prosecution Service for Northern Ireland. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 October 2018 . Retrieved 7 October 2018 .

^ a b "Reform of the Law of Rape" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 January 2014 . Retrieved 22 March 2014 .

^ "An Act to amend the Criminal Law Consolidation Act, 1935-1975" (PDF) .

legislation.sa.gov.au . Retrieved 18 February 2023 .

^ "Patterns of rape : a preliminary Queensland perspective" (PDF) .

Aic.gov.au . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 October 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ R v L [1991] HCA 48; 174 CLR, per Mason C.J., Deane and Toohey JJ.

^ "LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA" .

www.lawcommissionofindia.nic.in . Retrieved 14 June 2020 .

^ "Why India's law still allows men to rape their wives" .

The Week . Retrieved 25 September 2023 .

^ Nigam, Shalu (3 June 2015).

"The Social and Legal Paradox Relating to Marital Rape in India: Addressing Structural Inequalities" .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.2613447 .

SSRN 2613447 . Retrieved 25 September 2023 .

^ "The Middle East's "Rape-Marriage" Laws" .

Selfscholar . 18 July 2012 . Retrieved 6 August 2017 .

^ "Justice in Peru: Victim Gets Rapist for a Husband" .

New York Times . 12 March 1997 . Retrieved 10 August 2017 .

^ a b c d Kwiatkowski, Lynn (2016). "Marital Sexual Violence, Structural Vulnerability, and Misplaced Responsibility in Northern Việt Nam".

Marital Rape . pp.

55– 74.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190238360.003.0005 .

ISBN 978-0-19-023836-0 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Torres, M. Gabriela (2016). "Reconciling Cultural Difference in the Study of Marital Rape".

Marital Rape . pp.

9– 18.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190238360.003.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-023836-0 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Menjívar, Cecilia (2016). "Normalizing Suffering, Robadas, Coercive Power, and Marital Unions Among Ladinas in Eastern Guatemala".

Marital Rape . pp.

75– 86.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190238360.003.0006 .

ISBN 978-0-19-023836-0 .

^ "What is a forced marriage?" .

BBC . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ a b "Q & A: Child Marriage and Violations of Girls' Rights" .

Human Rights Watch . 14 June 2013 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "WHO - Child marriages: 39 000 every day" . Archived from the original on 14 March 2013 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "I have a right to...: Article 16: Right to marriage and family and to equal rights of men and women during and after marriage" .

BBC World Service . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Early and forced marriage - facts, figures and what you can do" . Archived from the original on 12 March 2014 . Retrieved 12 March 2014 .

^ Jamjoom, Mohammed; Almasmari, Hakim (15 September 2013).

"Yemen minister on child marriage: Enough is enough" .

CNN . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Yemeni minister seeks law to end child marriage" .

BBC News . 13 September 2013 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ a b "World report on violence and health" (PDF) .

Whqlibdoc.who.int . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "WHO - Gender, equity, human rights" . Archived from the original on 12 October 2006 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "WHO - Gender, equity, human rights" . Archived from the original on 26 January 2009 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ Abeya, Sileshi Garoma; Afework, Mesganaw Fantahun; Yalew, Alemayeh Worku (2012).

"Reproductive Health - Full text - Intimate partner violence against women in western Ethiopia: a qualitative study on attitudes, woman's response, and suggested measures as perceived by community members" .

Reproductive Health .

9 : 14.

doi : 10.1186/1742-4755-9-14 .

PMC 3453497 .

PMID 22906066 .

^ "Ethiopian women are most abused" .

BBC News . 11 October 2006.

^ "Women, Violence, and Tajikistan" . Archived from the original on 1 July 2001 . Retrieved 1 July 2001 .

^ "Amnesty International: Report on Violence Against Women" . Religiousconsultation.org . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

^ Seites, J. Marital rape: Dispelling the myth. Unpublished manuscript, 1975.  Cited in Gelles, Richard J. “Power, Sex, and Violence, The Family Coordinator, National Council on Family Relations, 1977. p. 343.

^ Russell, Diana E. H. (1990).

Rape in Marriage (New ed.). Indiana University Press. pp.

57–58, 65–67 .

ISBN 978-0-253-35055-8 .

^ Easteal, P. (1994).

Voices of the Survivors . North Melbourne: Spinifex Press. p. 224.

ISBN 1875559248 .

^ Basile, Kathleen C. (October 2002). "Prevalence of Wife Rape and Other Intimate Partner Sexual Coercion in a Nationally Representative Sample of Women".

Violence and Victims .

17 (5): 511– 524.

doi : 10.1891/vivi.17.5.511.33717 .

ISSN 0886-6708 .

PMID 12477095 .

S2CID 626022 .

^ Burman, M.; J. Lovett; L. Kelly (2009).

Different systems, similar outcomes? Tracking attrition in reported rape cases in eleven countries . London: Child and Woman Abuse Studies Unit, London Metropolitan University . p. 106.

^ Bernice, et al., The Relative Effects of Intimate Partner Physical and Sexual Violence on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Symptomatology, Violence and Victims, 2003 February; 18 vol 1, p. 87 ^ Motalingoane-Khau, Mathabo (2007).

" 'But He is My Husband! How Can That be Rape?': Exploring Silences around Date and Marital Rape in Lesotho" .

Agenda: Empowering Women for Gender Equity (74): 58– 66.

JSTOR 27739343 .

^ "Intimate Partner Sexual Violence" .

Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network . Retrieved 9 May 2013 .

^ "Marital Rape" .

Hiddenhurt.co.uk . 17 June 2007 . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

^ "Source: Reports Of Cases Adjudged In The Supreme Court Of Mississippi : Written: 1834 : Recorded: 1818 : CALVIN BRADLEY vs. THE STATE" (TXT) .

Files.usgwarchives.net . pp.

156– 157 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "STATE v. RICHARD OLIVER" .

University of Colorado Boulder . Archived from the original on 16 September 2013 . Retrieved 7 October 2018 .

^ "THE PENAL-CODE WITH AMENDMENTS" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2012 . Retrieved 31 March 2015 .

^ "Court in UAE says beating wife, child OK if no marks are left" . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ PNS Rumney (1999).

"When rape isn't rape: court of appeal sentencing practice in cases of marital and relationship rape" .

Oxford Journal of Legal Studies .

19 (2): 243– 270.

doi : 10.1093/ojls/19.2.243 . Retrieved 23 October 2023 .

^ Rhonda Copleon (1994).

"Surfacing Gender: Re-Engraving Crimes Against Women in Humanitarian Law" .

Hastings Women's Law Journal .

5 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Smith, Daniel Jordan (2016). "Modern Marriage, Masculinity, and Intimate Partner Violence in Nigeria".

Marital Rape . pp.

41– 54.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190238360.003.0004 .

ISBN 978-0-19-023836-0 .

^ "Handbook for Legislation on Violence Against Women" (PDF) .

Unwomen.oreg . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2015 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ a b "FORCED SEXUAL RELATIONS among married young women in developing countries" (PDF) .

Population Council . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 December 2010 . Retrieved 21 June 2010 .

^ "Child Marriage Factsheet: State of World Population 2005" . UNFPA . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

^ Jeffreys, Sheila (1997).

The Idea of Prostitution . Spinifex Press. p. 262.

ISBN 9781876756673 .

^ Posner, Richard A.

Sex and Reason . p. 94.

^ "Algeria - Amnesty International Taunton Local Group" . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ Ebtihal Mahadeen (December 2013).

"Doctors and Sheikhs: "Truths" in Virginity Discourse in Jordanian Media" .

Journal of International Women's Studies .

14 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ Carpenter, R. Charli (2000).

"Surfacing Children: Limitations of Genocidal Rape Discourse" .

Human Rights Quarterly .

22 (2): 428– 477.

doi : 10.1353/hrq.2000.0020 .

JSTOR 4489285 .

S2CID 143933912 .

^ "Honor Violence FACTSHEET" (PDF) .

Honor Diaries . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 June 2017 . Retrieved 7 October 2018 .

^ "Ethics: Honour crimes" . BBC. 1 January 1970 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ Sev'er, Aysan; Yurdakul, Gökçe (9 September 2001).

"Culture of Honor, Culture of Change - A Feminist Analysis of Honor Killings in Rural Turkey" (PDF) .

University of Toronto . Retrieved 7 October 2018 .

^ Naved, Ruchira Tabassum (2013). "Sexual Violence Towards Married Women in Bangladesh".

Arch Sex Behav .

42 (4): 595– 602.

doi : 10.1007/s10508-012-0045-1 .

PMID 23254953 .

S2CID 12301979 .

^ Mayell, Hillary (12 February 2002).

"Thousands of Women Killed for Family 'Honor' " .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 18 February 2023 .

^ "FAQ" .

Honour Based Violence Awareness Network . Retrieved 18 February 2023 .

^ Genesis 1:27 , Genesis 2:24 ^ Matthew 19:4–6 , Mark 10:6–8 ^ Ephesians 5:31 ^ 1 Corinthians 7:4–5a ^ a b Cummings, D. (1957).

"THE 85 CANONS OF THE HOLY AND RENOWNED APOSTLES TOGETHER WITH AN INTERPRETATION OF THEM IN THE COMMON DIALECT OF MODERN GREEK (TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH)" (PDF) .

The Rudder . Orthodox Christian Educational Society. pp.

720– 721.

... this course ought to be adopted by agreement between both parties—that is to say by both the husband and the wife agreeing thereto.

^ Laiou, Angelike E., ed. (1993).

Consent and Coercion to Sex and Marriage in Ancient and Medieval Societies . Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection. p. 183.

^ "Valley paper criticized over pastor's column on spousal rape" .

Alaska Dispatch News . Archived from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Marital rape ban 'tragically wrong' says the Christian Council" . Bahamas Crisis Centre. 7 September 2009 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "priest signs online petition to criminalize marital rape" . ucanews.com . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ Paul VI, 1968, Humanae vitae , §13.

^ Pope Francis, 2016, Amoris laetitia , §154.

^ de Margery, Bertrand.

" Humanae vitae - To which less consideration has been given" .

^ "Proverbs 19:2, JPS 1917 translation" .

Sefaria . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

^ "Eruvin 100b, The William Davidson Talmud" .

Sefaria . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

^ Ruttenberg, Danya (3 June 2015).

"Actually, Dr. Ruth, the Talmud Does Not OK Rape" .

Forward . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

^ Touger, Eliyahu; ben Maimon, Moshe (2007).

Mishneh Torah, Human Dispositions . Moznaim Publishing . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

^ Karo, Yosef.

Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chayim . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

^ Karo, Yosef.

Shulchan Arukh, Even HaEzer . Sefaria . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

^ R. W. Connell (1995), p. 45.

^ R. W. Connell (1995).

^ a b c d e f g Umberson, Debra; Anderson, Kristin L.; Williams, Kristi; Chen, Meichu D. (2003).

"Relationship Dynamics, Emotion State, and Domestic Violence: A Stress and Masculinities Perspective" .

Journal of Marriage and Family .

65 (1): 233– 247.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-3737.2003.00233.x .

JSTOR 3600062 .

^ Martin, Elaine K.; Taft, Casey T.; Resick, Patricia A. (2007). "A review of marital rape".

Aggression and Violent Behavior .

12 (3): 329– 347.

doi : 10.1016/j.avb.2006.10.003 .

^ Russell, Kirsten J.; Hand, Christopher J. (2017).

"Rape myth acceptance, victim blame attribution and Just World Beliefs: A rapid evidence assessment" .

Aggression and Violent Behavior .

37 : 153– 160.

doi : 10.1016/j.avb.2017.10.008 .

S2CID 148973779 .

^ "Bioline International Official Site (site up-dated regularly)" . Bioline.org.br . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ Moy, Patsy (23 November 2003).

"Publicity urged for law on marital rape" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 18 February 2023 .

^ "The War At Home: Gender Based Violence Indicators Project" (PDF) .

Alnap.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Policy Paralysis: A Call for Action on HIV/AIDS-Related Human Rights Abuses Against Women and Girls in Africa" (PDF) .

Human Rights Watch . December 2003 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "Unicef Statistics" . Archived from the original on 4 July 2014 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and UNICEF in Ethiopia : PROGRESS IN ABANDONING FEMALE GENITAL MULTILATION / CUTTING AND CHILD MARRIAGE IN SELF-DECLARED WOREDAS" (PDF) .

Unicef.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 August 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ Ali, Nada (18 August 2008).

"The costs of marital rape in Southern Africa" .

Human Rights Watch .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2008 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao ap aq ar as at au av aw ax ay az ba bb bc bd be bf bg bh bi bj bk bl bm bn bo bp bq br bs bt bu bv bw bx by bz ca cb cc cd ce cf cg ch ci cj ck cl cm cn co cp cq cr cs ct cu cv cw cx cy cz da db dc dd de df dg dh di dj dk dl dm dn do dp dq dr ds dt du dv dw dx dy dz ea eb ec ed ee ef eg eh ei ej ek el em en eo ep eq er es et eu ev ew ex ey ez fa fb fc fd fe ff fg fh "Women, Business and the Law - Data" .

World Bank . 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

^ "Afghanistan 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (8 July 2016).

"Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women considers the report of Albania" .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . Retrieved 7 October 2018 .

^ "Algeria 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Women's Rights in the Middle East and North Africa 2010" . Freedom House. March 2010. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015 . Retrieved 7 October 2018 .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Andorra, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ a b c d "Analytical study of the results of the 4th round of monitoring the implementation of Recommendation Rec(2002)5 on the protection of women against violence in Council of Europe member states" .

Council of Europe . Gender Equality Commission (GEC) . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Angola, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ a b c d e Elvy, Stacy-Ann (2015).

"A Postcolonial Theory of Spousal Rape: The Carribean and Beyond" .

Michigan Journal of Gender and Law .

22 (1): 94 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

^ "Sexual Offences Act 1995" (PDF) . Parliament of Antigua ad Barbuda. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Argentina, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Armenia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b c d e f g In-depth study on all forms of violence against women (PDF) .

United Nations (Report). 6 July 2006. A/61/122/Add.1.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 August 2011 . Retrieved 17 February 2023 .

^ "Australia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Austria, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Azerbaijan 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "The Bahamas 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Bahrain 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Bangladesh 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Barbados: Domestic violence, including legislation; recourse and support services available to victims (2015-January 2017)" .

Refworld . United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

^ "Barbados 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Belize 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Benin 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Bhutan 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Bolivia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Wright, Emily (26 June 2017).

"Bolivia: Home to Latin America's Highest Rates of Sexual Violence" .

Women and Girls . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

^ "Bosnia and Herzegovina 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b c Stefiszyn, Karen (12 May 2008).

A Brief Overview of Recent Developments in Sexual Offences Legislation in Southern Africa (PDF) .

Expert Group Meeting on good practices in legislation on violence against women.

(Report). UN. p. 4. EGM/GPLVAW/2008/EP.04.

In the sexual offences legislation of Namibia, Lesotho, Swaziland, and South Africa, rape within marriage is illegal.

^ "Botswana 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Brazil, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Brunei Darussalam: Amnesty International submission to the UN Universal Periodic Review" .

Amnesty International . Sixth session of the UPR Working Group, November–December 2009. 13 April 2009.

The 'Explanation' which forms part of Article 375 of Brunei's Penal Code (rape) stipulates that 'Sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under thirteen (13) years of age, is not rape.' This amounts to legalisation and legitimization of marital rape, including the rape of children, in flagrant violation of international human rights law.

^ "Brunei 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Bulgaria 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Burundi 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Canada 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Cambodia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Cabo Verde, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

^ a b c d e Claire Provost (6 July 2011).

"UN Women justice report: get the data" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Gender Equality in Central African Republic - Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI)" . Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Chile, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

^ Asian-Pacific Resource and Research Centre (ARROW).

"China: MDG 3: Promote Gender Equality and Empower Woman" . Archived from the original on 27 December 2010 . Retrieved 8 March 2011 .

China has no legal provisions for marital rape and the main reason for this is in deference to a prevailing cultural perception that wives are supposed to submit to their husband's wishes in matters of sexual relations and hence, there is no such concept of 'rape' within marriage or 'rape' being considered a form of violence within the marriage.

^ Westmarland, Nicole; Geetanjali Gangoli (April 2012).

International Approaches to Rape . The Policy Press. p. 69.

ISBN 978-1-84742-621-5 .

In China, it is difficult to punish an offender for marital rape because the law does not define this behaviour as a crime. ... there are no explicit articles in Chinese law that relate to marital rape.

^ "China (includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau) 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Colombia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

"Refworld | Honduras: Domestic violence; legislation and protection available to victims (2007-2009)" .

Unhcr.org . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Congo, Republic of the, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

^ Peterman, Amber; Tia Palermo; Caryn Bredenkamp (June 2011).

"Estimates and Determinants of Sexual Violence Against Women in the Democratic Republic of Congo" .

American Journal of Public Health .

101 (6): 1060– 1067.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2010.300070 .

ISSN 0090-0036 .

PMC 3093289 .

PMID 21566049 .

^ "Democratic Republic of Congo 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Costa Rica 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Croatia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Cuba Business and Investment Opportunities Yearbook Volume 1 Strategic, Practical Information and Opportunities . Lulu.com. 2016. p. 55.

ISBN 9781438776552 .

^ "Cuba 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Cyprus 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Cyprus - the Area Administered by Turkish Cypriots 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 21 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

^ "Czech Republic 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Denmark 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 2016" (PDF) . Commonwealth of Dominica . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

^ "Dominican Republic 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Timor-Leste 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Ecuador 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Egypt 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Warrick, Catherine. (2009).

Law in the service of legitimacy: Gender and politics in Jordan . Farnham, Surrey, England; Burlington, Vt.: Ashgate Pub.

ISBN 978-0-7546-7587-7 .

^ "Egypt" .

National Sexual Rights Law and Policy Database . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ "B. The State's Response to Sexual Violence | Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights" .

Egyptian Initiative of Personal Rights . Archived from the original on 9 January 2016 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ "El Salvador 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

^ "Estonia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b Banda, Fareda (6 March 2008).

"Project on a Mechanism to Address Laws that Discriminate Against Women" (PDF) .

Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights – Women's Rights and Gender Unit . pp.

85– 87.

^ "Fiji 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Finland 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "France 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Gambia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Germany 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Greece 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Grenada 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "GRENADA - REPORT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE CEVI SECOND ROUND" (PDF) .

www.oas.org . OAS - Organization of American States: Democracy for peace, security, and development. 15 August 2015 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

^ "Guatemala 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Guinea-Bissau 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Guyana 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Freedom House (23 November 2011).

Freedom in the World 2011: The Annual Survey of Political Rights and Civil Liberties . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 285.

ISBN 978-1-4422-0994-7 .

In May 2010, the Sexual Offenses Act was signed into law, which makes rape gender-neutral and expands its definition to include spousal rape and coercion and child abuse.

^ Klasing, Amanda (24 January 2012).

"A chance for Congress to help Haitian women" .

Human Rights Watch . Retrieved 10 May 2012 .

The penal code includes penalties for rape but does not address marital rape.

^ "Haiti 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Honduras 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ OECD (22 February 2010).

Atlas of Gender and Development: How Social Norms Affect Gender Equality in non-OECD Countries . OECD Publishing. p. 119.

ISBN 978-92-64-07747-8 .

^ "Hungary 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "India 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Section 375: Rape" .

Indian Penal Code . Retrieved 18 February 2023 .

Exception 2. Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape.

^ jain, akanksha (17 January 2018).

"Marital Rape: Married, Married But Separated, & Unmarried-Classifying Rape Victims Is Unconstitutional: Petitioners Submit Before Delhi HC [Read Written Submissions]" .

www.livelaw.in . Retrieved 23 March 2019 .

^ "The Protection of Women From Domestic Violence Act, 2005" . Archived from the original on 23 March 2019 . Retrieved 23 March 2019 .

^ "Indonesia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Article 285" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2017.

Any person who by using force or threat of force forces a woman to have sexual intercourse with him out of marriage, shall, being guilty of rape, shall be punished with a maximum imprisonment of twelve years.

^ "Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 23 of Year 2004 Regarding Elimination of Violence in Household" (PDF) .

President of Indonesia . Retrieved 18 February 2023 – via wcwonline.org.

^ Westmarland, Nicole; Geetanjali Gangoli (6 April 2011).

International Approaches to Rape . The Policy Press.

ISBN 978-1-84742-620-8 .

^ "Iran 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Iraqi law would legalize marital rape, child marriage for country's Shia" . Retrieved 14 July 2016 .

^ "Iraq 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Ireland 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Israel 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Italy 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Jamaica 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Japan 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Jordan 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Kazakhstan 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Kenya 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Kiribati 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Krol, Paula (10 June 2017).

"Mapping support services for victims of violence against women in Kosovo" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

^ "Concluding observations on the combined second to fourth periodic reports of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea" . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 17 November 2017 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

^ "South Korea 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Marital Rape – Ruling Seen as Move to Protect Spousal Right to Sex – Korea « womensphere" . Womensphere.wordpress.com. 24 February 2009 . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

^ "Kuwait: Events of 2017".

World Report 2018: Rights Trends in Kuwait . Human Rights Watch. 20 December 2017 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ "Kuwait 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Kyrgyz Republic 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ UN Committee on Elimination of Discrimination against Women (24 July 2009).

"Lao People's Democratic Republic boasts new legislation, machinery to improve women's lot, but expert committee faults rape, domestic violence policies" . WOM/1743. Archived from the original on 27 November 2009 . Retrieved 8 March 2011 .

^ "Laos 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Latvia, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ a b "Lebanon: Reform Rape Laws" .

Human Rights Watch . 19 December 2016 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ Concluding observations on the combined fourth and fifth periodic reports of Lebanon (PDF) .

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Report).

United Nations . November 2015. CEDAW/C/LBN/CO/4-5 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ "Lebanon 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ "Lesotho 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Country Policy and Information Note - Libya: Women" (PDF) . UK Home Office. January 2018. p. 7.3.2 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ "Libya 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Liechtenstein 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Lithuania, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Lithuania, § Protecting women from violence" .

Women, Business and the Law report 2017 . World Bank. 2017 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

^ "Luxembourg 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Malawi 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "AWAM : All Women's Action Society Malaysia" . Archived from the original on 6 May 2016 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Marital rape will remain non-crime, law minister announces" . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Remove exception to marital rape in the law" . 12 June 2015 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Maldives" .

sexualrightsdatabase.org . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ "Cleric apologises for marital rape comment" .

Maldives Times . 23 January 2018. Archived from the original on 17 October 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Mali, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Malta, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Marshall Islands 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Mauritania, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Mauritius, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Mexico 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Moldova 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Monaco, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Mongolia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Montenegro, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Morocco 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Morocco bans forced marriage and harassment" .

BBC News . 12 September 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ "Marital Rape Is Still Legal in Morocco Despite Brand New Domestic Violence Law" .

Global Citizen . 1 March 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ "Mozambique 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Burma 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Namibia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Nauru legalizes homosexuality, criminalizes marital rape and slavery" .

Reuters . 31 May 2016 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

^ "Nauru 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "New law sets five-year jail term for marital rape" .

The Himalayan Times . 29 October 2017 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ "Netherlands 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "128 Sexual violation defined – Crimes Act 1961 No 43 (as at 7 November 2015)" . New Zealand Legislation. 7 November 2015 . Retrieved 15 March 2016 .

^ "New Zealand 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Nicaragua 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017).

"Macedonia, Section 6. § Women" .

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2017 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Norway 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Oman 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b Khan, Myra (20 February 2015).

"Rape Laws in Pakistan" .

The Legal Brief . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ Rao, Hamza (31 August 2017).

"Marital rape: Is it criminalized in Pakistan?" .

Daily Pakistan Global . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ Khan, Usman (23 October 2019).

"Criminalising Marital Rape In Pakistan" .

Naya Daur . Retrieved 15 March 2022 .

^ "Palau 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "The Cutting Edge News" . Retrieved 14 July 2016 .

^ "Palestine: 'Marry-Your-Rapist' Law Repealed" .

Human Rights Watch . 10 May 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

^ "Panama 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Papua New Guinea 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Paraguay 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Peru 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Philippines 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Asian-Pacific Resource & Research Centre for Women (ARROW) (2011).

Reclaiming & Redefining Rights: Thematic Studies Series 1: Sexuality & Rights in Asia (PDF) . Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: ARROW. pp.

22– 23.

^ "Poland 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Portugal 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Gender Equality in Peru | Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI)" .

Genderindex.org . Archived from the original on 3 June 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

"Refworld - Peru: Domestic violence, including legislation; state protection and services available to victims (2011-February 2014)" .

Refworld . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Qatar 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Romania 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Rwanda 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Saint Lucia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "San Marino 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Sao Tome and Principe 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Saudi Arabia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Serbia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Seychelles 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Sierra Leone 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Sexual offences" .

statutes.agc.gov.sg .

Attorney-General's Chambers . Archived from the original on 29 July 2013 . Retrieved 12 July 2012 .

^ "Penal Code changes to protect vulnerable victims, minors to kick in on Jan 1, 2020" . Channel News Asia. 27 December 2019. Archived from the original on 1 January 2020 . Retrieved 1 January 2020 .

^ "Slovakia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Slovenia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Solomon Islands 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Provisional Constitution" (PDF) . Federal Government of Somalia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 December 2013 . Retrieved 13 November 2014 .

^ "Somalia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "South Africa 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "South Sudan 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Spain 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Rapes surge in Sri Lanka amid weak laws" . Retrieved 14 July 2016 .

^ "Sri Lanka 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 21 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Sudan 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Sudan's new law on rape and sexual harassment One step forward, two steps back?" (PDF) . African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies. 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

^ "Suriname 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Sweden 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Switzerland 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Syria 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Taiwan 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ OECD (22 February 2010).

Atlas of Gender and Development: How Social Norms Affect Gender Equality in non-OECD Countries . OECD Publishing. p. 85.

ISBN 978-92-64-07747-8 .

^ "Human Rights Council adopts outcomes of Universal Periodic Review of Papua New Guinea, Tajikistan and Tanzania" .

www.ohchr.org . OHCHR. 22 September 2016 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

^ "No Way Out" .

Human Rights Watch . 29 October 2014 . Retrieved 14 July 2016 .

^ "Tanzania 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Thailand 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Togo 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Tonga 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Trinidad and Tobago 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Khouili, Ramy; Levine-Spound, Daniel (29 September 2017).

"Anti-violence law is another victory for Tunisian women" .

Middle East Eye .

^ "Tunisia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ McCormick-Cavanagh, Conor (28 July 2017).

"New Tunisian law takes long stride toward gender equality" .

Al-Monitor . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ Chaban, Stephanie (23 December 2017).

"Now Is the time to criminalize marital rape in the Arab Region - Opinion - Ahram Online" .

english.ahram.org.eg . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ "Turkey 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ OECD (22 February 2010).

Atlas of Gender and Development: How Social Norms Affect Gender Equality in non-OECD Countries . OECD Publishing. p. 87.

ISBN 978-92-64-07747-8 .

Rape, including spousal rape, is illegal in Turkmenistan and punishable by sentences ranging from 3 to 25 years in prison, depending on the extent of the violence. The government generally applies this law.

^ "Women's property and use rights in personal laws" .

www.fao.org . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

^ "Tuvalu" .

UN Women Asia and the Pacific . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

^ "Tuvalu 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Ukraine 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ OECD (22 February 2010).

Atlas of Gender and Development: How Social Norms Affect Gender Equality in non-OECD Countries . OECD Publishing. p. 89.

ISBN 978-92-64-07747-8 .

^ "Factbox: Women's rights in the Arab world" .

Reuters . 12 November 2013 . Retrieved 14 July 2016 .

^ "World Report 2018: Rights Trends in United Arab Emirates" .

Human Rights Watch . 20 December 2017 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ "United Arab Emirates 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "United Kingdom 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "EXTINCTION OF CERTAIN CRIMES BY MARRIAGE OF THE OFFENDER WITH THE OFFENDER" . Archived from the original on 14 August 2011 . Retrieved 4 January 2013 .

^ "Uruguay 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ OECD (22 February 2010).

Atlas of Gender and Development: How Social Norms Affect Gender Equality in non-OECD Countries . OECD Publishing. p. 91.

ISBN 978-92-64-07747-8 .

Rape is punishable by law in Uzbekistan and spousal rape is specifically prohibited, but no man has ever been convicted for raping his wife.

^ "Uzbekistan 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Vanuatu 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Venezuela 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Vietnam 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Yemen" .

www.genderindex.org . The OECD Development Centre’s Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI). Archived from the original on 17 October 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ "Yemen 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Zambia 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Pambazuka - Southern Africa: Justice for survivors of marital rape, how far has SADC come ?" . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ "Zimbabwe 2017 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau Of Democracy, Human Rights, And Labor. 20 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bergen, Raquel Kennedy (March 1999).

"Marital Rape" (PDF) .

Applied Research Forum, National Electronic Network on Violence Against Women . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 October 2011 . Retrieved 8 February 2005 .

Connell, R.W. (2005).

Masculinities (PDF) (2nd ed.). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Bennice, Jennifer A.; Patricia A. Resick (1 July 2003). "Marital Rape".

Trauma, Violence, & Abuse .

4 (3): 228– 246.

doi : 10.1177/1524838003004003003 .

PMID 14697124 .

S2CID 20370920 .

Gan, K. (September 2004).

"Sex a conjugal right" . Archived from the original on 12 October 2004 . Retrieved 20 April 2005 .

Mandal, Saptarshi (2014).

"The Impossibility of Marital Rape" .

Australian Feminist Studies .

29 (81): 255– 272.

doi : 10.1080/08164649.2014.958124 .

S2CID 141826626 .

Russell, Diana E.H. (1990).

Rape in Marriage . Macmillan Publishing Company, USA.

"Facts about Women and the Law" (PDF) .

American Bar Association . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 October 2006 . Retrieved 20 April 2005 .

Tønnessen, Liv (2014).

"When rape becomes politics: Negotiating Islamic law reform in Sudan" .

Women's Studies International Forum .

44 : 145– 153.

doi : 10.1016/j.wsif.2013.12.003 .

hdl : 11250/2484805 .

Yllö, Kersti; Torres, M. Gabriela, eds. (2016).

Marital Rape: Consent, Marriage and Social Change in Global Context . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190238360.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-023836-0 .

United Nations General Assembly resolution 48/104 (December 1993).

"Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women" .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . Retrieved 17 February 2023 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) Dalal, Manish; Kumar, Raj (2020).

Marital Rape: The Indian and Global Perspective (first ed.). Delhi: Shandilya Publication.

ISBN 9789388147408 .

Waterman, Caroline; Dawson, Lori; Bologna, Michael (1989).

"Sexual coercion in gay male and lesbian relationships: Predictors and implications for support services" .

Journal of Sex Research .

26 : 118– 124.

doi : 10.1080/00224498909551495 .

Multi-country Study of Women's Health and Domestic Violence against Women (Report). Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization (WHO). 2005.

hdl : 10665/43309 .

ISBN 924159358X .

Yllö, Kersti (2016). "Prologue: Understanding Marital Rape in Global Context".

Marital Rape . pp.

1– 6.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190238360.003.0100 .

ISBN 978-0-19-023836-0 .

External links [ edit ] For a brief overview view of partner rape, see STAR Library - Marital Rape "Marital and Intimate Partner Sexual Assault" .

Stop Violence Against Women . Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights.

Aphrodite Wounded : Partner Rape Facts, Survivor Support and Educational Resources Easteal, Patricia L.; McOrmond-Plummer, Louise (30 October 2010).

"Real Rape, Real Pain: Help for Women Sexually Assaulted by Male Partners" .

"Raped by a Partner: Rape in Marriage" .

Women's Health Goulburn North East . 2008. Archived from the original on 23 February 2011.

v t e Domestic violence General Outline Abuse Controlling behavior Conflict tactics scale Cycle of abuse Cycle of violence Epidemiology Traumatic bonding Forms Sexual Genital modification and mutilation Marital rape Birth control sabotage Reproductive coercion Sexual violence by intimate partners Physical Acid attack Bride burning Domestic violence and pregnancy Dowry death Honor killing Murder of pregnant women Sati Situational couple violence Psychological Bullying Deny, attack, and reverse victim and offender (DARVO) Economic abuse Embarrassment / Humiliation Emotional blackmail False accusation Gaslighting Intimidation Major depressive disorder Mind games Nagging Narcissistic abuse Passive-aggressive behavior Setting up to fail Silent treatment Stalking Verbal abuse Victims Adults Bride buying Domestic violence against men Domestic violence and pregnancy Elder abuse Intimate partner violence Lesbian Mariticide Misandry Misogyny Parental abuse by children Same-sex relationships Social emotional development Uxoricide Children Adverse childhood experiences Child abuse Effects of domestic violence on children Narcissistic parent Parental bullying of children Sibling abuse Stress in early childhood Prevention Domestic violence hotlines Duluth model Management of domestic violence Women's shelter Prevention initiatives Country Argentina Armenia Albania Australia Bangladesh Bolivia Brazil Chile China Colombia Ecuador Ghana Guyana India Iran Mexico Kenya Lithuania New Zealand Norway Nigeria Norway Pakistan Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Romania Russia Samoa Saudi Arabia South Africa South Korea Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Uganda United Kingdom United States Religion Domestic violence in Christian culture Domestic violence in Islamic culture Experts Academics Jacquelyn Campbell Kenneth Dodge Emily Douglas Mary Ellsberg David Finkelhor Nicola Graham-Kevan Denise Hines Linda Saltzman Murray Straus Activists Ruahine Albert Angela Barker Sarah Buel Elizabeth Celi Anne Cools Donna Ferrato Karen Ingala Smith Ellen Pence Erin Pizzey Deborah Tucker Media Documentaries A Better Man The Conspiracy of Silence Defending Our Lives Power and Control: Domestic Violence in America Silent Voices Sin by Silence Other films American Tragedy Black and Blue Blinded Bordertown The Burning Bed Our Mother's Murder Enough Looking for Angelina Once Were Warriors One Minute to Nine Provoked Sleeping with the Enemy Submission What's Love Got to Do with It Books Life with Billy Mommie Dearest The War on Women Periodicals Contemporary Family Therapy Family Process Family Relations Journal of Family Issues Journal of Interpersonal Violence Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society Trauma, Violence, & Abuse Violence Against Women Organizations Gulabi Gang ManKind Initiative National Coalition Against Domestic Violence National Domestic Violence Hotline Nia Refuge Respect Legal Battered woman defense Domestic violence court v t e Sexual abuse Forms Bride kidnapping Child Child-on-child Child exploitation Child pornography in primary and secondary schools Child prostitution Child sex tourism Cybersex trafficking Forced prostitution Genital modification and mutilation Money marriage Rape Campus Date Gray Marital Prison By proxy Statutory Of males Raptio Revenge porn Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual bullying Sexual grooming Sexual harassment in education in education in the United States in the military Sexual misconduct Sexual predator Sexual slavery Sexual violence Statistics War Sociological theories Aggression Causes of sexual violence Effects and aftermath of rape Misandry Misogyny Rape culture Rape trauma syndrome Sociobiological theories of rape Victim blaming Laws Laws regarding child sexual abuse Laws regarding rape Sexually violent predator laws Related topics Child sexual abuse accommodation syndrome False allegation of child sexual abuse Law portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qgzq6
Cached time: 20250818021342
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 4.988 seconds
Real time usage: 5.498 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 50530/1000000
Revision size: 316816/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1194696/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 47185/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1871791/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.864/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21812022/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 4604.889      1 -total
 60.59% 2790.137      1 Template:Reflist
 39.29% 1809.153    372 Template:Cite_web
  9.90%  455.877    198 Template:Flag
  8.29%  381.733     53 Template:Cite_book
  5.61%  258.425     33 Template:Fix
  4.88%  224.874     34 Template:Cite_journal
  4.27%  196.842     17 Template:Page_needed
  4.06%  186.831     50 Template:Delink
  2.41%  111.112      1 Template:Rape Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:875547:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818021342 and revision id 1304605688. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marital_rape&oldid=1304605688 " Categories : Marital rape Intimate partner violence Sex crimes Rape by type Hidden categories: CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1: unfit URL CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Source attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2023 Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from July 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2023 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from February 2020 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2018 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marital rape 28 languages Add topic

