Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Characteristics 3 Threats 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Riparian forest 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia ქართული მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Татарча / tatarça Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Forested or wooded area of land adjacent to a body of water This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Riparian forest" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A she-oak riparian forest in Western Sydney See also: Riparian zone A riparian forest or riparian woodland is a forested or wooded area of land adjacent to a body of water such as a river , stream , pond , lake , marshland , estuary , canal , sink , or reservoir . Due to the broad nature of the definition, riparian woodlands have a huge diversity of characteristics including but not limited to soil composition, microclimates, and vegetative structures.

[ 1 ] However, among the varied range and landscapes, one factor stays constant: a high rate of primary productivity . This makes riparian forests hugely important centers of nutrient recycling.

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] Riparian forest in Záhorie Protected Landscape Area in Slovakia The term riparian comes from the Latin word ripa , 'river bank'; technically it refers only to areas adjacent to flowing bodies of water such as rivers, streams, sloughs and estuaries.  However, the terms riparian forest and riparian zone have come to include areas adjacent to non-flowing bodies of water such as ponds, lakes, playas and reservoirs.

Characteristics [ edit ] A riparian forest area along a tributary to Lake Erie Atlantic coastal salt marsh Riparian forests are subject to frequent inundation .

Riparian forests help control sediment , reduce the damaging effects of flooding, and aid in stabilizing stream banks .

Riparian zones are transition zones between an upland terrestrial environment and an aquatic environment.  Organisms found in this zone are adapted to periodic flooding.  Many not only tolerate it, but require it in order to maintain health and complete their lifestyles.

[ 2 ] Invertebrate communities rely on riparian forests due to their unique characteristics. The constant process of flooding and drought allow for insect communities to flourish since alluvial depositions of nutrients [ 1 ] and vital food sources like leaf litter due to their high rate of productivity.

[ 3 ] These aspects of Riparian forests make them hugely important in the life cycles of invertebrates like insects throughout the world.

Decomposers , like the Lepidostoma unicolor , Which can be found in northwestern North America, rely on these external nutritional subsidies for food sources. Many decomposers are in their larval stage when they are in the streams or rivers along riparian forests.

[ 3 ] Threats [ edit ] Threats to riparian forests: Cleared for agricultural use because of the good soil quality Historically, trees used as wood fuel for steamships, steam locomotives, etc.

[ 4 ] Urban development (housing, roads, malls, etc.) Grazing Mining Disrupted hydrology, such as dams and levees, which reduces the amount and/or frequency of flooding Invasive species See also [ edit ] Bosque Gallery forest Management of Pacific Northwest riparian forests Riparian zone Tugay Swamp Oak Forests References [ edit ] ^ a b c Ramey, Tonya L.; Richardson, John S. (2017-09-01).

"Terrestrial Invertebrates in the Riparian Zone: Mechanisms Underlying Their Unique Diversity" .

BioScience .

67 (9): 808– 819.

doi : 10.1093/biosci/bix078 .

ISSN 0006-3568 .

^ Molles, M.C. Jr. (2008).

Ecology: Concepts and Applications (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p.

291 .

ISBN 978-0-07-330976-7 .

^ a b Kominoski, John S.; Larrañaga, Santiago; Richardson, John S. (2012).

"Invertebrate feeding and emergence timing vary among streams along a gradient of riparian forest composition" .

Freshwater Biology .

57 (4): 759– 772.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2427.2012.02740.x .

ISSN 1365-2427 .

^ "A Brief History of Riparian Forests in the Central Valley of California" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-10-09.

External links [ edit ] "Assessing the Need for a Riparian Management System (RiMS)" —Iowa State University Extension Bulletin (2002) Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX This article about environmental habitats is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Riparian_forest&oldid=1291961136 " Categories : Forests Habitats Riparian zone Ecology stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2014 All articles needing additional references All stub articles This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 12:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Riparian forest 28 languages Add topic

