Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Travels 1.3 Vienna and conversion to Catholicism 2 Restauration Toggle Restauration subsection 2.1 Earlier work 2.2 Magnum opus 2.3 Commentary on Haller’s work 3 Reception and influence 4 Works 5 References 6 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Karl Ludwig von Haller 16 languages Alemannisch العربية Dansk Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swiss jurist (1768–1854) Karl Ludwig von Haller Born 1 August 1768 Bern , Bern, Old Swiss Confederacy Died 20 May 1854 ( 1854-05-21 ) (aged 85) Solothurn , Solothurn, Switzerland Nationality Swiss Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Conservatism Notable ideas Patrimonialism, private law theory of the state, critique of Roman law This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Switzerland Principles Agrarianism Capitalism Economic liberalism Federalism Heimat Liberty Limited government Multiculturalism Populism Property rights Republicanism Subsidiarity Swiss neutrality Intellectuals J. Burckhardt T. Burckhardt Gasser von Haller Mohler Ye'or Politicians Blocher Furgler Gnägi Maurer von Moos Schwarzenbach Stauffer Widmer-Schlumpf Parties Christian Democratic People's Party of Switzerland Conservative Democratic Party of Switzerland Evangelical People's Party of Switzerland Federal Democratic Union of Switzerland Freedom Party of Switzerland Geneva Citizens' Movement Party of Farmers, Traders and Independents Republican Movement (Defunct) Swiss People's Party Organisations AUNS Pro Libertate Media Die Weltwoche Neue Zürcher Zeitung Related topics The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy (1860) Culture of Switzerland Eurabia conspiracy theory Islam and Dhimmitude (2001) Dhimmitude Far-right politics in Switzerland Politics of Switzerland Überfremdung Conservatism portal Switzerland portal v t e Karl Ludwig von Haller (1 August 1768 – 20 May 1854) was a Swiss jurist , statesman and political philosopher. He was the author of Restauration der Staatswissenschaft (Restoration of Political Science, 1816–1834), a book which gave its namesake to the Restoration period after the Congress of Vienna , and which Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel strongly criticized in §258 of Elements of the Philosophy of Right .

Von Haller's work, which was burnt during the Wartburg Festival , was a highly systematic defense both of the principles of dynastic legitimacy and monarchy founded on territorial lordship, as well as of pre-modern republics like those of the Swiss city-states, and considered one of the most consistent rejection of modern political ideas of the social contract, public law, and state sovereignty.

Life [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Von Haller was a son of Bern statesman and historian Gottlieb Emanuel von Haller , and grandson of poet and polymath Albrecht von Haller . His lineage descended from Johannes Haller (1487-1531), a Reformed preacher who died alongside Huldrych Zwingli in the Second War of Kappel .

[ 2 ] He did not, however, receive an extensive education, but only some private lessons and a few classes at the Gymnasium . As a child Haller studied at a Greek school under Philipp Albert Stapfer , the latter going on to serve as an official in the Helvetic Republic . At the age of sixteen he entered the chancery of the Republic of Bern as a volunteer. The family moved to Nyon due to his father's promotion as a Landvogt (bailiff).

[ 3 ] He studied by himself and so filled out the gaps in his education. Following the death of his father in 1786, he became the de facto guardian of his estate. He is elected substitute chancellor the next year, and begins attending the lectures of Swiss theologian Johann Samuel Ith . At the age of nineteen, he was appointed to the important office of Kommissionsschreiber , or clerk of a public commission. In this capacity, he obtained an insight into methods of government, practical politics, and criminal procedure. As secretary of the Swiss diet held in Baden and Frauenfeld , he became familiar with the conditions of things in the Swiss Confederation.

[ citation needed ] In 1789 he began investing in a French annuity plan, which he resold two years later due to his ethical opposition to the French government's confiscation of church estates as biens nationaux . Around this time, he read the works of Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès , and found himself drawn to constitutional liberalism .

Travels [ edit ] A journey to Paris in 1790 provided him further acquaintance with new revolutionary ideas, and he was present at the Fête de la Fédération . The same year, he was elected to Bern's Kornkammer, responsible for managing the city's granaries. In 1792, he became a member of the Bernese Economic Society, and publishes his first written work, a report arguing against the export ban on butter.

[ 4 ] As secretary of legation he served several important embassies, for instance, one to Geneva in 1792, about the Swiss troops stationed there; to Ulm in 1795, regarding the import of grain from southern Germany; to Lugano , Milan , and Paris in 1797, regarding the neutral attitude of Switzerland towards the warring powers. These journeys acquainted him with some of the leading personalities of the day, including Napoleon and Talleyrand .

When the Old Swiss Confederacy was threatened [ clarification needed ] he was dispatched to Rastatt to allay the storm. It was too late, however, and by the time he returned in February 1798 the French army was already on Bernese territory. He tried to conciliate the authorities by penning a constitutional proposal, Projekt einer Constitution für die schweizerische Republik Bern , and attempted one last mediation with Gen.

Guillaume Brune on March 1, 1798, but was unable to stay the dissolution of the Old Swiss Confederacy. Bern would fall definitively four days later at the Battle of Grauholz .

Von Haller soon renounced any liberal principles entirely, and became an uncompromising opponent of the Revolution . Thereupon he resigned the government office he had held under the revolutionary authorities and established a paper, the Helvetische Annalen , running for 64 issues from April to November 1798, in which he attacked the excesses and legislative schemes of the Helvetic Republic with such bitter sarcasm that the sheet was suppressed, and he himself had to flee to escape imprisonment. The specific article that led to his being proscribed was Beiträge zum einem revolutionären Gesetzbuch (Contributions to a revolutionary code of law), a political satire. Featuring lines such as “To slander or overturn any authority means patriotism, and to the patriots one should be loyal, but an ‘oligarch,’ or a citizen from a former capital, or an honest magistrate who has done his duty, is not a man, but a wild animal with which one can do what he wants,” the work did not impress the Helvetic authorities.

[ 5 ] Henceforth, von Haller was a reactionary and a divisive figure. The Swiss physiognomist Johann Kaspar Lavater was his most vocal defender in Switzerland during this time, and Haller would pay tribute to him in an essay after Lavater's death.

[ 6 ] Vienna and conversion to Catholicism [ edit ] After many wanderings, he came to Vienna, where he was court secretary of the council of war, from 1801 until 1806. Public opinion at home resulted in his being recalled by the Bernese Government in 1806, and appointed professor of constitutional law at the newly founded higher school of the academy. When the old aristocratic regime was reinstated in 1814, he became a member of the sovereign Grand Council, and soon after also of the privy council of the Bernese Republic, and he abandoned his professorship in 1817. But in 1821, when his return to Catholicism became known, he was dismissed. This change of religion caused great controversy, and the letter he wrote to his family from Paris, explaining his reasons for the step he had taken, went through about fifty editions in a short time, was translated a number of times, and called forth numerous rejoinders and apologies.

[ citation needed ] In this document he made known his long-felt inclination to join the Catholic Church and his growing conviction that he must bring his political opinions in harmony with his religious views. Though he had expressed philo-Catholic sympathies for years, the immediate impetus for his conversion was a correspondence he started with Pierre Tobie Yenni , the bishop of Lausanne, in 1819.

[ 7 ] Haller was soliciting advice on the fourth volume of the Restoration of Political Science dealing with ecclesiastical states, whereupon Yenni began correcting his views on sacramental theology and other doctrinal subjects. After his conversion to Catholicism, his family soon followed him; with them he left Bern permanently and took up residence in Paris in 1822, after his initial requests to Friedrich von Gentz for settling back in Vienna were unsuccessful.

[ 8 ] In 1824 the Foreign Office invited him to assume the instruction of candidates for the diplomatic service in constitutional and international law, filling a vacancy left by Chateaubriand . After the July Revolution of 1830, he went to Solothurn and, from that time until the day of his death, was a contributor to political journals, including the Neue Preussische Zeitung and the Historisch-Politische Blätter . In 1833 he was elected to the Grand Council of Solothurn and exercised an important influence in ecclesiastical affairs which constituted the burning question of the hour, [ clarification needed ] and held this post until 1837. In 1844, he was awarded the Order of St. Sylvester by Pope Gregory XVI .

[ 9 ] Restauration [ edit ] Earlier work [ edit ] In connection with his other work, Haller had propounded and defended his political opinions as early as 1808 in his ‘’Handbuch der allgemeinen Staatenkunde, des darauf begründeten allgemeinen Rechts und der allgemeinen Staatsklugheit nach den Gesetzen der Natur’’. This, considered by some his most important work, impelled Johannes von Müller to offer Haller the chair of constitutional law at the University of Göttingen . In spite of the great honour involved in this offer, he declined it. The Handbuch itself was an extended version of his inaugural lecture Über die Nothwendigkeit einer andern obersten Begründung des allgemeinen Staatsrechtes , published on November 2, 1806 and delivered shortly after his return to Bern. Two other essays would follow in 1807: the Über den wahren Sinn des Naturgesetzes: dass der Mächtigere herrsche , dealing with his doctrine of natural superiority as the basis for political authority; and Über die Domainen und Regalien , covering the jura regalia , sovereign rights of kings deriving from their ownership of the royal domains.

[ 10 ] By that point, Haller’s political doctrine had been fully formed. Haller published three essays in Friedrich Schlegel ’s "Concordia," (1820-1823), and his various writings in journals and periodicals were collected in two volumes and published as Mélanges de droit public et de haute politique (1839).

Magnum opus [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism Variants Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Libertarian Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Balance of power Class collaboration Collective identity Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family as a state model Family values Fundamentalism Gender roles Complementarianism Essentialism Historism Honour Imperialism Law and order Loyalty Maternalism Monarchism Royalism Moral absolutism Natalism Nationalism Nativism Natural law Norms Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organised religion State Orthodoxy Patriarchy Patriarchalism Patriotism Peace through strength Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Czartoryski Coleridge Karamzin Savigny Carlyle Ranke Newman Tocqueville Dostoevsky Taine Le Bon Nordau Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Jabotinsky Ilyin Savarkar Schmitt Eliot Mannheim Jünger Evola Strauss Röpke Gadamer Freyre Voegelin Oakeshott Burnham Lefebvre Qutb Kuehnelt-Leddihn Gómez Dávila Kirk Solzhenitsyn Koselleck Mishima Buckley Sowell Mansfield Scruton Hoppe Dugin Peterson Politicians Adams Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Chiang Salazar De Gaulle Dollfuss Franco Khomeini Reagan Powell Pinochet Marcos Park Smith Reza Shah Suharto Lee Zia Vajpayee Thatcher Kohl Fujimori Trump Bush Kaczyński Netanyahu Modi Putin Erdoğan Abe Sarkozy Bolsonaro Yoon Orbán Milei Meloni Bukele Religion Christian democracy Christian right Confucianism Clericalism Hindutva Islamism Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Theravada Buddhism Traditionalist Catholicism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Personal variants Berlusconism Bukelism Cameronism Chiangism Erdoğanism Francoism Fujimorism Gaullism Janismo Kaczyzm Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Pinochetism Putinism Qutbism Khomeinism Reaganism Sarkozysm Thatcherism Trumpism Ziaism National variants Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Belize Brazil Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Cuba Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Iceland India Iran Israel Italy Japan Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sweden Switzerland South Korea Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Toryism United States Related ideologies Agrarianism Black conservatism In US Conservative feminism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Conservative socialism Corporatism Hispanic conservatism In US LGBTQ conservatism Ordoliberalism Para-fascism Related topics Anti-communism White Terror Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Catholic social teaching Conservative wave NatCon Radical right Europe US Right realism Right-wing politics Alt Authoritarianism Centre Dictatorship Far New Small-c conservative Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Haller's magnum opus , however, was the Restauration der Staats-Wissenschaft oder Theorie des natürlich-geselligen Zustandes, der Chimäre des künstlich-bürgerlichen entgegengesetzt . It was published in Winterthur in six volumes from 1816 to 1834. In this he uncompromisingly rejected the revolutionary conception of the State, and developed a natural and juridical system of government, arguing at the same time that a commonwealth can endure and prosper without being founded on the omnipotence of the state and official bureaucracy. The first volume, which appeared in 1816, contains his history and his rejection of the older political theories, and also sets forth the general principles of his system of government. In the succeeding volumes he shows how these principles apply to different forms of government: in the second to monarchies; in the third (1818) to military powers; in the fourth (1820) and fifth (1834) to ecclesiastical states; and in the sixth (1825) to republics. It was written primarily to counteract Jean-Jacques Rousseau 's The Social Contract . Moreover, Haller's "Digression on Slavery" in the third volume made a deep impact on the Scottish historian Thomas Carlyle and surfaced again in his polemical "Occasional Discourse on the Negro Question".

[ 11 ] The book in its entirety was translated into Italian, part of it into French, and an abridged version into Latin and Spanish. All his later writings are influenced by the ideas here set forth, and oppose vigorously the revolutionary tendencies of the times and the champions of liberalism in Church and State.

Haller's political views were heavily influenced by his long tenure as a Bernese public official, a city-state with dependent territorial possessions that did not officially call itself a "republic" until 1716, and which was governed by a patriciate of 236 families who were eligible for election in the grand council, known as 'regimentsfähigen Geschlechter der Stadt Bern.' Direct taxation, public debt, and military conscription were virtually absent in 18th century Bern.

[ 12 ] Repudiating the abstract juridical conceptions of sovereignty and civil society, Haller based political authority instead on a combination of personal power and acquired rights deriving from possession of property. Unlike most theoreticians who posited the formation of a civil state which partially or completely negated the state of nature, Haller posited an uninterrupted state of nature. In the Handbuch of 1808, he defined the state as "nothing more than a natural sociable relationship between free and servant, which differs from other similar relationships only in the independence of its head." He used the term "sovereignty" interchangeably with "independence" and "perfect freedom," defining it as a perfection or elevation of already existing private social relationships among extended households, one that increased the means for these social bonds to exercise their already existing rights, but which did not inherently confer any new ones. In Haller's theory, the authority exercised by states over their subjects is fundamentally alike to that exercised by a father over his wife and children, each bond being based on the dependence of the weaker on the stronger.

[ 13 ] Depending on whether the source of personal power was in a natural person or fictive person (corporation), the state would either be a monarchy or a republic. In turn, monarchies were subdivided into three principal ways of exercising personal power: from land ownership (patrimonial states), from authority over a retinue of troops (military states), or from doctrinal and teaching authority over disciples and followers (spiritual states, a.k.a. theocracies).

He was strongly critical of the influence of Roman law on European jurisprudence for what he saw as obscuring the social relationships that had emerged following the dissolution of the Roman Empire by falsely analogizing them to ones that properly pertain to republics only. In his own words, the Roman Empire and the code of law it bequeathed was in a "monstrous state of incomplete usurpation, which one could call neither monarchy nor republic, which seemed to derive from both, but no longer rested on any basis; a state of affairs in which the forms and locutions of the republic had been preserved, but where, in fact, there remained only an absolute despotism, founded solely on military power." (vol. I, ch. VII of the Restauration der Staatswissenschaft ).

Commentary on Haller’s work [ edit ] The Swiss historian Béla Kapossy contextualizes Haller's thought by placing it in his Swiss background, and cites his criticism of Roman law as anticipating the field of conceptual history .

[ 14 ] Kapossy quotes Haller on the substance of his critique: Just as the citizens of Rome constituted a community [Gemeinde], a citizenry, a genuine societas civilis: all other forms of human association and relations, too, had to be called societas civilis or civil societies. Soon all forms of states, even principalities had to be called civitates or respublicas (republics, commonwealths), the aggregate of serviceable people was called populum liberum (a free people), individual subjects who amongst themselves did not form any corporation and who were not in any particular way legally bound to one another were now called cives (citizens), the estates, servicemen who were called into council, and vassals were called comitia (popular assemblies) where the majority should carry the vote; princely domains were called patrimonium populi (public or state domains), the treasure of an individual lord became an aerarium publicum, private services owed to powerful and mighty lords were called munera publica (public offices) etc.

The term "patrimonial state" would later make its way into the sociology of Max Weber . Haller also exerted a great influence on modern German jurisprudence and the debates over whether the constitutional form of the Holy Roman Empire could be said to constitute a modern state, as recounted by Austrian medievalist Otto Brunner in his work Land and Lordship (1939).

Reception and influence [ edit ] The publication of Haller's work garnered passionate reactions. Moderate conservatives like members of the German historical school reacted negatively, believing that Haller, instead of defeating the social contract as he claimed, had simply given it a new, cruder form.

[ 15 ] On the other hand, Haller's work made use of diligently by Gerlach and the Prussian government under Frederick William IV .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Works [ edit ] Handbuch der allgemeinen Staaten-Kunde.

Steiner’schen Buchhandlung, Winterthur 1808.

Politische Religion oder biblische Lehre über die Staaten.

Steiner’schen Buchhandlung, Winterthur 1811.

Was sind Unterthanen-Verhältnisse?

, 1814.

Restauration der Staats-Wissenschaft oder Theorie des natürlich-geselligen Zustands der Chimäre des künstlich-bürgerlichen entgegengesezt.

6 Volumes (in two editions), Winterthur 1817–1834.

Ueber die Constitution der spanischen Cortes.

1820.

Lettre de M. Charles-Louis de Haller, membre du conseil souverain de Berne, à sa famille, pour lui déclarer son retour à l'église catholique, apostolique et romaine [ Letter from Mr Charles-Louis de Haller, member of the Sovereign Council of Bern, to his family, declaring his return to the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church .], Paris/Lyon 1821.

Freymaurerey und ihr Einfluss auf die Schweiz.

Hurter, Schaffhausen 1840.

References [ edit ] ^ Bonacina, Giovanni, “Anticipazioni della teoria della Restaurazione secondo Carl Ludwig von Haller,” Rivista Storica Italiana 122 (2010): 500–59.

^ Missionen der Berner Regierung nach Genf (1782), Mailand, Paris und Rastatt (1797—1798). Mittheilungen aus dem Nachlaß des Herrn K. L. von Haller. Berner Taschenbuch. 1868.

^ ”Aufzeichnungen Karl Ludwig von Hallers über seine Jugendjahre 1768-1792.” Berner Zeitschrift für Geschichte und Heimatkunde , vol. 23 (1961).

^ Wyss, Regula; Stuber, Martin (2012). Paternalism and Agricultural Reform. The Economic Society of Bern in the Eighteenth-Century.

^ König, K. G. "Karl Ludwig Von Haller, Zubenannt „der Restaurator“." Kritische Ueberschau Der Deutschen Gesetzgebung Und Rechtswissenschaft 3 (1856): 89-104. Accessed August 29, 2021.

http://www.jstor.org/stable/43125190 .

^ Historischer Verein des Kantons Bern (Herausgeber). Band 41 (1951-1952). Heft 1. Haasbauer, Adolphine.

Briefwechsel zwischen Johann Kaspar Lavater und Karl Ludwig von Haller aus den Jahren 1798 und 1799 .

^ Bischof Yenni und Karl-Ludwig von Haller . Freiburger Geschichtsblätter. Band 55. 1967.

^ Gentz; Haller, Karl Ludwig von. An Karl Ludwig von Haller, Wien, 14. Juni 1821, Archives de l'Etat, Fribourg (Schweiz). Fonds Haller, K 92.2 1821 ^ Historischer Verein des Kantons Solothurn (Herausgeber), Band 27 (1954). Reinhard, Ewald.

Die Résumés der Tagebücher des "Restaurators" Karl Ludwig von Haller.

^ Litterarisches Archiv der Akademie zu Bern, vol. 1 (1806).

^ Hans Fässler : Une Suisse esclavagiste. Voyage dans un pays au-dessus de tout soupçon. (Préface de Doudou Diène) . Duboiris, Paris 2007, pp. 142-145 ^ Altorfer-Ong, Stefan (2007) State-building without taxation: The political economy of government finance in the eighteenth-century republic of Bern. PhD thesis, London School of Economics and Political Science (United Kingdom).

^ Merriam, Charles E. (1900).

History of the Theory of Sovereignty Since Rousseau . Columbia University Press.

^ Kapossy, Béla, « Karl Ludwig von Haller's critique of liberal peace », in Kapossy, Béla et alii (dir.), Commerce and Peace in the Enlightenment, Cambridge : Cambridge University Press, 2017, p. 244-271 ^ a b Liedke, Herbert R. (1958).

"The German Romanticists and Karl Ludwig von Haller's Doctrines of European Restoration" .

The Journal of English and Germanic Philology .

57 (3): 371– 393.

ISSN 0363-6941 .

JSTOR 27707117 .

^ Meinecke, Friedrich; Kimber, Robert B. (1970).

Cosmopolitanism and the National State . Princeton University Press.

JSTOR j.ctt13x1c1v .

Sources [ edit ] Liedke, Herbert R.

The German Romanticists and Carl Ludwig von Hallers Doctrines of European Restoration, in The Journal of English and Germanic Philology (1958) This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Karl Ludwig von Haller ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Further reading [ edit ] Guggisberg, Kurt.

Carl Ludwig von Haller, Frauenfeld/Leipzig, 1938.

Kruska, Alexander.

Die Polemik der Restauration: Metapolemische und ideengeschichtliche Betrachtungen zum Initialband der Restaurationsschrift Karl Ludwig von Hallers.

Bielefeld, 2019. ( transcript-verlag.de PDF).

Neumann, Sigmund.

Die Stufen des Preussischen Konservatismus, Emil Ebering, 1930.

Pfister, Christoph.

Die Publizistik Karl Ludwig von Hallers in der Frühzeit. 1791–1815, Bern: Herbert Lang; Frankfurt/M.: Peter Lang 1975.

Reinhard, Ewald.

Carl Ludwig von Haller – Ein Lebensbild aus der Zeit der Restauration, Köln, 1915.

Rommen, Heinrich Albert.

The State in Catholic Thought, B. Herder Book Co., 1945.

Valjavec, Fritz.

Die Entstehung der Politischen Strömungen in Deutschland, 1770-1815, Verlag für Geschichte und Politik, 1951.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Karl Ludwig von Haller .

Works by or about Karl Ludwig von Haller at the Internet Archive Commentary on vols. 1-4 of Haller's Restoration of Political Science (patrimonial and military states) Commentary on vol. 6 of Haller's Restoration of Political Science (on republics) English-language Haller readings and critical commentary v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6nft2
Cached time: 20250818011225
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.792 seconds
Real time usage: 0.967 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5500/1000000
Revision size: 24117/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 177852/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9613/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 66014/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.474/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23306427/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  728.834      1 -total
 19.32%  140.829      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 14.46%  105.385      1 Template:Reflist
 13.79%  100.498      1 Template:Conservatism_in_Switzerland
 13.60%   99.086      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.19%   96.157      1 Template:Conservatism_sidebar
 11.95%   87.064     11 Template:Lang
 10.85%   79.043      2 Template:Cite_book
  8.54%   62.252      1 Template:Conservatism_navbox
  7.72%   56.297      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3950942:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818011225 and revision id 1306492278. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Karl_Ludwig_von_Haller&oldid=1306492278 " Categories : 1768 births 1854 deaths 18th-century Swiss philosophers 19th-century Roman Catholics 19th-century Swiss male writers 19th-century Swiss philosophers Converts to Roman Catholicism from Calvinism People from Bern Swiss jurists Swiss male non-fiction writers Swiss political philosophers Swiss Roman Catholic writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2021 Articles containing French-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Karl Ludwig von Haller 16 languages Add topic

