Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Production and decoration 3 Chronology 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Protogeometric style 14 languages Беларуская Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français Italiano Magyar Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type or style of Ancient Greek ceramic Proto-Geometric amphora c.

975–950 BCE. Athens, now British Museum .

Proto-Geometric amphora c.

950–900 BCE Part of a series on the History of Greek art Greek Bronze Age Aegean art Cycladic art Minoan art Minoan pottery Mycenaean art Mycenaean pottery Protogeometric art Ancient Greece Geometric art Archaic Greek art Ancient Greek art Ancient Greek architecture Ancient Greek pottery Ancient Greek sculpture Hellenistic art see also: Greco-Buddhist art Medieval Greece Byzantine art Byzantine Iconoclasm Macedonian art Post-Byzantine Greece Cretan school Heptanese school Modern Greece Modern Greek art Modern Greek architecture Munich School Contemporary Greek art v t e The Protogeometric style (or Proto-Geometric ) is a style of Ancient Greek pottery led by Athens and produced, in Attica and Central Greece , between roughly 1025 and 900 BCE, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] during the Greek Dark Ages .

[ 4 ] It was succeeded by the Early Geometric period .

Earlier studies considered the beginning of this style around 1050 BCE.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] History [ edit ] After the collapse of the Mycenaean - Minoan Palace culture and the ensuing Greek Dark Ages, the Protogeometric style emerged around the late 11th century BCE, [ 1 ] as the first expression of a reviving civilization. Following on from the development of a faster potter's wheel, vases of this period are markedly more technically accomplished than earlier Dark Age examples. From Athens the style spread to several other centres.

[ 7 ] Production and decoration [ edit ] The decoration of these pots is restricted to purely abstract elements and very often includes broad horizontal bands about the neck and belly and concentric circles applied with compass and multiple brush. Many other simple motifs can be found, but unlike many pieces in the following Geometric style , typically much of the surface is left plain.

[ 8 ] Like many pieces, the example illustrated includes a colour change in the main band, arising from a firing fault. Both the red and black colour use the same clay, differently levigated and fired. As the Greeks learnt to control this variation, the path to their distinctive three-phase firing technique opened.

Some of the innovations included some new Mycenean influenced shapes, such as the belly-handled amphora , the neck handled amphora, the krater , and the lekythos .

Attic artists redesigned these vessels using the fast wheel to increase the height and therefore the area available for decoration.

Chronology [ edit ] Based on radiocarbon datings and Bayesian models to Lefkandi , Kalapodi and Corinth , Toffolo et al. (2013) placed the Sub-Mycenaean /Protogeometric transition "in the second half of the 11th century, approximately centered on 1025 BCE." [ 9 ] Alex Knodell, in his (2021) book, classifies Protogeometric period in three sub-periods: [ 10 ] Ceramic period Dates BCE Early Protogeometric 1025 [ 1 ] –1000 Middle Protogeometric 1000–950 Late Protogeometric 950–900 See also [ edit ] Mycenaean pottery Archaic period References [ edit ] ^ a b c Van Damme, Trevor, and Lis Bartłomiej, (29 October 2024).

"The origin of the Protogeometric style in northern Greece and its relevance for the absolute chronology of the Early Iron Age" , in: Antiquity, 2024, Vol. 98, No. 401, pp. 1271-1289, Table 1: "Early Protogeometric in Central Greece and Attica, 1025 cal BC." ^ Toffolo, Michael B., et al., (December 26, 2013).

"Towards an Absolute Chronology for the Aegean Iron Age: New Radiocarbon Dates from Lefkandi, Kalapodi and Corinth" , in: PLoS ONE 8(12): e83117.

^ Fantalkin, Alexander, Assaf Kleiman, Hans Mommsen, and Israel Finkelstein, (2020).

"Aegean Pottery in Iron IIA Megiddo: Typological, Archaeometric and Chronological Aspects" , in Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry Vol. 20, No 3, (2020), p. 143 : "...This  would  imply  that  the  preceding  Aegean sequence from Early Protogeometric to the end of Late Protogeometric should cover the last few decades  of  the  11th century BCE  and  the  entire  10th century BCE..." ^ Cook, 30 ^ Miller 2013 , p. 139 :"Around the beginning of the Protogeometric Period [c.1075/50], the future Ionians set out from Athens on a series of migrations to colonize Asia Minor and the islands of the Cyclades".

^ Lemos 2002 , p. 2 :"...the Aegean from the period around 1050/25 to around 900 BC, named after its characteristic 'Protogeometric' pottery style.".

^ Cook, 30-31 ^ Cook, 31 ^ Toffolo, Michael B., et al., (December 26, 2013).

"Towards an Absolute Chronology for the Aegean Iron Age: New Radiocarbon Dates from Lefkandi, Kalapodi and Corinth" , in: PLoS ONE 8(12): e83117.

^ Knodell, Alex, (2021).

Societies in Transition in Early Greece: An Archaeological History , University of California Press, Oakland, Table 1, p. 7.

Sources [ edit ] Cook, R.M.

, Greek Art , Penguin, 1986 (reprint of 1972), ISBN 0140218661 Lemos, Irene S. (2002).

The Protogeometric Aegean, The Archaeology of the Late Eleventh and Tenth Centuries BC . Oxford University Press.

Miller, D. Garry (2013).

Ancient Greek Dialects and Early Authors, Introduction to the Dialect Mixture in Homer, with Notes on Lyric and Herodotus (PDF) . De Gruyter.

Murray, R. L.

The Protogeometric Style: the first Greek style , Gothenburg, Paul Åströms (1975).

Eiteljorg, H., "The fast wheel, the multiple brush compass and Athens as home of the Protogeometric style" American Journal of Archaeology (AJA) 84 (1980) pp. 445–452.

Library resources about Protogeometric style Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Further reading [ edit ] Betancourt, Philip P. 2007.

Introduction to Aegean Art.

Philadelphia: INSTAP Academic Press.

Preziosi, Donald, and Louise A. Hitchcock. 1999.

Aegean Art and Architecture.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

External links [ edit ] Greek Art & Archaeology , (Japanese and English) Introduction to the Ancient World: Greece , University of Texas at Austin v t e Ancient Greek vase painting Techniques Three-phase firing Bilingual White-ground Black-glazed Ware West Slope Ware Black-figure Six's Red-figure Kerch Stylistic periods Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Stylistic  regions Argive Attic Chalkidian ( Pseudo-Chalkidian ) Cycladic Euboean Laconian Thessalian East Greek Ionic Klazomenian Rhodian Samian Wild Goat Caeretan hydria South Italian Lucanian Paestan Campanian Apulian Canosa vases Gnathia vases Sicilian Centuripe ware Boeotian Kabiria Group Etruscan Pontic Group Painters List of Greek vase painters Scholars John Beazley Adolf Furtwangler Special topics Corpus vasorum antiquorum East Greek Bird Bowl Hadra vase Kalos inscription Name vase Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Protogeometric_style&oldid=1289868590 " Categories : 11th century BC in Greece 10th century BC in Greece 11th-century BC works 10th-century BC works Ancient Greek vase-painting styles Mycenaean Greece Iron Age Greek art Greek Dark Ages Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 09:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Protogeometric style 14 languages Add topic

