Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Main works 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Juan de Herrera 35 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Corsu Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish architect (1530–1593) Juan de Herrera Born 1530 Roiz , Valdáliga , Cantabria , Spain Died 15 January 1597 Madrid , Spain Alma mater University of Valladolid Occupation Architect Buildings El Escorial Royal Palace of Aranjuez Valladolid Cathedral Juan de Herrera (1530 – 15 January 1597) was a Spanish architect , mathematician and geometrician .

One of the most outstanding Spanish architects in the 16th century, Herrera represents the peak of the Renaissance in Spain . His sober style reached full development in buildings like the Monastery of San Lorenzo de El Escorial .  The Herrerian style was named after him, and was representative of the architecture of the Spanish Empire of Philip II and his Austrian successors.

Herrera was interested in many branches of knowledge. His Discurso sobre la figura cúbica (Discussion of the Cubic form) tells us about his notable knowledge about geometry and mathematics. He participated in the military campaigns of Charles V in Germany , Flanders and Italy .

Biography [ edit ] Juan de Herrera started his architectural career in 1561 with the Royal Palace of Aranjuez . In 1562 he also made some drawings for the Libro del saber de astronomía ( The Book of Astronomical Knowledge ).

In 1563 he started to work under Juan Bautista de Toledo in the construction of El Escorial . After the death of de Toledo in 1567, Herrera became the director architect of the works, enlarging the plan, building the monumental western façade, the central Basilica and the pavilion of the Patio de los Evangelistas (Court of the Evangelists), and modifying the construction techniques and roofing. Stylistically, he changed the image of the façades and introducing his personal sober style in accordance to the wishes of King Philip. The main keys of his design are the impressive horizontal unified composition and the use of bare granite, omitting the classical orders for large surfaces. This style introduced in the monastery influenced Spanish architecture for over a century, becoming known as the Herrerian style.

The Cathedral of Valladolid and the today Archivo General de Indias building were also designed by Herrera. He was the original designer for the Plaza Mayor in Madrid .

As instructed in his 1584 will, after his death, his sepulchre was transferred from Madrid to the Church of San Juan Bautista in Maliaño , Cantabria .

[ 1 ] Main works [ edit ] Segovia Bridge , in Madrid.

Palacio Real de Aranjuez (1561) El Escorial (1563) Palace of El Quexigal (1563), building since disappeared, built in Robledo de Chavela ( Madrid ) South Façade of the Alcázar de Toledo (1571–1585) Casa Consistorial de Toledo (1575) Puente de Segovia in Madrid (1582–1584) Design of the Lonja de Sevilla , current Archivo de Indias (1583) Valladolid Cathedral (1589) Real Aposento de Torrelodones (1589), building since disappeared, built in Torrelodones .

Puerta de Triana (1588) (demolished). One of the gates of the Walls of Seville .

Gallery [ edit ] El Escorial, by Juan Bautista de Toledo and Juan de Herrera.

Façade of the Monastery of El Escorial Detail of the Court of the Kings, in El Escorial.

Dome of the Basilica of El Escorial Houses in front of the Monastery of El Escorial.

Archivo de Indias , Seville Valladolid Cathedral Model of the project of Herrera for the Cathedral of Valladolid.

Royal Palace of Aranjuez See also [ edit ] Catedral de Valladolid Monasterio de El Escorial Palacio Real de Aranjuez Valdáliga Camargo, Cantabria References [ edit ] ^ Ceán Bermúdez, Juan Agustín (1800).

Diccionario histórico de los más ilustres profesores de la Bellas Artes en España . Vol. IV. Madrid. pp.

87– 93. Archived from the original on 2016-03-09 . Retrieved 2020-08-14 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Juan de Herrera .

‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Catalonia Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav People Trove Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Juan_de_Herrera&oldid=1230142838 " Categories : 1530 births 1593 deaths People from the Western Coast of Cantabria Architects from Cantabria 16th-century Spanish architects 16th-century Spanish mathematicians Scientists from Cantabria Renaissance architects Spanish Roman Catholics Herrerian architecture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 June 2024, at 22:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Juan de Herrera 35 languages Add topic

