Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins and early years 2 Wartime 3 Postwar creative print movement 4 Contemporary Japanese prints 5 Notable sōsaku hanga artists 6 See also 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Sōsaku-hanga 9 languages Català Deutsch Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Português Русский Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Sosaku-hanga ) Japanese art movement Kanae Yamamoto 's "Fisherman" (1904) Sōsaku-hanga ( 創作版画 , "creative prints" ) was an art movement of woodblock printing which was conceived in early 20th-century Japan. It stressed the artist as the sole creator motivated by a desire for self-expression, and advocated principles of art that is "self-drawn" (自画 jiga ), "self-carved" (自刻 jikoku ) and "self-printed" (自摺 jizuri ), as opposed to the parallel shin-hanga ("new prints") movement that maintained the traditional ukiyo-e collaborative system where the artist, carver, printer, and publisher engaged in division of labor.

The birth of the sōsaku-hanga movement was signaled by Kanae Yamamoto 's (1882–1946) small print Fisherman in 1904. Departing from the ukiyo-e collaborative system, Yamamoto made the print solely on his own: drawing, carving, and printing the image. Such principles of "self-drawn", "self-carved" and "self-printed" became the foundation of the movement, which struggled for existence in prewar Japan, and gained its momentum and flourished in postwar Japan as the genuine heir to the ukiyo-e tradition.

In practice, however, the distinction of sosaku-hanga to other movements was somewhat more pragmatic. For example, one of the leading artists, Kōshirō Onchi , commissioned carvers, such as Yamagishi Kazue, and printers, such as his student Sekino Jun'ichirō , to produce his work. The fundamental difference of sōsaku-hanga was that the artist had total artistic control - the artist was the publisher, chose the subject and chose whether to carve or print themselves or to employ specialist carvers or printers.

The 1951 São Paulo Art Biennial witnessed the success of the creative print movement. Both of the Japanese winners, Yamamoto and Kiyoshi Saitō (1907–1997) were printmakers, who outperformed Japanese paintings ( nihonga ), Western-style paintings ( yōga ), sculptures and avant-garde. Other sōsaku-hanga artists such as Kōshirō Onchi (1891–1955), Un'ichi Hiratsuka (1895–1997), Sadao Watanabe (1913–1996) and Maki Haku (1924–2000) are also well known in the West.

Origins and early years [ edit ] The creative print movement was one of the many manifestations of the rise of the individual after decades of modernization . In both artistic and literary circles, there emerged at the turn of the century expressions of the "self". In 1910, Kōtarō Takamura 's (1883–1956) "A Green Sun" encouraged artists' individual expression: "I desire absolute freedom of art. Consequently I recognize the limitless authority of individuality of the artist ... Even if two or three artists should paint a "green sun", I would never criticize them for I myself may see a green sun". In 1912, in "Bunten and the Creative Arts" ( Bunten to Geijutsu ), Natsume Sōseki (1867–1916) states that "art begins with the expression of the self and ends with the expression of the self". These two essays marked the beginning of the intellectual discussion of the "self", which immediately found echo in the art scene. 1910 witnessed the first publication of a monthly magazine called White Birch ( Shirakaba ), the most important magazine shaping the thought of the Taishō period. Aspiring young artists organized its first exhibition in the same year.

Shirakaba also sponsored exhibitions of Western art.

In its formative years, the sōsaku-hanga movement, like many others such as the shin-hanga , futurism and proletarian art movements, struggled to survive, experiment and find a voice in an art scene dominated by those mainstream arts that were well received by the Bunten (Japan Art Academy).

Hanga in general (including shin-hanga ) did not achieve the status of Western oil paintings ( yōga ) in Japan.

Hanga was considered a craft that was inferior to paintings and sculptures .

Ukiyo-e woodblock prints had always been considered as mere reproductions for mass commercial consumption, as opposed to the European view of ukiyo-e as art, during the climax of Japonisme . It was impossible for sōsaku-hanga artists to make a living by just doing creative prints. Many of the later renowned sōsaku-hanga artists, such as Kōshirō Onchi (also known as the father of the creative print movement), were book illustrators and wood carvers. It was not until 1927 that hanga was accepted by the Teiten (the former Bunten). In 1935, extracurricular classes on hanga were finally permitted.

Wartime [ edit ] The wartime years from 1939 to 1945 was a time of metamorphosis for the creative print movement. The First Thursday Society , which was crucial to the postwar revival of Japanese prints, was formed in 1939 through the groups of people who gathered once a month in the house of Kōshirō Onchi in Tokyo to discuss subjects of woodblock prints. First initial members included Gen Yamaguchi (1896–1976) and Sekino Jun'ichirō (1914–1988). American connoisseurs Ernst Hacker , William Hartnett and Oliver Statler also attended and helped revive Western interest in Japanese prints. The First Thursday Collection ( Ichimoku-shū ), a collection of prints by members to circulate among each other, was produced in 1944. The group provided comradeship and a venue for artistic exchange and nourishment during the difficult war years when resources were scarce and censorship severe.

Postwar creative print movement [ edit ] Portrait of Hagiwara Sakutarô (Onchi Kôshirô, 1943) The rebirth of the Japanese print coincided with the rebirth of Japan after World War II . During the islands' occupation , American soldiers and their wives bought and collected Japanese prints as souvenirs. It can be said that Japanese prints became one of the components of postwar economic reconstruction . With the aim of promoting "democratic art", American patronage shifted from the more traditional shin-hanga to the modern-leaning sōsaku-hanga .

Abstract art had been banned by the military government during wartime, but postwar, artists such as Kōshirō Onchi turned completely to abstract art. By 1950 abstraction was the primary mode of the creative print movement, and Japanese prints were perceived as a genuine blending of East and West.  The 1951 São Paulo Art Biennial was Japan’s first postwar submission to an international exhibition. Notable artists such as Shikō Munakata (1903–1975) and Naoko Matsubara (b. 1937) worked in the folk art tradition ( mingei ), and held solo shows in the United States .

Contemporary Japanese prints [ edit ] Contemporary Japanese prints have a rich diversity in subject matter and style.

Tetsuya Noda (b. 1940) employs photography and produces everyday qualities in his prints in the form of photographic diaries. Artists such as Maki Haku (1924–2000) and Shinoda Toko (1913–2021) synthesize calligraphy and abstract expression and produce strikingly beautiful and serene images.

Sadao Watanabe worked in the mingei (folk art) tradition, synthesizing Buddhist figure portrayal and Western Christianity in his unique Biblical prints.

From the 1960s onwards, the line between fine art and commercial media became blurred.

Pop and conceptual artists work with professional technicians, and possibilities for innovation are endless.

Notable sōsaku hanga artists [ edit ] Okiie Hashimoto Azechi Umetarō Eiichi Kotozuka Un'ichi Hiratsuka Itow Takumi Kitaoka Fumio Koizumi Kishio Yasuhide Kobashi Sakuichi Fukazawa Masao Maeda Toshirō Maeda Senpan Maekawa Maki Haku Matsubara Naoko Yoshitoshi Mori Shikō Munakata Hajime Namiki Tetsuya Noda Gihachiro Okuyama Kōshirō Onchi Saitō Kiyoshi Kihei Sasajima Sekino Jun'ichirō Takumi Shinagawa Toko Shinoda Hiroyuki Tajima Tomikichirō Tokuriki Sadao Watanabe Gen Yamaguchi Kanae Yamamoto Hodaka Yoshida Tōshi Yoshida Ansei Uchima Suwa Kanenori Fujimori Shizuo Kiichi Okamoto Tadashige Ono Shiro Kasamatsu See also [ edit ] One Hundred Views of New Tokyo Further reading [ edit ] Ajioka, Chiaki, Kuwahara, Noriko and Nishiyama, Junko.

Hanga: Japanese creative prints . Sydney: Art Gallery of New South Wales, c2000.

ISBN 0-7347-6313-1 Blakemore, Frances.

Who’s Who in Modern Japanese Prints . New York: Weatherhill, 1975.

Fujikake, Shizuya.

Japanese Woodblock Prints . Tokyo: Japan Travel Bureau, 1957.

Jenkins, Donald, and Gilkey, Gordon, and Klemperer, Louise.

Images of a Changing World - Japanese Prints of the Twentieth Century , 1983. Portland Art Museum, Oregon.

Kawakita, Michiaki.

Contemporary Japanese Prints . Tokyo and Palo Alto: Kodansha, 1967.

Keyes, Roger.

Break with the Past: The Japanese Creative Print Movement, 1910-1960 . Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, 1988.

Michener, James.

The Modern Japanese Print: An Appreciation . Rutland & Tokyo: Tuttle, 1968.

Milone, Marco.

La xilografia giapponese moderno-contemporanea , Edizioni Clandestine, 2023, ISBN 88-6596-746-3 Petit G. and Arboleda A. Evolving Techniques in Japanese Woodblock Prints. Tokyo: Kodansha, 1977.

Statler, Oliver.

Modern Japanese Prints: An Art Reborn . Rutland & Tokyo: Tuttle, 1956.

Smith, Lawrence.

Japanese Prints During the Allied Occupation 1945–1952: Onchi Koshiro, Ernst Hacker and the First Thursday Society . Art Media Resources, 2002.

ISBN 0-7567-8527-8 Volk, Alicia.

Made in Japan: The Postwar Creative Print Movement . Milwaukee Art Museum and University of Washington Press, 2005.

ISBN 0-295-98502-X External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sōsaku-hanga .

SŌSAKU-HANGA - 創作版画 - Japanese Twentieth-Century Creative Prints, from The Bowdoin College Museum of Art Sōsaku hanga — Viewing Japanese Prints website by John Fiorillo Suzaka Hanga Museum in Suzaka , Nagano Nihon no Hanga Museum in Amsterdam v t e Ukiyo-e General Glossary of ukiyo-e Woodblock printing in Japan Themes Aka-e Beni-e Bijin-ga Boshi-e Egoyomi Fushiga Hanshita-e Hashira-e Jōge-e Kachō-e Kage-e Kaika-e Kodomo-e Komochi-e Kuchi-e Megane-e Meisho-e Mitate-e Moji-e Monogatari-e Monozukushi-e Musha-e Muzan-e Namazu-e Ogao-e Ōkubi-e Omocha-e Senso-e Shini-e Shita-e Shunga Sumo-e Surimono Uchiwa-e Uki-e Yakusha-e Yūrei-zu Region specific themes Kamigata-e Nagasaki-e Yokohama-e Techniques Aizuri-e Benizuri-e Bokashi Ishizuri-e Kappazuri-e Kirazuri-e Nishiki-e Sumizuri-e Tan-e Urushi-e Schools Kaigetsudō school Katsukawa school Torii school Utagawa school List of Utagawa school members Related traditions E-hon Nikuhitsu-ga Shin-hanga Sōsaku-hanga Tosa-ha v t e Ukiyo-e schools and artists General Ukiyo-e Japanese woodblock printing Glossary of ukiyo-e Schools and artists of 17–19th centuries Asayama school Gigadō Ashiyuki Eishi school Chōbunsai Eishi Chōkōsai Eishō Furuyama school Furuyama Moromasa Harukawa Eizan school Harukawa Eizan Harunobu school Suzuki Harunobu Isoda Koryūsai Shiba Kōkan Hasegawa school Hasegawa Settan Hishikawa school Hishikawa Moronobu Hokusai school Katsushika Hokusai Katsushika Ōi Yanagawa Shigenobu Yanagawa Nobusada Totoya Hokkei Ippitsusai Bunchō school Ippitsusai Bunchō Ishikawa Toyonobu school Ishikawa Toyonobu Kaigetsudō school Kaigetsudō Ando Kaigetsudō Anchi Hasegawa Eishun Matsuno Chikanobu Katsukawa school Katsukawa Shunshō Katsukawa Shun'ei Katsukawa Shunsen Katsukawa Shunchō Katsukawa Shunkō I Kawamata school Kawamata Tsuneyuki Kawamata Tsunemasa Keisai Eisen school Keisai Eisen Kitagawa school Kitagawa Utamaro Tsukimaro Eishōsai Chōki Kitao school Kitao Shigemasa Miyagawa school Miyagawa Chōshun Miyagawa Isshō Miyagawa Shunsui Nishikawa school Nishikawa Sukenobu Nishimura school Nishimura Shigenaga Ishikawa Toyonobu Suzuki Harunobu Okumura school Okumura Masanobu Ōoka school Ōoka Shunboku Osaka school Ryūkōsai Jokei Shunkōsai Hokushū Ashiyuki Yoshida Hanbei Hirosada I Hirosada II Shunbaisai Hokuei Kunimasu Yanagawa Nobusada Shunshi Yoshitaki Ryūkōsai school Ryūkōsai Jokei Urakusai Nagahide Shigenobu school Yanagawa Shigenobu I Shunkōsai Fukushū school Shunshosai Hokucho Gatōken Shunshi Shunbaisai Hokuei Torii school Torii Kiyomoto Torii Kiyonobu I Torii Kiyonobu II Torii Kiyomasu I Torii Kiyomasu II Torii Kiyomitsu I Torii Kiyotsune Torii Kiyohiro Torii Kiyonaga Torii Kotondo Toyohara school Toyohara Kunichika Yōshū Chikanobu Utagawa school Utagawa Toyoharu Utagawa Toyohiro Utagawa Toyokuni I Utagawa Kunimasa Utagawa Kunisada Utagawa Kunisada II Utagawa Kunisada III Utagawa Sadahide Utagawa Kunimasu I Utagawa Toyokuni II Utagawa Kuniyasu Utagawa Kuniyoshi Ryusai Shigeharu Utagawa Yoshitsuya Utagawa Yoshitora Kawanabe Kyōsai Utagawa Yoshiiku Utagawa Yoshitoshi Utagawa Yoshifuji Utagawa Yoshifusa Utagawa Kuniteru I Utagawa Hiroshige Utagawa Hiroshige II Utagawa Hiroshige III Utagawa Hirokage Utagawa Sadafusa Adachi Ginkō List of Utagawa school members Not associated with any school Kanbun Master Sharaku Sawa Sekkyō Toriyama Sekien Ogata Gekkō Sugimura Jihei Kobayashi Eitaku Kobayashi Kiyochika Kikukawa Eizan By region Kamigata-e Nagasaki-e Yokohama-e 20th century artists and movements Shin-hanga Hashiguchi Goyō Itō Shinsui Kiyokata Kaburagi Hasui Kawase Elizabeth Keith Kojima Gyokuhō Natori Shunsen Ohara Koson Ota Masamitsu Shiro Kasamatsu Takahashi Shōtei Torii Kotondo Tsuchiya Koitsu Yamakawa Shūhō Yoshida Hiroshi Sosaku-hanga Azechi Umetarō Eiichi Kotozuka Un'ichi Hiratsuka Itow Takumi Kitaoka Fumio Yasuhide Kobashi Sakuichi Fukazawa Masao Maeda Senpan Maekawa Maki Haku Matsubara Naoko Yoshitoshi Mori Shikō Munakata Tetsuya Noda Gihachiro Okuyama Kōshirō Onchi Kiichi Okamoto Saitō Kiyoshi Sekino Jun'ichirō Toko Shinoda Hiroyuki Tajima Kōkei Tsuruya Sadao Watanabe Kanae Yamamoto Shōzaburō Watanabe Hodaka Yoshida Tōshi Yoshida Suwa Kanenori Fujimori Shizuo Reika Iwami Tadashige Ono Chosei Kawakami Others Kohno Michisei Tadashi Nakayama Fujio Yoshida Related Japanese painting Rinpa school Kanō school Akita ranga Hara school Hasegawa school Kyoto school Nanpin school Nanga Nihonga Shijō school Mochizuki school Yōga Ukiyo-e influenced non-Japanese art Japonisme Japonaiserie (Van Gogh) Impressionism Anglo-Japanese style Post-Impressionism Art Nouveau Ligne claire Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sōsaku-hanga&oldid=1305141882 " Categories : Ukiyo-e genres Schools of Japanese art Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Japanese-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 08:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sōsaku-hanga 9 languages Add topic

