Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description and history 2 Attempted link with the Christian God 3 Portrayal in the Awaba (Lake Macquarie) area 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Baiame 6 languages Deutsch Français 한국어 Magyar Polski Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Creator god and sky father in Australian Aboriginal mythology Wonnarua painting of Baiame, near Milbrodale , (south of Singleton, New South Wales ). Note that his arms extend to the two trees either side.

In Australian Aboriginal mythology , Baiame (or Biame , Biami , Baayami , Baayama or Byamee ) is the creator god and sky father [ 1 ] in the Dreaming of several Aboriginal Australian peoples of south-eastern Australia, such as the Wonnarua , Kamilaroi , Guringay , Eora , Darkinjung , and Wiradjuri peoples.

Description and history [ edit ] Baiame Cave, details Mount Yengo The Baiame story tells how Baiame came down from the sky to the land and created rivers, mountains, and forests in all the lands. He then gave the people their laws of life, traditions, songs, and culture. He also created the first initiation site. This is known as a bora ; a place where boys were initiated into manhood. When he had finished, he returned to the sky and people called him the Sky Hero or All Father or Sky Father .

[ 2 ] He is said to have two wives, Ganhanbili and Birrangulu , [ 3 ] the latter often being identified as an emu , and with whom he has a son Dharramalan . In other stories Dharramalan is said to be brother to Baiame.

[ citation needed ] It was forbidden to mention or talk about the name of Baiame publicly. Women were not allowed to see drawings of Baiame nor approach Baiame sites, which are often male initiation sites (boras).

[ citation needed ] In rock paintings Baiame is often depicted as a human figure with a large head-dress or hairstyle, with lines of footsteps nearby. He is always painted in front view; Dharramalan is drawn in profile. Baiame is often shown with internal decorations such as waistbands, vertical lines running down the body, bands and dots.

[ citation needed ] Attempted link with the Christian God [ edit ] The missionary William Ridley adopted the name of Baiame for the Christian God when translating into Gamilaraay (the language of the Kamilaroi ). It is sometimes suggested that Baiame was a construct of early Christian missionaries, but K Langloh Parker dated belief in Baiame to (at latest) 1830, prior to missionary activity in the region.

[ 4 ] Portrayal in the Awaba (Lake Macquarie) area [ edit ] In the area surrounding Awaba (Lake Macquarie) in New South Wales , Australia, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] he was believed to have created all of the mountains, lakes, rivers and caves in the area. After he  finished creating, he jumped back up to the spirit world from Mount Yengo , which he flattened. Its flat top can still be seen to this day, near Wollombi Valley.

[ 7 ] A cave near Milbrodale contains many Wonnarua Aboriginal paintings, including a large figure of a man who may be Baiame. It is popularly known as the Baiame Cave and is part of a series of rock shelters on an area of 80 hectares. The site is listed on the Register of the National Estate and is considered a sacred site .

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Aboriginal mythology Aboriginal sites of New South Wales References [ edit ] ^ Baglin, Douglass; Mullins, Barbara (1986).

Aboriginal Art of Australia . Marleston, S.A.: Mulavon. p. 11.

^ Popp, T & N; Walker, Bill (1997).

Footprints on Rock . Redfern, N.S.W.: Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council.

ISBN 0-7313-1002-0 .

^ Robert S Fuller et al, The Astronomy of the Kamilaroi People and their Neighbours, 12.

^ Parker, K. Langloh (1905).

"The All Father, Byamee" .

The Euahlayi Tribe : A Study of Aboriginal Life in Australia (1st ed.). London: Archibald Constable and Company. pp.

4– 10.

^ Wright.T- Belongs the Kamilaroi people [ clarification needed ] ^ NSW National Parks.

"Yengo National Park: Learn more" .

NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service . NSW Government . Retrieved 18 December 2019 .

^ "Aboriginal History" .

Wollombi Valley . Wollombi Valley Chamber of Commerce. 2007. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011.

^ Australian Heritage Commission; Bilney, Elizabeth (1981).

The Heritage of Australia . South Melbourne, Vic.: Macmillan. p. 2/211.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Hunter Valley at Wikimedia Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baiame&oldid=1294071879 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal gods Creator gods Sky and weather gods Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from July 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 11:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Baiame 6 languages Add topic

