Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Behaviour 2 Physical oceanography 3 In popular culture 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents East Australian Current 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano Қазақша Lietuvių मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Currents of the Pacific Ocean Thermal profile of the East Australian Current CSIRO NOAA polar orbiting satellites obtain the data generating sea surface temperature images. (Composite 15-day image showing the extension of the Leeuwin Current around Tasmania ) The East Australian Current (EAC) is a warm, southward, western boundary current that is formed from the South Equatorial Current (SEC) crossing the Coral Sea and reaching the eastern coast of Australia . At around 15° S near the Australian coast the SEC divides forming the southward flow of the EAC. It is the largest ocean current close to the shores of Australia.

Behaviour [ edit ] The EAC reaches a maximum velocity at 30° S, where its flow can reach 90 cm/s. As it flows southward it splits from the coast at around 31° to 32° S. By the time it reaches 33° S it begins to undergo a southward meander while another portion of the transport turns back northward in a tight recirculation. At this location the EAC reaches its maximum transport of nearly 35 Sv (35 billion liters per second).

[ 1 ] The majority of the EAC flow that does not recirculate will move eastward into the Tasman Front , crossing the Tasman Sea just north of the cape [ clarification needed ] of New Zealand . The remainder will flow south on the EAC Extension until it reaches the Antarctic Circumpolar Current . The Tasman Front transport is estimated at 13 Sv. The eastward movement of the EAC through the Tasman Front and reattachment to the coastline of New Zealand forms the East Auckland Current.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The EAC also acts to transport tropical marine fauna to habitats in sub-tropical regions along the south east Australian coast. The current also warms up the eastern coastline of the country.

[ 3 ] Physical oceanography [ edit ] Heat flux in the East Australian Current from the equator toward the South Pole The EAC is a surface current driven by winds over the South Pacific. These winds control how the current behaves at different times of year. The EAC starts on the west edge of the South Pacific Gyre where it collects warm, nutrient-poor water. As it skirts along the east coast of Australia, it carries a large amount of warm tropical water from the Equator southward. This contributes to the conditions which allow the Great Barrier Reef to thrive, keeping the east coast around 18 °C year round instead of dropping to 12 °C in the winter.

[ 4 ] The current is very low in nutrients but remains important for the marine ecosystem. The EAC transfers heat from the tropics to the mid-latitude water and atmosphere.

[ 5 ] It does this by producing warm core eddies , which allow the Tasman Sea to have a large biodiversity.

[ 6 ] The most southern tip of the EAC can produce these eddies by wind currents. As instabilities in the current develop due to a westward Tasman Front, the meander pinches off to form eddies once or twice per year.

[ 7 ] The EAC causes upwelling along the coastline.

[ 8 ] The eddies produced cause an increase in vertical mixing within the Tasman Sea. The process of producing, moving, and destroying eddies causes the thermocline layer to mix with the surface layer, bringing some nutrients up to the surface. The EAC and its eddies frequently flow onto the continental shelf and inshore, influencing circulation patterns and increasing mixing. Eddies are not the only way the EAC brings nutrients to the surface. Features along the coast push the current further offshore. If there is a strong northerly wind, it will push the current even further offshore, allowing deep water to rise up the coast, bringing nutrients up to the surface.

The EAC varies seasonally. It tends to be strongest in the summer, with a total flow of around 36.3 Sv. It is its weakest during the winter months, flowing at around 27.4 Sv.

[ 7 ] Over the past 50–60 years the EAC has shifted. The south Tasman Sea has become warmer and saltier from 1944–2002, causing the flow to strengthen and extend southward. This shift in the EAC flow past Tasmania is controlled by the Southern Hemisphere subtropical ocean circulation. This trend is thought to be caused by changes in wind patterns due to ozone depletion over Australia. There is a strong consensus with climate models that this trend will continue to intensify and accelerate over the next 100 years. The current is predicted to increase by more than 20%, due to the increase in South Pacific winds.

[ 8 ] In popular culture [ edit ] In the 2003 Disney / Pixar animated film Finding Nemo , the EAC is portrayed as a superhighway that fish and sea turtles use to travel down the east coast of Australia. The characters Marlin ( Albert Brooks ) and Dory ( Ellen DeGeneres ) join Crush ( Andrew Stanton ), Squirt ( Nicholas Bird ) and a group of baby and adult sea turtles and fish in using the EAC to help them travel to Sydney Harbour to find his son Nemo ( Alexander Gould ). The basic premise of the storyline is actually correct. Every summer, thousands of fish are swept from the Great Barrier Reef to Sydney Harbour and further south; [ 9 ] however, the current is not nearly as rapid as depicted in the film.

See also [ edit ] Ocean current Oceanic gyres Physical oceanography References [ edit ] ^ a b Talley, Lynne.

Descriptive physical oceanography: an introduction (6th ed.). San Diego, CA: Elsevier Inc.

^ Roemmich, D.; Sutton, P. (1998).

"The mean and variability of ocean circulation past northern New Zealand: Determining the representativeness of hydrographic climatologies" .

J. Geophys. Res .

103 (C6): 13041– 13054.

Bibcode : 1998JGR...10313041R .

doi : 10.1029/98jc00583 .

^ Going with the flow: scientists probe changes in the East Australian Current by Peter Hannam from the Sydney Morning Herald. May 15, 2015 ^ "Ocean currents" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . 8 September 2005 . Retrieved 20 April 2017 .

^ Roemmich, D.; Gilson, J.; Davis, R.; Sutton, P.; Wijffels, S.; Riser, S. (1 February 2007). "Decadal Spinup of the South Pacific Subtropical Gyre".

Journal of Physical Oceanography .

37 (2): 162– 173.

Bibcode : 2007JPO....37..162R .

doi : 10.1175/JPO3004.1 .

ISSN 0022-3670 .

S2CID 129242564 .

^ "The East Australian Current" (PDF) .

Griffith University . Gold Coast City Council. 18 April 2017 . Retrieved 25 June 2021 .

^ a b Ridgway, K. R.; Godfrey, J. S. (15 October 1997).

"Seasonal cycle of the East Australian Current" .

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans .

102 (C10): 22921– 22936.

Bibcode : 1997JGR...10222921R .

doi : 10.1029/97JC00227 .

ISSN 2156-2202 .

^ a b Ridgway, Ken (March 2011).

"Marine Climate Change in Australia. The East Australian Current" .

Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in Oceanography . The East Australian Current – Its Eddies and Impacts.

58 (5): 538– 546.

doi : 10.1016/j.dsr2.2010.09.029 . Retrieved 18 April 2017 .

^ Looking For Nemo , 2004-06-03, Catalyst , ABC External links [ edit ] Image of the East Australian Current.

Sea surface temperature and currents, New South Wales. (These Australian Bureau of Meteorology images form a seven-day loop, showing clearly both the sea surface temperatures and the movement of the East Australian Current) v t e Ocean currents and gyres Currents Arctic Ocean East Greenland North Icelandic Norwegian Transpolar Drift Stream Atlantic Ocean Angola Antilles Azores Baffin Island Benguela Brazil Canary Cape Horn Caribbean East Greenland East Iceland Falkland Florida Guinea Gulf Stream Irminger Labrador Lomonosov Loop North Atlantic North Brazil North Equatorial Norwegian Portugal South Atlantic South Equatorial West Greenland West Spitsbergen Indian Ocean Agulhas Agulhas Return East Madagascar Equatorial Counter Indian Monsoon Indonesian Throughflow Leeuwin Madagascar Mozambique North Madagascar Somali South Equatorial West Australian Pacific Ocean Alaska Aleutian California Cromwell Davidson East Australian East Korea Warm Equatorial Counter Humboldt Indonesian Throughflow Kamchatka Kuroshio Mindanao North Equatorial North Korea Cold North Pacific Oyashio South Equatorial Tasman Front Southern Ocean Antarctic Circumpolar Tasman Outflow Gyres Major gyres Indian Ocean Gyre North Atlantic Gyre South Atlantic Gyre North Pacific Gyre South Pacific Gyre Other gyres Beaufort Gyre Ross Gyre Weddell Gyre Related Atmospheric circulation Boundary current Coriolis force Ekman transport Marine debris Marine garbage patches Great Pacific Indian Ocean North Atlantic South Pacific Thermohaline circulation Environment portal Oceans portal Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=East_Australian_Current&oldid=1291868335 " Categories : Geography of Australia Currents of the Pacific Ocean Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 Use Australian English from September 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2021 This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 21:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents East Australian Current 30 languages Add topic

