Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Insulation of cylinders 2 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 2.1 Clothing and natural animal insulation in birds and mammals 2.2 Buildings 2.3 Mechanical systems 2.4 Passive radiative cooling surfaces 2.5 Refrigeration 2.6 Spacecraft 2.7 Automotive 2.8 Aerospace 2.9 Greenhouse 3 Factors influencing performance 4 Calculating requirements 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Thermal insulation 42 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша Latviešu Lombard Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Minimization of heat transfer This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Thermal insulation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mineral wool insulation, 1600 dpi scan Thermal insulation is the reduction of heat transfer (i.e., the transfer of thermal energy between objects of differing temperature) between objects in thermal contact or in range of radiative influence.

[ 1 ] Thermal insulation can be achieved with specially engineered methods or processes, as well as with suitable object shapes and materials.

Heat flow is an inevitable consequence of contact between objects of different temperature . Thermal insulation provides a region of insulation in which thermal conduction is reduced, creating a thermal break or thermal barrier , [ 2 ] or thermal radiation is reflected rather than absorbed by the lower-temperature body.

The insulating capability of a material is measured as the inverse of thermal conductivity (k) . Low thermal conductivity is equivalent to high insulating capability ( resistance value ).

[ 3 ] In thermal engineering , other important properties of insulating materials are product density (ρ) and specific heat capacity (c) .

Definition [ edit ] Main article: Thermal conductivity Thermal conductivity k is measured in watts -per-meter per kelvin (W·m −1 ·K −1 or W/mK). This is because heat transfer , measured as power , has been found to be (approximately) proportional to difference of temperature Δ Δ T {\displaystyle \Delta T} the surface area of thermal contact A {\displaystyle A} the inverse of the thickness of the material d {\displaystyle d} From this, it follows that the power of heat loss P {\displaystyle P} is given by P = k A Δ Δ T d {\displaystyle P={\frac {kA\,\Delta T}{d}}} Thermal conductivity depends on the material and for fluids, its temperature and pressure. For comparison purposes, conductivity under standard conditions (20 °C at 1 atm) is commonly used. For some materials, thermal conductivity may also depend upon the direction of heat transfer.

Further information: List of thermal conductivities The act of insulation is accomplished by encasing an object in material with low thermal conductivity in high thickness. Decreasing the exposed surface area could also lower heat transfer, but this quantity is usually fixed by the geometry of the object to be insulated.

Multi-layer insulation is used where radiative loss dominates, or when the user is restricted in volume and weight of the insulation (e.g.

emergency blanket , radiant barrier ) Insulation of cylinders [ edit ] A ceramic coating on the exhaust system of a car lowers the surface temperature.

For insulated cylinders, a critical radius blanket must be reached. Before the critical radius is reached, any added insulation increases heat transfer.

[ 4 ] The convective thermal resistance is inversely proportional to the surface area and therefore the radius of the cylinder, while the thermal resistance of a cylindrical shell (the insulation layer) depends on the ratio between outside and inside radius, not on the radius itself. If the outside radius of a cylinder is increased by applying insulation, a fixed amount of conductive resistance (equal to 2×π×k×L(Tin-Tout)/ln(Rout/Rin)) is added. However, at the same time, the convective resistance is reduced. This implies that adding insulation below a certain critical radius actually increases the heat transfer. For insulated cylinders, the critical radius is given by the equation [ 5 ] r critical = k h {\displaystyle {r_{\text{critical}}}={k \over h}} This equation shows that the critical radius depends only on the heat transfer coefficient and the thermal conductivity of the insulation. If the radius of the insulated cylinder is smaller than the critical radius for insulation, the addition of any amount of insulation will increase heat transfer.

Applications [ edit ] Clothing and natural animal insulation in birds and mammals [ edit ] Main article: Clothing insulation Gases possess poor thermal conduction properties compared to liquids and solids and thus make good insulation material if they can be trapped. In order to further augment the effectiveness of a gas (such as air), it may be disrupted into small cells, which cannot effectively transfer heat by natural convection . Convection involves a larger bulk flow of gas driven by buoyancy and temperature differences, and it does not work well in small cells where there is little density difference to drive it, and the high surface-to-volume ratios of the small cells retards gas flow in them by means of viscous drag .

In order to accomplish small gas cell formation in man-made thermal insulation, glass and polymer materials can be used to trap air in a foam-like structure. This principle is used industrially in building and piping insulation such as ( glass wool ), cellulose , rock wool , polystyrene foam (styrofoam), urethane foam , vermiculite , perlite , and cork . Trapping air is also the principle in all highly insulating clothing materials such as wool, down feathers and fleece.

The air-trapping property is also the insulation principle employed by homeothermic animals to stay warm, for example down feathers , and insulating hair such as natural sheep's wool . In both cases the primary insulating material is air, and the polymer used for trapping the air is natural keratin protein.

Buildings [ edit ] Main article: Building insulation Common insulation applications in apartment building in Ontario , Canada.

Thermal insulation retrofit works on a department store building in Poland Maintaining acceptable temperatures in buildings (by heating and cooling) uses a large proportion of global energy consumption . Building insulations also commonly use the principle of small trapped air-cells as explained above, e.g. fiberglass (specifically glass wool ), cellulose , rock wool , polystyrene foam, urethane foam , vermiculite , perlite , cork , etc.  For a period of time, asbestos was also used, however, it caused health problems.

Window insulation film can be applied in weatherization applications to reduce incoming thermal radiation in summer and loss in winter.

When well insulated, a building is: energy efficient and cheaper to keep warm in the winter, or cool in the summer.

Energy efficiency will lead to a reduced carbon footprint .

more comfortable because there is uniform temperatures throughout the space. There is less temperature gradient both vertically (between ankle height and head height) and horizontally from exterior walls, ceilings and windows to the interior walls, thus producing a more comfortable occupant environment when outside temperatures are extremely cold or hot.

In industry, energy has to be expended to raise, lower, or maintain the temperature of objects or process fluids.  If these are not insulated, this increases the energy requirements of a process, and therefore the cost and environmental impact.

Mechanical systems [ edit ] Main article: Pipe insulation Insulated hot water supply and return hydronic piping on a gas-fired boiler Thermal insulation applied to exhaust component by means of plasma spraying Space heating and cooling systems distribute heat throughout buildings by means of pipes or ductwork. Insulating these pipes using pipe insulation reduces energy into unoccupied rooms and prevents condensation from occurring on cold and chilled pipework.

Pipe insulation is also used on water supply pipework to help delay pipe freezing for an acceptable length of time.

Mechanical insulation is commonly installed in industrial and commercial facilities.

Passive radiative cooling surfaces [ edit ] Thermal insulation has been found to improve the thermal emittance of passive radiative cooling surfaces by increasing the surface's ability to lower temperatures below ambient under direct solar intensity.

[ 6 ] Different materials may be used for thermal insulation, including polyethylene aerogels that reduce solar absorption and parasitic heat gain which may improve the emitter's performance by over 20%.

[ 6 ] Other aerogels also exhibited strong thermal insulation performance for radiative cooling surfaces, including a silica-alumina nanofibrous aerogel.

[ 7 ] Refrigeration [ edit ] A refrigerator consists of a heat pump and a thermally insulated compartment.

[ 8 ] Spacecraft [ edit ] Thermal insulation on the Huygens probe Cabin insulation of a Boeing 747-8 airliner Launch and re-entry place severe mechanical stresses on spacecraft, so the strength of an insulator is critically important; the failure of insulating tiles on the Space Shuttle Columbia caused the shuttle airframe to overheat and break apart during reentry, killing the astronauts on board. Re-entry through the atmosphere generates very high temperatures due to compression of the air at high speeds. Insulators must meet demanding physical properties beyond their thermal transfer retardant properties. Examples of insulation used on spacecraft include reinforced carbon -carbon composite nose cone and silica fiber tiles of the Space Shuttle . See also Insulative paint .

Automotive [ edit ] Main article: Exhaust Heat Management Internal combustion engines produce a lot of heat during their combustion cycle. This can have a negative effect when it reaches various heat-sensitive components such as sensors, batteries, and starter motors. As a result, thermal insulation is necessary to prevent the heat from the exhaust from reaching these components.

Race cars such as F1, high performance road cars and even most ordinary road cars use thermal insulation to control the temperatures of critical components, principally shielding them from heat radiated from exhaust manifolds and pipes and/or turbochargers. Heat shielding is also often used in road cars to reduce the transmission of engine and exhaust system heat to the interior of the car.

Aerospace [ edit ] Aircraft engines such as turbojets use thermal barriers on components such as the combuster sections/afterburner for heat protection.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Greenhouse [ edit ] Main article: Greenhouse Thermal insulation is integral to greenhouse design, enabling controlled environments for plant growth and energy efficiency. Common insulation techniques include the use of double-layer films and multi-wall polycarbonate panels, which trap air between layers to reduce heat transfer while maintaining sufficient light transmission for photosynthesis. These measures improve energy efficiency and support year-round crop production, significantly reducing heating costs.

Factors influencing performance [ edit ] Insulation performance is influenced by many factors, the most prominent of which include: Thermal conductivity ("k" or "λ" value) Surface emissivity ("ε" value) Insulation thickness Density Specific heat capacity Thermal bridging It is important to note that the factors influencing performance may vary over time as material ages or environmental conditions change.

Calculating requirements [ edit ] Industry standards are often rules of thumb, developed over many years, that offset many conflicting goals: what people will pay for, manufacturing cost, local climate, traditional building practices, and varying standards of comfort. Both heat transfer and layer analysis may be performed in large industrial applications, but in household situations (appliances and building insulation), airtightness is the key in reducing heat transfer due to air leakage (forced or natural convection). Once airtightness is achieved, it has often been sufficient to choose the thickness of the insulating layer based on rules of thumb. Diminishing returns are achieved with each successive doubling of the insulating layer.
It can be shown that for some systems, there is a minimum insulation thickness required for an improvement to be realized.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Thermal mass – Use of thermal energy storage in building design List of thermal conductivities Insulative paint – Type of paint in which can be used to coat a surface to reduce heat transfer Heat trap – Valves or loops of pipe on water heaters Removable insulation blanket – Cover fastened onto a mechanical component Thermal pad Thermal envelope – Concept in architectural and engineering practice Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Down feather Aerogel Winter clothing#Types of thermal insulation References [ edit ] ^ "Turbine insulation blankets" . 15 January 2025.

^ "Thermal Break Technology - IQ Technical" .

IQ Glass Technical . 28 July 2017 . Retrieved 2019-10-16 .

^ Ashley, Jake (26 December 2022).

"Choosing the Correct Insulation for Your Home" .

Homaphy . Archived from the original on 20 January 2025 . Retrieved 29 December 2022 .

^ "17.2 Combined Conduction and Convection" .

web.mit.edu .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 29 April 2018 .

^ Bergman, Lavine, Incropera and DeWitt, Introduction to Heat Transfer (sixth edition), Wiley, 2011.

^ a b Leroy, A.; Bhatia, B.; Kelsall, C.C.; Castillejo-Cuberos, A.M.; Capua H., Di; Zhang, L.; Guzman, A.M.; Wang, E.N. (October 2019).

"High-performance subambient radiative cooling enabled by optically selective and thermally insulating polyethylene aerogel" .

Materials Science .

5 (10): eaat9480.

Bibcode : 2019SciA....5.9480L .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aat9480 .

PMC 6821464 .

PMID 31692957 .

^ Li, Tao; Sun, Haoyang; Yang, Meng; Zhang, Chentao; Lv, Sha; Li, Bin; Chen, Longhao; Sun, Dazhi (2023).

"All-Ceramic, Compressible and Scalable Nanofibrous Aerogels for Subambient Daytime Radiative Cooling" .

Chemical Engineering Journal .

452 : 139518.

Bibcode : 2023ChEnJ.45239518L .

doi : 10.1016/j.cej.2022.139518 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Keep your fridge-freezer clean and ice-free .

BBC . 30 April 2008 ^ "Heat shield for a gas turbine" .

^ "Heat Shielding" .

^ "Thermal acoustic insulation for the aeronautical and spatial market" .

^ Frank P. Incropera; David P. De Witt (1990).

Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer (3rd ed.).

John Wiley & Sons . pp.

100–103 .

ISBN 0-471-51729-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] US DOE publication, Residential Insulation US DOE publication, Energy Efficient Windows US EPA publication on home sealing Archived 2007-01-10 at the Wayback Machine DOE/CE 2002 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thermal insulation .

Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX v t e Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning Fundamental concepts Air changes per hour (ACH) Bake-out Building envelope Convection Dilution Domestic energy consumption Enthalpy Fluid dynamics Gas compressor Heat pump and refrigeration cycle Heat transfer Humidity Infiltration Latent heat Noise control Outgassing Particulates Psychrometrics Sensible heat Stack effect Thermal comfort Thermal destratification Thermal mass Thermodynamics Vapour pressure of water Technology Absorption-compression heat pump Absorption refrigerator Air barrier Air conditioning Antifreeze Automobile air conditioning Autonomous building Building insulation materials Central heating Central solar heating Chilled beam Chilled water Constant air volume (CAV) Coolant Cross ventilation Dedicated outdoor air system (DOAS) Deep water source cooling Demand controlled ventilation (DCV) Displacement ventilation District cooling District heating Electric heating Energy recovery ventilation (ERV) Firestop Forced-air Forced-air gas Free cooling Heat recovery ventilation (HRV) Hybrid heat Hydronics Ice storage air conditioning Kitchen ventilation Mixed-mode ventilation Microgeneration Passive cooling Passive daytime radiative cooling Passive house Passive ventilation Radiant heating and cooling Radiant cooling Radiant heating Radon mitigation Refrigeration Renewable heat Room air distribution Solar air heat Solar combisystem Solar cooling Solar heating Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Underfloor air distribution Underfloor heating Vapor barrier Vapor-compression refrigeration (VCRS) Variable air volume (VAV) Variable refrigerant flow (VRF) Ventilation Water heat recycling Components Air conditioner inverter Air door Air filter Air handler Air ionizer Air-mixing plenum Air purifier Air source heat pump Attic fan Automatic balancing valve Back boiler Barrier pipe Blast damper Boiler Centrifugal fan Ceramic heater Chiller Condensate pump Condenser Condensing boiler Convection heater Compressor Cooling tower Damper Dehumidifier Duct Economizer Electrostatic precipitator Evaporative cooler Evaporator Exhaust hood Expansion tank Fan Fan coil unit Fan filter unit Fan heater Fire damper Fireplace Fireplace insert Freeze stat Flue Freon Fume hood Furnace Gas compressor Gas heater Gasoline heater Grease duct Grille Ground-coupled heat exchanger Ground source heat pump Heat exchanger Heat pipe Heat pump Heating film Heating system HEPA High efficiency glandless circulating pump High-pressure cut-off switch Humidifier Infrared heater Inverter compressor Kerosene heater Louver Mechanical room Oil heater Packaged terminal air conditioner Plenum space Pressurisation ductwork Process duct work Radiator Radiator reflector Recuperator Refrigerant Register Reversing valve Run-around coil Sail switch Scroll compressor Solar chimney Solar-assisted heat pump Space heater Smoke canopy Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Thermal expansion valve Thermal wheel Thermostatic radiator valve Trickle vent Trombe wall TurboSwing Turning vanes Ultra-low particulate air (ULPA) Whole-house fan Windcatcher Wood-burning stove Zone valve Measurement and control Air flow meter Aquastat BACnet Blower door Building automation Carbon dioxide sensor Clean air delivery rate (CADR) Control valve Gas detector Home energy monitor Humidistat HVAC control system Infrared thermometer Intelligent buildings LonWorks Minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) Normal temperature and pressure (NTP) OpenTherm Programmable communicating thermostat Programmable thermostat Psychrometrics Room temperature Smart thermostat Standard temperature and pressure (STP) Thermographic camera Thermostat Thermostatic radiator valve Professions, trades, and services Architectural acoustics Architectural engineering Architectural technologist Building services engineering Building information modeling (BIM) Deep energy retrofit Duct cleaning Duct leakage testing Environmental engineering Hydronic balancing Kitchen exhaust cleaning Mechanical engineering Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Mold growth, assessment, and remediation Refrigerant reclamation Testing, adjusting, balancing Industry organizations AHRI AMCA ASHRAE ASTM International BRE BSRIA CIBSE Institute of Refrigeration IIR LEED SMACNA UMC Health and safety Indoor air quality (IAQ) Passive smoking Sick building syndrome (SBS) Volatile organic compound (VOC) See also ASHRAE Handbook Building science Fireproofing Glossary of HVAC terms Warm Spaces World Refrigeration Day Template:Fire protection Template:Home automation Template:Solar energy .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rhzlw
Cached time: 20250817085227
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.504 seconds
Real time usage: 0.782 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2329/1000000
Revision size: 17748/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 68099/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 915/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 57289/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.327/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21486959/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  611.757      1 -total
 29.07%  177.825      7 Template:Annotated_link
 22.42%  137.184      1 Template:Reflist
 15.87%   97.061      7 Template:Cite_web
 11.03%   67.502      1 Template:Short_description
 10.03%   61.382      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.79%   53.780      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.12%   49.682      1 Template:Ambox
  7.18%   43.907      1 Template:Commons_category
  6.95%   42.516      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:67043:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817085227 and revision id 1302846105. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thermal_insulation&oldid=1302846105 " Categories : Heat transfer Thermal protection Insulators Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2021 All articles needing additional references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 19:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thermal insulation 42 languages Add topic

