Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Archaeological sites 2 Rock art time periods 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Saharan rock art 9 languages Български Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français Nederlands Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area of archaeological study Tassili n'Ajjer Tibesti Ennedi Messak Tadrart Sabu-Jaddi Adrar Plateau Gilf Kebir class=notpageimage| Significant Saharan rock art locations Manda Guéli Cave in the Ennedi Mountains, northeastern Chad Saharan rock art is a significant area of archaeological study focusing on artwork carved or painted on the natural rocks of the central Sahara desert . The rock art dates from numerous periods starting c.

12,000 years ago, and is significant because it shows the culture of ancient African societies.

The paintings and carvings of the Sahara are endangered, and vulnerable rock art on uncovered rock has already disappeared. Organizations, such as the Trust for African Rock Art, [ 1 ] are researching and recording as much information about Saharan rock art as possible, while raising awareness of threats to the art itself.

New discoveries and ongoing research of Sahara 's rock art includes findings of ancient symbols, mysterious figures, and scenes depicting early African society's relationship with animals.

[ 2 ] Archaeological sites [ edit ] Important regions and sites include: Cave of Swimmers and Cave of Beasts caves area, Gilf Kebir area, Egypt Tibesti , Chad : Also known as Tibesti Massif or Tibesti Mountains located in central Sahara, extending from Niger and Libya . The mountains are volcanic and are approximately 300 miles (480 km) long and 175 miles (282 km) wide.

[ 3 ] The rock art that exists in these mountains was created before dramatic climate change in the Saharan Desert caused the inhabitants to move towards the Nile Valley . Large animal engravings and other rock art dates to between 12,000 and 4,000 years ago.

[ 4 ] Ennedi , Chad : Next to the Tibesti Mountain chain is another mountain chain named Ennedi. Much of the rock art in this area is from the Horse Period, and was made in the last 2,000 years.

Pastoral Period art was also shown here.

[ 4 ] The period reflects the changes in societal practices and adaption to the environment.

Messak Settafet , Libya : Abundant rock art is found in this location, near a mountain chain in Libya. Art is made from engraving techniques such as grinding, pecking, and scratching. Outlines of animals are found in blackened sandstone.

[ 5 ] Neolithic cave paintings found in Tassili n'Ajjer (Plateau of the Chasms) region of the Sahara Tadrart Acacus , Libya : Near the sand dune of Murzuk, bordering Tassili n'Ajjer, exists 12,000 year old prehistoric rock art. It appears to reflect much of the same culture as the Tassili n'Ajjer rock art.

[ 6 ] Crying Cows low-relief rock art found in Tassili n'Ajjer , Algeria . It depicts teardrops rolling down the faces of horned cattle.

Tassili n'Ajjer , Algeria : The cave paintings found at Tassili n'Ajjer , north of Tamanrasset , Algeria, and at other locations depict vivid scenes of everyday life in central North Africa between about 10,000 BP and 6,000 BP, in the Later Stone Age . There are over 15,000 individual pieces of artwork in Tassili n'Ajjer . The art includes paintings and engravings into the rock that depicts the culture of Africans up to 12,000 years ago. They were executed by a hunting people in the Capsian period between 5,000 and 3,900 BP who lived in a savanna region teeming with giant buffalo , elephant , rhinoceros , and hippopotamus , animals that no longer exist in the now-desert area.

[ 7 ] Rock art such as the Crying Cows low-relief depicts the Pastoral Period in the Saharas.

The difficult to access Tassili n'Ajjer plateau has the rock art , Crying Cows, depicting teardrops rolling down the faces of horned cattle. They are thought to be dated around 7,000 to 8,000 years ago when the climate wasn’t nearly as dry. This depiction incorporates a local myth that describes a shepard carving the piece after being unable to find drinking water for his herd.

South Oran , Algeria Djelfa , Algeria Ahaggar , Algeria Draa River , Morocco Rock art of Figuig , Morocco Aïr Mountains , Niger Sabu-Jaddi rock art site in Northern Sudan Research techniques Archaeologists , anthropologists , and other researchers have been studying rock art to gain information about African cultures from the past. Many photographs are taken of the art so it can be studied further. Dating the art of the Sahara is made possible through radiometric dating of organic material , including radiocarbon dating . Organic artifacts found at the sites can be dated, as can some residues on the rock art itself.

[ 8 ] Rock art time periods [ edit ] Rock art from the Bubalus time period in Tin Taghirt Large Wild Fauna Period (12,000 BP - 6000 BP): [ 9 ] Saharan hunter-gatherer societies first made rock art. These images included animals that then lived in the area, including hippos, rhinos, elephants, giraffes, bubalus , aurochs , and large antelopes. Many of those animals no longer exist in the Sahara due to changes in climate that have caused the desiccation of the desert over the past several thousand years. Humans are shown hunting with spears and axes . The artwork portrays not only hunting, but the relationship between humans and animals. Most of the artwork can be found in Tassili n'Ajjer , Algeria.

[ 9 ] Kel Essuf Period (9800 BP): [ 10 ] The Kel Essuf rock art tradition of engraving may have developed into the Round Head rock art tradition of painting .

[ 11 ] Round Head Period (9500 BP - 7000 BP): [ 9 ] Hunter-gatherers on the Tassili Plateau painted distinctive human figures with round, featureless heads. Marking a shift in rock art, where human figure become more prominent, possibly reflecting changes in social and ritual practices. The art often portrays activities such as hunting, dancing, or ceremonial rituals.

Pastoral Period (7200 BP - 3000 BP): [ 9 ] One of the most prolific periods for rock art in the Sahara. During this period, humans were depicted with domesticated cattle, showing proof of a livelihood system known as pastoralism . Pictures show cultures herding animals and hunting as well, portrayed through men holding bows . Women and children are in camps where they lived. This style is shown around the Sahara with paintings and engravings . Herders eventually migrated to the west, east, and south as Saharan climates aridified.

[ 9 ] Horse Period (3200 BP - 1000 BP): [ 9 ] Humans are shown with horses during this period. Paintings and few engravings have men on horses with weapons, as well as horse-drawn chariots . The people are also dressed in clothing instead of no clothing at all.

[ 9 ] Camel Period (3000 BP - 2000 BP): [ 9 ] This is the final period of rock art in the Sahara, with images of camels appearing. Cattle and goats are frequently included in Camel Period art as well. Advanced weaponry is depicted, including pictures of men with spears , swords , and shields .

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Rock art Prehistoric art List of Stone Age art Association des Amis de l'Art Rupestre Saharien African humid period References [ edit ] ^ "Trust for African Rock Art (TARA)" .

^ Lenssen-Erz, Tilman (February 2012).

"Adaptation or Aesthetic Alleviation: Which Kind of Evolution Do We See in Saharan Herder Rock Art of Northeast Chad?" .

Cambridge Archaeological Journal .

22 (1): 89– 114.

doi : 10.1017/S0959774312000066 .

ISSN 0959-7743 .

^ "Tibesti | mountains, Africa" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 2016-12-12 .

^ a b "Rock Art of Chad - Trust for African Rock Art" .

Trust for African Rock Art . Retrieved 2016-12-14 .

^ Temehu.com.

"The Rock Engravings of Messak Settafet & Mellet" .

www.temehu.com . Retrieved 2016-12-14 .

^ Temehu.com.

"Tadrart Acacus (Akakus or Akakous)" .

www.temehu.com . Retrieved 2016-12-14 .

^ Coulson, David; Campbell, Alec.

"Rock Art of the Tassili n'Ajjer, Algeria" (PDF) .

AfricanRockArt.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-09-30 . Retrieved 2016-11-02 .

^ "Prehistoric African Paintings and Engravings" .

Trust for African Rock Art . Retrieved 2016-11-02 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Coulson, David; Campbell, Alec.

"Rock Art of the Tassili n'Ajjer, Algeria" (PDF) .

AfricanRockArt.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-09-30 . Retrieved 2016-11-02 .

^ Soukopova, Jitka (2017).

"Central Saharan rock art: Considering the kettles and cupules" .

Journal of Arid Environments .

143 : 10.

Bibcode : 2017JArEn.143...10S .

doi : 10.1016/j.jaridenv.2016.12.011 .

^ Soukopova, Jitka (Jan 16, 2013).

Round Heads: The Earliest Rock Paintings in the Sahara . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 38.

ISBN 9781443845793 .

v t e Saharan rock art Algeria Rock Art of South Oran Rock art of the Djelfa region Marhouma Tassili n'Ajjer Tadrart Rouge la Vache qui pleure Rock art of Iheren and Tahilahi Rock engravings of Oued Djerat Morocco Rock art of Figuig Libya Acacus Mountains Wadi Mathendous Mesak Settafet Uan Muhuggiag Egypt Abu Ballas Gilf Kebir Cave of Beasts Cave of Swimmers Magharet el Kantara Cave of Archers Wadi Hamra Sudan Sabu-Jaddi Wadi Abu Dom Gabal El Uweinat Mauritania Adrar Plateau Agrour Amogjar Amazmaz Chad Ennedi Plateau v t e Prehistoric technology Prehistory Timeline Outline Stone Age Subdivisions New Stone Age Technology history Glossary Tools Farming Neolithic Revolution Founder crops New World crops Ard / plough Celt Digging stick Domestication Goad Irrigation Secondary products Sickle Terracing Food processing ( Paleolithic diet ) Fire Basket Cooking Earth oven Granaries Grinding slab Ground stone Hearth Aşıklı Höyük Qesem cave Manos Metate Mortar and pestle Pottery Quern-stone Storage pits Hunting Arrow Boomerang throwing stick Bow and arrow history Nets Spear spear-thrower baton harpoon Schöningen woomera Projectile points Arrowhead Transverse Bare Island Cascade Clovis Cresswell Cumberland Eden Folsom Lamoka Manis Mastodon Plano Systems Game drive system Buffalo jump Toolmaking Earliest toolmaking Oldowan Acheulean Mousterian Aurignacian Clovis culture Cupstone Fire hardening Gravettian culture Hafting Hand axe Grooves Langdale axe industry Levallois technique Lithic core Lithic reduction analysis debitage flake Lithic technology Magdalenian culture Metallurgy Microblade technology Mining Prepared-core technique Solutrean industry Striking platform Tool stone Uniface Yubetsu technique Other tools Adze Awl bone Axe Bannerstone Blade prismatic Bone tool Bow drill Burin Canoe Oar Pesse canoe Chopper tool Cleaver Denticulate tool Fire plough Fire-saw Hammerstone Knife Microlith Quern-stone Racloir Rope Scraper side Stone tool Tally stick Weapons Wheel illustration Architecture Ceremonial Kiva Pyramid Standing stones megalith row Stonehenge Dwellings Neolithic architecture long house British megalith architecture Nordic megalith architecture Burdei Cave Cliff dwelling Dugout Hut Quiggly hole Jacal Longhouse Mudbrick Mehrgarh Pit-house Pueblitos Pueblo Rock shelter Blombos Cave Abri de la Madeleine Sibudu Cave Roundhouse Stilt house Alp pile dwellings Stone roof Wattle and daub Water management Check dam Cistern Flush toilet Reservoir Well Other architecture Archaeological features Broch Burnt mound fulacht fiadh Causewayed enclosure Tor enclosure Circular enclosure Goseck Cursus Henge Thornborough Megalithic architectural elements Midden Oldest extant buildings Timber circle Timber trackway Sweet Track Arts and culture Material goods Baskets Beadwork Beds Chalcolithic Clothing/textiles timeline Cosmetics Glue Hides shoes Ötzi Jewelry amber use Mirrors Pottery Cardium Cord-marked Grooved ware Jōmon Linear Unstan ware Sewing needle Weaving Wine winery wine press Prehistoric art Art of the Upper Paleolithic Art of the Middle Paleolithic Blombos Cave List of Stone Age art Bird stone Cairn Carved stone balls Cave paintings Cup and ring mark Geoglyph Hill figure Golden hats Guardian stones Gwion Gwion rock paintings painting pigment Megalithic art Petroform Petroglyph Petrosomatoglyph Pictogram Rock art Rock cupule Stone carving Sculpture Statue menhir Stone circle list British Isles and Brittany Venus figurine Prehistoric music Evolutionary musicology music archaeology Alligator drum Paleolithic flute Divje Babe flute Gudi Prehistoric religion Evolutionary origin of religion Paleolithic religion Spiritual drug use Burial Burial mounds Bowl barrow Round barrow Mound Builders culture U.S. sites Chamber tomb Cotswold-Severn Cist Dartmoor kistvaens Clava cairn Court cairn Cremation Dolmen Great dolmen Funeral pyre Gallery grave transepted wedge-shaped Grave goods Jar burial Long barrow unchambered Grønsalen Megalithic tomb Mummy Passage grave Rectangular dolmen Ring cairn Simple dolmen Stone box grave Tor cairn Unchambered long cairn Other cultural Archaeoastronomy sites lunar calendar Behavioral modernity Origin of language Prehistoric counting Prehistoric medicine trepanning Prehistoric warfare Symbols symbolism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saharan_rock_art&oldid=1302914707 " Categories : Saharan rock art 10th millennium BC Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 03:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Saharan rock art 9 languages Add topic

