Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Jus novum and Corpus juris canonici Toggle Jus novum and Corpus juris canonici subsection 2.1 Decretum Gratiani 2.2 Extravagantes 2.3 Decretales Gregorii IX 2.4 Liber Sextus 2.5 Liber Septimus 2.6 Extravagantes Joannis XXII and Extravagantes communes 3 Legal status and structure of codifications 4 Manner of statutory citation 5 Post-Tridentine Revision 6 See also 7 Further reading 8 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 8.1 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Corpus Juris Canonici 17 languages العربية Bosanski Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Catholic text of Canon law This article is about the codifications of canon law. For the Roman law codification of Justinian I, see Corpus Juris Civilis .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Corpus Juris Canonici" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e The Corpus Juris Canonici ( lit.

' Body of Canon Law ' ) is a collection of significant sources of the Canon law of the Catholic Church that was applicable to the Latin Church . It was replaced by the 1917 Code of Canon Law which went into effect in 1918. The 1917 Code was later replaced by the 1983 Code of Canon Law , the codification of canon law currently in effect for the Latin Church.

The Corpus Juris Canonici was used in canonical courts of the Catholic Church such as those in each diocese and in the courts of appeal at the Roman Curia such as the Roman Rota .

Definitions [ edit ] The term Corpus Juris Canonici was used to denote the system of canonical law beginning in the thirteenth century.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term corpus (Latin for 'body') here denotes a collection of documents; corpus juris , a collection of laws, especially if they are placed in systematic order. It may signify also an official and complete collection of a legislation made by the legislative power, comprising all the laws which are in force in a country or society. The term, although it never received legal sanction in either Roman or canon law, being merely academic phraseology, is used in the above sense when the Corpus Juris Civilis of the Christian Roman emperors is meant.

The expression corpus juris may also mean, not the collection of laws itself, but the legislation of a society considered as a whole. Hence Pope Benedict XIV could rightly say that the collection of his Bulls formed part of the corpus juris.

[ 3 ] One best explains the signification of the term corpus juris canonici by showing the successive meanings which were usually assigned to it in the past and at the present day.

Under the name of "corpus canonum" ('body of canons ') were designated the collection of Dionysius Exiguus and the Collectio Anselmo dedicata (see below). The Decretum of Gratian is already called Corpus juris canonici by a glossator of the 12th century, and Innocent IV calls by this name the Decretales or Decretals of Gregory IX .

[ 4 ] Since the second half of the 13th century, Corpus juris canonici in contradistinction to the Roman Corpus Juris Civilis of Justinian I , generally denoted the following collections: the "Decretals" of Gregory IX ; those of Boniface VIII (Sixth Book of the Decretals); those of Clement V (Clementinæ) i. e. the collections which at that time, with the Decretum of Gratian, were taught and explained at the universities.
At the present day, under the above title are commonly understood these three collections with the addition of the Decretum of Gratian, the Extravagantes (laws 'circulating outside' the standard sources) of John XXII, and the Extravagantes Communes .

Thus understood, the term dates back to the 16th century and was officially sanctioned by Gregory XIII .

[ 5 ] The earliest editions of these texts printed under the now usual title of Corpus juris canonici , date from the end of the 16th century (Frankfort, 8vo, 1586; Paris, fol., 1587).

In the strict sense of the word the Church does not possess a corpus juris clausum ('closed body of law'), i. e. a collection of laws to which new ones cannot be added. The Council of Basle (Sess. XXIII, ch. vi) and the decree of the Congregation " Super statu regularium " (25 January 1848) do not speak of a corpus clausum ; the first refers to " reservationibus in corpore juris expresse clausis ": reservations of ecclesiastical benefices contained in the Corpus juris , especially in the Liber sextus of Boniface VIII, to the exclusion of those held in the Extravagantes described below, and at that time not comprised in the Corpus juris canonici ; the second speaks of " cuilibet privilegio, licet in corpore juris clauso et confirmato ", i. e. of privileges not only granted by the Holy See but also inserted in the official collections of canon law.

Jus novum and Corpus juris canonici [ edit ] Decretum Gratiani [ edit ] Main article: Decretum Gratiani It was about 1150 that Gratian, professor of theology at the University of Bologna and sometimes believed to have been a Camaldolese monk, composed the work entitled by himself Concordia discordantium canonum , but called by others Nova collectio , Decreta , Corpus juris canonici , also Decretum Gratiani , the latter being now the commonly accepted name.

[ 2 ] He did this to obviate the difficulties which beset the study of practical, external theology ( theologia practica externa ), i. e. the study of canon law. In spite of its great reputation and wide diffusion, the Decretum has never been recognized by the Church as an official collection.

[ 6 ] Extravagantes [ edit ] Main article: Extravagantes The general laws of a later date than the "Decree" of Gratian have been called "Extravagantes", i. e. laws not contained in Gratian's Decretum ( Vagantes extra Decretum ). These were soon brought together in new collections, five of which (Quinque compilationes antiquæ) possessed a special authority. Two of them, namely the third and the fifth, are the most ancient official compilations of the Roman Church (see Papal Decretals ). Among other compilations at the end of the twelfth and the beginning of the 13th century the following deserve special attention: "Appendix concilii Lateranensis III"; the collections known as "Bambergensis" (Bamberg), "Lipsiensis" (Leipzig), "Casselana" (Cassel) "Halensis" (Halle), and "Lucensis" (Lucca), so named from the libraries in which the manuscripts of these collections were found; the collection of the Italian Benedictine Rainerus Pomposianus, that of the English canonist Gilbert (Collectio Gilberti), that of his countryman Alanus, professor at Bologna (Collectio Alani) and that of the Spaniard Bernard of Compostella . But soon the new era of official collections began to dawn.

Decretales Gregorii IX [ edit ] Main article: Decretals of Gregory IX In 1230 Gregory IX ordered Raymond of Penyafort to make a new collection, which is called the "Decretals of Gregory IX" ( Decretales Gregorii IX ). To this collection he gave force of law by the Bull "Rex pacificus", 5 September 1234. This collection is also known to canonists as the "Liber extra", i. e. extra Decretum Gratiani.

[ 2 ] [ 6 ] Liber Sextus [ edit ] Boniface VIII published a similar code on 3 March 1298, called the "Sixth Book of the Decretals" ( Liber Sextus ), including the Regulæ Juris .

[ 7 ] Liber Septimus [ edit ] John XXII added to it the last official collection of Canon law, the " Liber Septimus Decretalium", better known under the title of "Constitutiones Clementis V", or simply "Clementinæ" (Quoniam nulla, 25 October 1317).

[ 2 ] Extravagantes Joannis XXII and Extravagantes communes [ edit ] Later on the canonists added to the manuscripts of the "Decretals" the most important constitutions of succeeding popes. These were soon known and quoted as "Extravagantes", i. e. twenty constitutions of John XXII himself, and those of other popes to 1484. In the Paris edition of the canonical collections (1499–1505) Jean Chappuis drew them up in the form since then universally accepted, and kept for the first the name "Extravagantes Joannis XXII", and called the others, "Extravagantes communes", i. e. commonly met with in the manuscripts of the "Decretals" (see Papal Decretals).

Legal status and structure of codifications [ edit ] The "Corpus Juris Canonici" was now complete, but it contained collections of widely different juridical value. Considered as collections, the "Decree" of Gratian, the "Extravagantes Joannis XXII" and the "Extravagantes communes" never had a legal value, but the documents which they contain often do possess very great authority. Moreover, custom has even given to several apocryphal canons of the "Decree" of Gratian the force of law. The other collections are official, and consist of legislative decisions still binding, unless abrogated by subsequent legislation.

The collections of Gregory IX (Libri quinque Decretalium) and of Boniface VIII (Liber Sextus) are moreover exclusive. The former, indeed, abrogated all the laws contained in the aforesaid compilations subsequent to the "Decree" of Gratian. Several authors however maintained, but wrongly, that it abrogated also all the ancient laws which had not been incorporated in Gratian. The second abrogated all the laws passed at a later date than the "Decretals" of Gregory IX and not included in itself. Each of these three collections is considered as one collection (collectio una), i. e. one of which all the decisions have the same value, even if they appear to contain antinomies. In cases of contradiction, the decisions of the collections of later date invalidate those found in a collection of an earlier date.

The "Decretals" of Gregory IX, those of Boniface VIII and the "Clementinæ' are divided uniformly into five books ( liber ), the books into titles ( titulus ), the titles into chapters ( caput ), and treat successively of jurisdiction ( judex ), procedure (judicium), the clergy ( clerus ), marriage ( connubium ), and delinquencies ( crimen ). The rubrics, i. e. the summaries of the various titles, have the force of law, if they contain a complete meaning; on the other hand, the summaries of the chapters have not this juridical value.

Manner of statutory citation [ edit ] It is customary to quote these collections by indicating the number of the chapter, the title of the collection, the heading of the title, the number of the book and the title. The "Decretals" of Gregory IX are indicated by the letter "X", i. e. extra Decretum Gratiani; the "Sixth Book" or "Decretals" of Boniface VIII by "in VIº" i. e. "in Sexto"; the "Clementines" by "in Clem.", i. e. "in Clementinis". For instance: "c. 2, X, De pactis, I, 35", refers to the second chapter of the "Decretals" of Gregory IX, first book, title 35; "c. 2, in VIº, De hæreticis, V, 2", refers to the second chapter of the "Decretals" of Boniface VIII, fifth book, title. 2; "c. 2, in Clem., De testibus, II, 8", refers to the second chapter of the "Clementines", second book, title 8. If there is only one chapter in a title, or if the last chapter is quoted, these passages are indicated by "c. unic.", and "c. ult.", i. e. "caput. unicum" and "caput ultimum". Sometimes also the indication of the number of the chapters is replaced by the first words of the chapter, as for instance: c. Odoardus. In such cases the number of the chapter may be found in the index-tables printed in all the editions.

[ 8 ] The "Extravagantes Communes" are divided and quoted in the same manner as the "Decretals", and the collection is indicated by the abbreviation: "Extrav. Commun." For instance: "c. 1 (or unicum, or Ambitiosæ), Extrav. Commun., De rebus Ecclesiæ non alienandis, III, 4", refers to the first chapter (the only chapter) in book III, title 4 of the "Extravagantes Communes". This collection omits the usual "Liber IV" which treats of marriage. The "Extravagantes of John XXII" are divided only into titles and chapters. They are indicated by the abbreviation, "Extrav. Joan. XXII". For instance: "c. 2, Extrav. Joan. XXII, De verborum significatione XIV" refers to the second chapter of the fourteenth title of this collection.

[ 9 ] Very soon after the invention of printing editions of the "Corpus Juris", with or without the gloss (comments of canonists) were published. The Paris edition (1499–1505) of the two collections of "Extravagantes" includes the gloss. The last edition with the gloss is that of Lyons (1671).

Post-Tridentine Revision [ edit ] Though the Council of Trent (1545–63) did not order a revision of the text of the canonical collections, St. Pius V appointed in 1566 a commission to prepare a new edition of the "Corpus Juris Canonici". This commission devoted itself especially to the correction of the text of the "Decree" of Gratian and of its gloss.

Gregory XIII decreed that no change was to be made in the revised text.

[ 10 ] This edition of the "Corpus" appeared at Rome in 1582, in ædibus populi Romani , and serves as exemplar for all subsequent editions. The best-known, previous to the 19th century, are those of the brothers Pithou (Paris, 1687), Freiesleben (Prague, 1728) and the Protestant canonist Böhmer (Halle-Magdeburg, 1747). The text of the latter edition differs from that of the Roman edition of 1582, and does not therefore possess practical utility. The edition of Richter (Leipzig, 1833–39) avoids this defect and is valuable for its critical notes. The edition of Friedberg (Leipzig, 1879–81) does not reproduce the text of the Roman edition for the "Decree" of Gratian, but gives the Roman text of the other collections. it is the best and most critical edition.

See also [ edit ] Byzantine law Code of Hammurabi International Roman Law Moot Court List of Roman laws Twelve Tables Further reading [ edit ] Reichel, Oswald J. (1896).

A complete manual of canon law . Catholic standard library. Vol. 1. London: Hodges.

OCLC 869655 .

Smith, Sebastian B. (1895) [1877].

Elements of ecclesiastical law . Vol. 1 (9th ed.). New York [u.a.]: Benziger brothers.

OCLC 6319850 .

Smith, Sebastian B. (1882) [1882].

Elements of ecclesiastical law . Vol. 2 (1st ed.). New York [u.a.]: Benziger brothers.

OCLC 847944562 .

Smith, Sebastian B. (c. 1890) [1888].

Elements of ecclesiastical law . Vol. 3 (3rd ed.). New York [u.a.]: Benziger brothers.

OCLC 6319850 .

Taunton, Ethelred L.

(1906). "The law of the church; a cyclopaedia of canon law for English-speaking countries, by Ethelred Taunton".

The Law of the Church: a cyclopedia of canon law for English-speaking countries . London: K. Paul, Trench, Trübner.

hdl : 2027/uc2.ark:/13960/t7wm1671g .

OCLC 681107790 .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Berman, Harold Joseph (1983).

Law and revolution: the formation of the Western legal tradition . Cambridge (Mass.), London: Harvard University Press. p. 253.

ISBN 0-674-51776-8 .

^ a b c d Rhode, Ulrich (2015).

Kirchenrecht [ Canon Law ] (in German) (1st ed.). Stuttgart: Kohlhammer. p. 24.

ISBN 978-3-17-026226-3 .

^ Jam fere sextus, 1746 ^ Ad expediendos, 9 September 1253 ^ Cum pro munere, 1 July 1580 ^ a b Wall, Heinrich de; Muckel, Stefan (2022).

Kirchenrecht: ein Studienbuch [ Canon Law: a textbook ] (in German) (6th ed.). München: C.H. Beck. p. 18.

ISBN 978-3-406-77639-7 .

^ Link, Christoph (2017).

Kirchliche Rechtsgeschichte [ The History of Canon Law ] (in German) (3rd ed.). München: C.H. Beck. p. 45.

ISBN 978-3-406-68194-3 .

^ Lee, Guy Carleton (1900).

Historical Jurisprudence: An Introduction to the Systematic Study of the Development of Law . New York: The Macmillan Company. p. 335.

^ Lee, Guy Carleton (1900).

Historical Jurisprudence: An Introduction to the Systematic Study of the Development of Law . New York: The Macmillan Company. p. 336.

^ "Cum pro munere", 1 July 1580; "Emendationem", 2 June 1582 Bibliography [ edit ] Berman, Harold J.

Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition (Cambridge, Mass. Harvard University Press, 1983) ISBN 0-674-51776-8 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Corpus Juris Canonici ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] Text of the 1582 Corpus Iuris Canonici (searchable) Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Corpus Juris Canonici" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Catalonia Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐bkkqt
Cached time: 20250814232224
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.607 seconds
Real time usage: 0.794 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1883/1000000
Revision size: 17410/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104813/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1179/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 57994/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.420/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26047070/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  646.485      1 -total
 19.84%  128.249     10 Template:Cite_book
 16.98%  109.745      1 Template:Canon_law
 16.38%  105.905      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.77%  101.951      3 Template:Lang
 11.45%   74.034      1 Template:Short_description
 10.27%   66.413      1 Template:Authority_control
  9.03%   58.360      1 Template:Refimprove
  8.12%   52.473      1 Template:Ambox
  7.67%   49.554      1 Template:Reflist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6518257:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814232224 and revision id 1300676381. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Corpus_Juris_Canonici&oldid=1300676381 " Categories : Canon law codifications Latin religious words and phrases Texts in Latin 1230s in law 12th century in law 1230s books 1234 in Europe 13th-century Catholicism 13th-century books in Latin Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia without Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 19:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Corpus Juris Canonici 17 languages Add topic

