Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Political career Toggle Political career subsection 2.1 In the Second Republic 2.2 Opposition to Louis Napoleon 3 Travels Toggle Travels subsection 3.1 North America 3.2 England and Ireland 3.3 Algeria 4 Death 5 Democracy in America Toggle Democracy in America subsection 5.1 On civil and political society and the individual 5.2 On democracy and new forms of tyranny 5.3 On the American social contract 5.4 On majority rule and mediocrity 5.5 On enslavement, black people, and indigenous communities 5.6 On policies of assimilation 5.7 On the United States and Russia as future global powers 5.8 On civil jury service 6 Views on Algeria Toggle Views on Algeria subsection 6.1 1837 letters on Algeria 6.2 1841 discourse on the conquest of Algeria 6.3 Opposition to the invasion of Kabylia 6.4 1847 "Report on Algeria" 7 The Old Regime and the Revolution 8 References in popular literature 9 Works 10 See also Toggle See also subsection 10.1 General 11 Notes 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Alexis de Tocqueville 76 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Eʋegbe فارسی Français Gàidhlig Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French diplomat, political philosopher and historian (1805–1859) "Tocqueville" redirects here. For other uses, see Tocqueville (disambiguation) .

Alexis de Tocqueville 1850 portrait by Théodore Chassériau Minister of Foreign Affairs In office 2 June 1849 – 30 October 1849 Prime Minister Odilon Barrot Preceded by Édouard Drouyn de Lhuys Succeeded by Alphonse de Rayneval President of the General Council of Manche In office 27 August 1849 – 29 April 1852 Preceded by Léonor-Joseph Havin Succeeded by Urbain Le Verrier Member of the National Assembly for Manche In office 25 April 1848 – 3 December 1851 Preceded by Léonor-Joseph Havin Succeeded by Hervé de Kergorlay Constituency Sainte-Mère-Église Member of the Chamber of Deputies for Manche In office 7 March 1839 – 23 April 1848 Preceded by Jules Polydore Le Marois Succeeded by Gabriel-Joseph Laumondais Constituency Valognes Personal details Born Alexis Charles Henri Clérel de Tocqueville ( 1805-07-29 ) 29 July 1805 Paris , France Died 16 April 1859 (1859-04-16) (aged 53) Cannes , France Resting place Tocqueville, Manche Political party Movement Party [ 1 ] [ 2 ] (1839–1848) Party of Order (1848–1851) Spouse Mary Mottley ​ ( m.

1835) ​ Alma mater University of Paris Profession Historian , magistrate , jurist Signature Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Liberalism [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Liberal conservatism [ 6 ] Main interests History , political philosophy , sociology Notable works Democracy in America (1835) The Old Regime and the Revolution (1856) Notable ideas Voluntary association , mutual liberty , soft despotism , soft tyranny , Tocqueville effect Alexis Charles Henri Clérel, comte de Tocqueville [ a ] (29 July 1805 – 16 April 1859), [ 7 ] was a French diplomat, political philosopher and historian. He is best known for his works Democracy in America (appearing in two volumes, 1835 and 1840) and The Old Regime and the Revolution (1856). In both, he analyzed the living standards and social conditions of individuals as well as their relationship to the market and state in Western societies.

Democracy in America was published after Tocqueville's travels in the United States and is today considered an early work of sociology and political science .

Tocqueville was active in French politics, first under the July Monarchy (1830–1848) and then during the Second Republic (1849–1851) which succeeded the February 1848 Revolution . He retired from political life after Louis Napoléon Bonaparte 's 2 December 1851 coup and thereafter began work on The Old Regime and the Revolution .

[ 8 ] Tocqueville argued the importance of the French Revolution was to continue the process of modernizing and centralizing the French state which had begun under King Louis XIV . He believed the failure of the Revolution came from the inexperience of the deputies who were too wedded to abstract Enlightenment ideals.

Tocqueville was a classical liberal who advocated parliamentary government and was sceptical of the extremes of majoritarianism .

[ 8 ] During his time in parliament, he was first a member of the centre-left before moving to the centre-right , [ 9 ] and the complex and restless nature of his liberalism has led to contrasting interpretations and admirers across the political spectrum.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 10 ] For example, Democracy in America was interpreted differently across national contexts. In France and the United States, Tocqueville's work was seen as liberal, whereas both progressives and conservatives in the British Isles interpreted his work as supporting their own positions.

[ 11 ] Early life [ edit ] Tocqueville came from an old aristocratic Norman family, the great-grandson of the statesman Malesherbes , who was guillotined in 1793. He was the third son of Hervé Louis François Jean Bonaventure Clérel, Count of Tocqueville, an officer of the Constitutional Guard of King Louis XVI , and Louise Madeleine Le Peletier de Rosanbo who, themselves, might have faced the guillotine but for the fall in 1794 of Maximilien Robespierre .

[ 12 ] Under the Bourbon Restoration , Tocqueville's father became a noble peer and prefect .

[ 12 ] Tocqueville attended the Lycée Fabert in Metz .

[ 13 ] Political career [ edit ] The Fabert School in Metz , where Tocqueville was a student between 1817 and 1823 Tocqueville, who despised the July Monarchy (1830–1848), began his political career in 1839. From 1839 to 1851, he served as member of the lower house of parliament for the Manche department ( Valognes ). He sat on the centre-left , [ 14 ] [ 15 ] defended abolitionist views and upheld free trade while supporting the colonisation of Algeria carried on by Louis-Philippe I 's regime. In 1842, he was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society .

[ 16 ] In 1847, Tocqueville sought to found a Young Left ( Jeune Gauche ) party which would advocate wage increases, a progressive tax , [ 17 ] and other labor concerns in order to undermine the appeal of the socialists.

[ 18 ] In the Second Republic [ edit ] After the fall of the July Monarchy in the Revolution of 1848 , Tocqueville was elected a member of the Constituent Assembly of 1848 , where he became a member of the commission charged with the drafting of the new Constitution of the Second Republic (1848–1851). He defended bicameralism and the election of the President of the Republic by universal suffrage . As the countryside was thought to be more conservative than the labouring population of Paris, he conceived of universal suffrage as a means to counteract the revolutionary spirit of Paris.

During the Second Republic, Tocqueville sided with the Party of Order against the socialists. A few days after the February 1848 insurrection, he anticipated that a violent clash between the Parisian workers' population led by socialists agitating in favour of a "Democratic and Social Republic" and the conservatives, which included the aristocracy and the rural population, would be inescapable. Indeed, these social tensions eventually exploded in the June Days Uprising of 1848.

[ 19 ] Led by General Cavaignac , the suppression of the uprising was supported by Tocqueville, who advocated the "regularization" of the state of siege declared by Cavaignac and other measures promoting suspension of the constitutional order.

[ 19 ] Between May and September, Tocqueville participated in the Constitutional Commission which wrote the new Constitution. His proposals, such as his amendment about the President and his reelection, reflected lessons he drew from his North American experience.

[ 20 ] Tocqueville at the 1851 "Commission de la révision de la Constitution à l'Assemblée nationale" A supporter of Cavaignac and of the Party of Order, Tocqueville accepted an invitation to enter Odilon Barrot 's government as Minister of Foreign Affairs from 3 June to 31 October 1849. During the troubled days of June 1849, he pleaded with Interior Minister Jules Armand Dufaure for the reestablishment of the state of siege in the capital and approved the arrest of demonstrators. Tocqueville, who since February 1848 had supported laws restricting political freedoms, approved the two laws voted immediately after the June 1849 days which restricted the liberty of clubs and freedom of the press .

[ 21 ] This active support in favour of laws restricting political freedoms stands in contrast of his defence of freedoms in Democracy in America . According to Tocqueville, he favoured order as "the sine qua non for the conduct of serious politics. He [hoped] to bring the kind of stability to French political life that would permit the steady growth of liberty unimpeded by the regular rumblings of the earthquakes of revolutionary change″.

[ 21 ] Opposition to Louis Napoleon [ edit ] Tocqueville had supported Cavaignac against Louis Napoléon Bonaparte for the presidential election of 1848. Opposed to Louis Napoléon Bonaparte's 2 December 1851 coup which followed his election, Tocqueville was among the deputies who gathered at the 10th arrondissement of Paris in an attempt to resist the coup and have Napoleon III judged for "high treason" as he had violated the constitutional limit on terms of office. Detained at Vincennes and then released, Tocqueville, who supported the Restoration of the Bourbons against Napoleon III's Second Empire (1851–1871), quit political life and retreated to his castle ( Château de Tocqueville ).

[ 22 ] Against this image of Tocqueville, biographer Joseph Epstein concluded: "Tocqueville could never bring himself to serve a man he considered a usurper and despot. He fought as best he could for the political liberty in which he so ardently believed—had given it, in all, thirteen years of his life ... . He would spend the days remaining to him fighting the same fight, but conducting it now from libraries, archives, and his own desk." [ 22 ] There, he began the draft of L'Ancien Régime et la Révolution , publishing the first tome in 1856 but leaving the second one unfinished.

Travels [ edit ] North America [ edit ] In 1831, Tocqueville obtained from the July Monarchy a mission to examine prisons and penitentiaries in the United States and proceeded there with his lifelong friend Gustave de Beaumont . While they did visit some prisons, Tocqueville and Beaumont traveled widely in the United States: from the east-coast cities to what was then the north-west frontier , Michigan ; by steamboat down the Ohio and Mississippi to New Orleans ; and by stagecoach across the South back toward the east coast and north to New York .

[ 23 ] Tocqueville also made a side trip to Montreal and Quebec City .

[ 24 ] Throughout his trip, he took extensive notes on his observations and reflections.

[ 25 ] He returned within nine months and published a report, The Penitentiary System in the United States , although the more well-known result of his tour was his major work Democracy in America , which appeared in 1835.

[ 7 ] Beaumont also wrote an account of their travels in Jacksonian America: Marie or Slavery in the United States (1835).

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] England and Ireland [ edit ] Tocqueville returned to France in February 1832. Before putting the finishing touches to his reflections on American democracy, he departed for England in 1833. Tocqueville had a private reason for crossing the Channel : to meet the family of Mary Mottley, a young woman he had met at Versailles.

[ 28 ] : xiii–xiv The couple were married in 1836.

[ 29 ] He stayed five weeks in England, eager to observe what many imagined as the dawning of the age of democracy, the passage of the Parliamentary Reform Act .

[ 28 ] : xiii–xiv Tocqueville concluded that there was "a good chance for the English to succeed in modifying the social and political set-up ... without violent convulsions". The British nobility was open to new recruits. He suggested that the difference with the French was "clear from the use of one word" as " gentleman in English applies to any well-educated man, regardless of birth, whereas in France gentilhomme can only be used of a noble by birth".

[ 28 ] : xiv In May 1835, Tocqueville returned to England but then in summer with Beaumont travelled on to Ireland, [ 28 ] : xviii then part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . He described Ireland as having "all the evils of an aristocracy and none of its advantages". There was "no moral tie between rich and poor; the difference of political opinion of religious belief and the actual distance they live apart make them strangers one to the other, one could almost say enemies".

[ 30 ] : 114–115 In this circumstance he remarked on the "unbelievable unity between the Irish clergy and the Catholic population". The people looked to the clergy, and the clergy "rebuffed" by the "upper classes" (" Protestants and enemies "), had "turned all its attention to the lower classes; it has the same instincts, the same interests and the same passions as the people; [a] state of affairs altogether peculiar to Ireland".

[ 30 ] : 127–128 Back in England, Tocqueville found confirmation of a close connection between centralisation and democratisation. He observed that in England centralisation took a form less absolute than in France. It was of "legislation and not administration", and co-existed with a "spirit of [civic] association" that in responding to specific and local issues narrowed the range of government intervention.

[ 28 ] : xvi Tocqueville had intended the joint impressions of their trip to Britain and Ireland would form the basis of a work by Beaumont, just as their common reflections of the United States on had served as him as material for Democracy in America .

[ 31 ] Beaumont did produce L'Irlande sociale, politique et religieuse (1839) .

Much praised by Daniel O'Connell , the first sentence of its historical introduction read: "The dominion of the English in Ireland, from their invasion of the country in 1169 , to the close of the last century, has been nothing but a tyranny." [ 32 ] Algeria [ edit ] In 1841 and 1846, Tocqueville traveled to Algeria which France had invaded and colonised from 1830. Having himself entertained the possibility of settling in Algeria as a colonist, from his election to the Chamber of Deputies in 1839 Tocqueville had come to be seen as the parliament's foremost expert on the colony.

[ 33 ] In 1837, he had written of his hope for eventual intermarriage between the French and indigenous Arabs and their amalgamation into a distinct whole.

[ 33 ] Following the first of his two visits to Algeria (again accompanied by Beaumont), his position was reversed. When it came to the French colonists, he "displayed his usual liberalism", as he criticised the "coarseness and violence" of the military rule to which they too were subject.

[ 34 ] : 376–377 Yet from what he observed of Algerian society, including what he understood as "the absence of all political life", [ 34 ] : 377 he was persuaded that not only could its violent subjugation be justified but also that its result could not, and should never, be assimilation of the indigenous people into the civil and political life of France.

[ 33 ] Death [ edit ] A longtime sufferer from bouts of tuberculosis , Tocqueville eventually succumbed to the disease on 16 April 1859 and was buried in the Tocqueville cemetery in Normandy .

[ citation needed ] He was survived by his English wife of 23 years, Mary Mottley. Although she was "too liberal ... too Protestant, too middle-class, and too English" for some in his family, de Tocqueville described Mottley as perhaps his only true friend.

[ 29 ] While they had hoped for a family, they had no children.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] In advance of their marriage, Mottley converted to Roman Catholicism , [ 35 ] Tocqueville's professed religion, [ 37 ] before their marriage.

[ 35 ] While she appeared to be comparatively devout, Tocqueville's own attitude toward religion has been described as "utilitarian", regarding it as a "social cement, a safety valve for passions that might otherwise feed a revolutionary torrent dangerous to individual liberty".

[ 38 ] Provided it was separated from state power, Tocqueville did not believe that his church was bound to be anti-democratic.

[ 38 ] Democracy in America [ edit ] Main article: Democracy in America A page from original working manuscript of Democracy in America , c.

1840 In Democracy in America , published in 1835, Tocqueville wrote of the New World and its burgeoning democratic order. Observing from the perspective of a detached social scientist, Tocqueville wrote of his travels through the United States in the early 19th century when the Market Revolution , Western expansion and Jacksonian democracy were radically transforming the fabric of American life.

[ 25 ] According to political scientist Joshua Kaplan, one purpose of writing Democracy in America was to help the people of France get a better understanding of their position between a fading aristocratic order and an emerging democratic order and to help them sort out the confusion.

[ 25 ] Tocqueville saw democracy as an enterprise that balanced liberty and equality , concern for the individual as well as for the community.

[ 39 ] On a negative note, Tocqueville remarked that "in democracies manners are never so refined as amongst aristocratic nations." [ 40 ] Tocqueville was an ardent supporter of liberty. He wrote: "I have a passionate love for liberty, law, and respect for rights. I am neither of the revolutionary party nor of the conservative. ... Liberty is my foremost passion." He wrote of "Political Consequences of the Social State of the Anglo-Americans" by saying: "But one also finds in the human heart a depraved taste for equality, which impels the weak to want to bring the strong down to their level, and which reduces men to preferring equality in servitude to inequality in freedom." [ 41 ] The above is often misquoted as a slavery quote because of previous translations of the French text. The most recent translation by Arthur Goldhammer in 2004 translates the meaning to be as stated above. Examples of misquoted sources are numerous on the internet such as "Americans are so enamored of equality that they would rather be equal in slavery than unequal in freedom", [ 42 ] but the text does not contain the words "Americans were so enamored by equality" anywhere.

His view on government reflects his belief in liberty and the need for individuals to be able to act freely while respecting others' rights. Of centralized government, he wrote that it "excels in preventing, not doing".

[ 43 ] Tocqueville continues to comment on equality by saying: "Furthermore, when citizens are all almost equal, it becomes difficult for them to defend their independence against the aggressions of power. As none of them is strong enough to fight alone with advantage, the only guarantee of liberty is for everyone to combine forces. But such a combination is not always in evidence".

[ 44 ] Tocqueville explicitly cites inequality as being incentive for the poor to become rich and observes that it is not often that two generations within a family maintain success and that it is inheritance laws that split and eventually break apart someone's estate that cause a constant cycle of churn between the poor and the rich, thereby over generations making the poor rich and the rich poor. He cites protective laws in France at the time that protected an estate from being split apart among heirs, thereby preserving wealth and preventing a churn of wealth such as was perceived by him in 1835 within the United States.

[ citation needed ] On civil and political society and the individual [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Liberalism in France Schools Catholic Classical Orthodox Pure orléanism Economic National Radical Jacobinism Social Principles Civic nationalism Civil and political rights Economic freedom Equality before the law Freedom of the press Freedom of speech Internationalism Laicism Laissez-faire Liberté, égalité, fraternité Republicanism Laïcité History Dreyfusards February Revolution French Resistance French Revolution July Monarchy July Revolution Lumières People Alain Aron Bastiat Brissot Clemenceau Condorcet Constant Doumergue Fallières Freund Gambetta de Gouges Grévy Hugo Lamennais Louis Philippe I Macron Manent Mendès France Merleau-Ponty de Molinari Montesquieu Poincaré Robespierre Rougier Say Thiers Tocqueville de Tracy Voltaire Parties Active Agir Centrist Alliance The Centrists Democratic European Force Democratic Movement Liberal Alternative Liberal Democratic Party Radical Party Radical Party of the Left Renaissance Union of Democrats and Independents Defunct Democratic Republican Alliance Doctrinaires Independent Radicals Jacobins Girondins Liberal Party Moderate Republicans (1848) Moderate Republicans (1871) Progressive Republicans Radical Movement Republican Union Union for French Democracy Media Active BFM TV La Chaîne Info Courrier International Les Echos Le Figaro Le Monde L'Opinion Le Parisien Defunct L'Aurore Related topics Anti-clericalism Centrism in France Nouveaux Philosophes Political positions of Emmanuel Macron Rally of Republican Lefts Sinistrisme Together (coalition) Liberalism portal France portal v t e Tocqueville's main purpose was to analyze the functioning of political society and various forms of political associations, although he brought some reflections on civil society too (and relations between political and civil society). For Tocqueville, as for Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Karl Marx , civil society was a sphere of private entrepreneurship and civilian affairs regulated by civil code .

[ 45 ] As a critic of individualism , Tocqueville thought that through associating for mutual purpose, both in public and private, Americans are able to overcome selfish desires, thus making both a self-conscious and active political society and a vibrant civil society functioning according to political and civil laws of the state .

[ 25 ] [ 45 ] According to political scientist Joshua Kaplan, Tocqueville did not originate the concept of individualism, instead he changed its meaning and saw it as a "calm and considered feeling which disposes each citizen to isolate himself from the mass of his fellows and to withdraw into the circle of family and friends ... . [W]ith this little society formed to his taste, he gladly leaves the greater society to look for itself." [ 25 ] While Tocqueville saw egotism and selfishness as vices, he saw individualism not as a failure of feeling but as a way of thinking about things which could have either positive consequences such as a willingness to work together, or negative consequences such as isolation and that individualism could be remedied by improved understanding.

[ 25 ] When individualism was a positive force and prompted people to work together for common purposes and seen as "self-interest properly understood", then it helped to counterbalance the danger of the tyranny of the majority since people could "take control over their own lives" without government aid.

[ 25 ] According to Kaplan, Americans have a difficult time accepting Tocqueville's criticism of the stifling intellectual effect of the "omnipotence of the majority" and that Americans tend to deny that there is a problem in this regard.

[ 25 ] Others such as the Catholic writer Daniel Schwindt disagree with Kaplan's interpretation, arguing instead that Tocqueville saw individualism as just another form of egotism and not an improvement over it.

[ 46 ] To make his case, Schwindt provides citations such as the following: Egoism springs from a blind instinct; individualism from wrong-headed thinking rather than from depraved feelings. It originates as much from defects of intelligence as from the mistakes of the heart. Egoism blights the seeds of every virtue; individualism at first dries up only the source of public virtue. In the longer term it attacks and destroys all the others and will finally merge with egoism.

[ 46 ] On democracy and new forms of tyranny [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in France Ideologies Bonapartism Christian democracy Gaullism Integralism nationalist Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Royalism Sarkozysm Ultramontanism Principles Anti-communism Counter-revolution Dirigisme Elitism Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethnopluralism Family values French culture Imperialism Monarchism Metapolitics Nationalism Nativism Natural order Patriotism Social hierarchy Social order Souverainisme Traditional authority History Ancien Régime Monarchiens Feuillant Catholic and Royal Armies War in the Vendée Thermidorian Reaction Chouannerie Chouan First White Terror Companions of Jehu Muscadins Second White Terror Bourbon Restoration Ultra-royalists Dreyfus affair Second French Empire Philippe Daudet affair Vichy France Algiers putsch of 1961 2024 The Republicans alliance crisis Intellectuals Ballanche Bainville Barbey d'Aurevilly Barruel Barrès Baudelaire de Benoist Blanc de Saint-Bonnet de Bonald Boutang Bruckner Brunetière Brague Cau de Chateaubriand Fustel de Coulanges Cochin Daudet Delsol Dumézil Faguet Faye Freund Girardet Guénon de Gobineau Houellebecq de Jouvenel Lamennais (early) Le Bon Lefebvre Lemaître Le Play Lugan Madiran de Maistre Morel Maffesoli Massis Maurras Maulnier Marcel Nimier Poulat Rémond Renan de Rivarol Rohmer Rueff Siegfried Taine de Tocqueville Thibon Literature Considerations on France (1796) Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1797) The Genius of Christianity (1802) The Pope (1819) St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) Democracy in America (1835) The Ancient City (1864) " What Is a Nation?

" (1882) The Crowd (1895) Inquiry into the Monarchy (1900) "The Future of the Intelligentsia" (1905) My Political Ideas (1937) The Reign of Quantity (1945) The Opium of the Intellectuals (1955) Violence and the Sacred (1972) The Camp of the Saints (1973) The Tyranny of Guilt (2006) The French Suicide (2014) Submission (2015) Politicians Bardella Bellamy de Bonald Boulanger Cathelineau de Chateaubriand Ciotti Flandin Fouéré de Gaulle Holeindre Juppé de Kérillis Le Pen (Jean-Marie) Le Pen (Marine) Maurras Malraux MacMahon Maréchal Messiha Messmer Pécresse Pétain Peyrefitte Pichegru Poincaré Poisson de Polignac Pompidou Retailleau de La Rocque de La Tour du Pin Sarkozy Schuman de Vaublanc de Villèle de Villiers Zemmour Commentators Barbier Buisson Camus Cassen Jean Giesbert de Girardin d'Escufon Jamet Lasserre Lévy Marmin Massis Maulnier Ménard Mougeotte Nay Obertone d'Orcival d'Ornellas Pauwels Pujo Sastre Sérant Tasin Venner Parties Active Alliance Royale Debout la France French Future The Nationalists National Republican Movement Future with Confidence National Centre of Independents & Peasants National Rally Reconquête The Republicans Senate Republicans Soyons libres VIA, the Way of the People Defunct Democratic Republican Alliance Feuillants French Agrarian and Peasant Party French Social Party Movement for France Independent Radicals Independent Republicans Party of Order Rally of the French People Popular Liberal Action Rally for France Rally for the Republic Republican Federation Resistance Party Union for a Popular Movement Union for the New Republic Organisations Active Action Française Carrefour de l'Horloge Cité catholique Groupement de Recherche et d'Études pour la Civilisation Européenne Initiative and Liberty Movement La Manif pour tous Les Identitaires March for Life Nouvelle Action Royaliste Rassemblement national de la jeunesse Student Cockade UDR group Union Nationale Inter-universitaire Defunct Action Française (pre Liberation) Camelots du Roi Cercle Proudhon Civitas Croix-de-Feu Independent Republicans Hussards Service d'Action Civique Media Active Atlantico CNews Éléments Famille chrétienne L'Écho du Sud La Croix Le Figaro Le Figaro Magazine Le Point Nouvelle École Radio Courtoisie Valeurs actuelles Defunct La Liberté La Presse La Nation française Le Quotidien de Paris Minute Présent Related topics Archeofuturism Clerical philosophers European New Right Far-right movements in France France profonde French–German enmity French Revolution " Islamo-leftism " List of French conservatives Maurrassisme in Argentina Ligues d'extrême droite Politics of France Remigration Sinistrisme Sovereigntist Right Tocqueville effect Conservatism portal France portal v t e Tocqueville warned that modern democracy may be adept at inventing new forms of tyranny because radical equality could lead to the materialism of an expanding bourgeoisie and to the selfishness of individualism. "In such conditions, we might become so enamored with 'a relaxed love of present enjoyments' that we lose interest in the future of our descendants...and meekly allow ourselves to be led in ignorance by a despotic force all the more powerful because it does not resemble one", wrote The New Yorker ' s James Wood.

[ 47 ] Tocqueville worried that if despotism were to take root in a modern democracy, it would be a much more dangerous version than the oppression under the Roman emperors or tyrants of the past who could only exert a pernicious influence on a small group of people at a time.

[ 25 ] In contrast, a despotism under a democracy could see "a multitude of men", uniformly alike, equal, "constantly circling for petty pleasures", unaware of fellow citizens and subject to the will of a powerful state which exerted an "immense protective power".

[ 25 ] Tocqueville compared a potentially despotic democratic government to a protective parent who wants to keep its citizens (children) as "perpetual children" and which does not break men's wills but rather guides it and presides over people in the same way as a shepherd looking after a "flock of timid animals".

[ 25 ] On the American social contract [ edit ] Tocqueville's penetrating analysis sought to understand the peculiar nature of American political life. In describing the American, he agreed with thinkers such as Aristotle and Montesquieu that the balance of property determined the balance of political power; however, his conclusions differed radically from those of his predecessors. Tocqueville tried to understand why the United States was so different from Europe in the last throes of aristocracy . In contrast to the aristocratic ethic, the United States was a society where hard work and money-making was the dominant ethic, where the common man enjoyed a level of dignity which was unprecedented, where commoners never deferred to elites and where what he described as crass individualism and market capitalism had taken root to an extraordinary degree.

[ citation needed ] Tocqueville writes: "Among a democratic people, where there is no hereditary wealth, every man works to earn a living. ... Labor is held in honor; the prejudice is not against but in its favor." [ 48 ] Tocqueville asserted that the values that had triumphed in the North and were present in the South had begun to suffocate old-world ethics and social arrangements. Legislatures abolished primogeniture and entails , resulting in more widely distributed land holdings. This was a contrast to the general aristocratic pattern in which only the eldest child, usually a man, inherited the estate, which had the effect of keeping large estates intact from generation to generation.

[ 25 ] In contrast, landed elites in the United States were less likely to pass on fortunes to a single child by the action of primogeniture , which meant that as time went by large estates became broken up within a few generations which in turn made the children more equal overall.

[ 25 ] According to Joshua Kaplan's Tocqueville, it was not always a negative development since bonds of affection and shared experience between children often replaced the more formal relation between the eldest child and the siblings, characteristic of the previous aristocratic pattern.

[ 25 ] Overall, hereditary fortunes in the new democracies became exceedingly difficult to secure and more people were forced to struggle for their own living.

[ citation needed ] A sketch of Tocqueville As Tocqueville understood it, this rapidly democratizing society had a population devoted to "middling" values which wanted to amass through hard work vast fortunes. In Tocqueville's mind, this explained why the United States was so different from Europe. In Europe, he claimed, nobody cared about making money. The lower classes had no hope of gaining more than minimal wealth while the upper classes found it crass, vulgar and unbecoming of their sort to care about something as unseemly as money and many were virtually guaranteed wealth and took it for granted. At the same time in the United States, workers would see people fashioned in exquisite attire and merely proclaim that through hard work they too would soon possess the fortune necessary to enjoy such luxuries.

[ citation needed ] On majority rule and mediocrity [ edit ] Beyond the eradication of old-world aristocracy, ordinary Americans also refused to defer to those possessing, as Tocqueville put it, superior talent and intelligence, and these natural elites could not enjoy much share in political power as a result. Ordinary Americans enjoyed too much power and claimed too great a voice in the public sphere to defer to intellectual superiors. Tocqueville argued that this culture promoted a relatively pronounced equality, but the same mores and opinions that ensured such equality also promoted mediocrity. Those who possessed true virtue and talent were left with limited choices.

[ 25 ] Tocqueville said that those with the most education and intelligence were left with two choices. They could join limited intellectual circles to explore the weighty and complex problems facing society, or they could use their superior talents to amass vast fortunes in the private sector. He wrote that he did not know of any country where there was "less independence of mind, and true freedom of discussion, than in America".

[ 25 ] Tocqueville blamed the omnipotence of majority rule as a chief factor in stifling thinking: "The majority has enclosed thought within a formidable fence. A writer is free inside that area, but woe to the man who goes beyond it, not that he stands in fear of an inquisition, but he must face all kinds of unpleasantness in every day persecution. A career in politics is closed to him for he has offended the only power that holds the keys." [ 25 ] According to Kaplan's interpretation of Tocqueville, he argued in contrast to previous political thinkers that a serious problem in political life was not that people were too strong but that people were "too weak" and felt "swept up in something that they could not control".

[ 25 ] On enslavement, black people, and indigenous communities [ edit ] Uniquely positioned at a crossroads in American history, Tocqueville's Democracy in America attempted to capture the essence of American culture and values. Although a supporter of colonialism, Tocqueville could clearly perceive the evils that black people and natives had been subjected to in the United States. Tocqueville devoted the last chapter of the first volume of Democracy in America to the question, while his travel companion Gustave de Beaumont wholly focused on slavery and its fallouts for the American nation in Marie or Slavery in America . Tocqueville observes among the American races: The first who attracts the eye, the first in enlightenment, in power and in happiness, is the white man, the European, man par excellence; below him appear the Negro and the Indian. These two unfortunate races have neither birth, nor face, nor language, nor mores in common; only their misfortunes look alike. Both occupy an equally inferior position in the country that they inhabit; both experience the effects of tyranny; and if their miseries are different, they can accuse the same author for them.

[ 49 ] Tocqueville contrasted the settlers of Virginia with the middle class, religious Puritans who founded New England and analyzed the debasing influence of slavery: The men sent to Virginia were seekers of gold, adventurers without resources and without character, whose turbulent and restless spirit endangered the infant colony. ... Artisans and agriculturalists arrived afterwards[,] ... hardly in any respect above the level of the inferior classes in England. No lofty views, no spiritual conception presided over the foundation of these new settlements. The colony was scarcely established when slavery was introduced; this was the capital fact which was to exercise an immense influence on the character, the laws and the whole future of the South. Slavery ... dishonors labor; it introduces idleness into society, and with idleness, ignorance and pride, luxury and distress. It enervates the powers of the mind and benumbs the activity of man. On this same English foundation there developed in the North very different characteristics.

[ 50 ] Tocqueville maintained that the friction between races in America was deeper than merely the issue of slavery, even going so far as to say that discrimination against African Americans was worse in states where slavery was outlawed: Whosoever has inhabited the United States must have perceived that in those parts of the Union in which the negroes are no longer slaves, they have in no wise drawn nearer to the whites. On the contrary, the prejudice of the race appears to be stronger in the States which have abolished slavery, than in those where it still exists; and nowhere is it so intolerant as in those States where servitude has never been known.

[ 51 ] Tocqueville concluded that return of the Black population to Africa could not resolve the problem, as he writes at the end of Democracy in America : If the colony of Liberia were able to receive thousands of new inhabitants every year, and if the Negroes were in a state to be sent thither with advantage; if the Union were to supply the society with annual subsidies, and to transport the Negroes to Africa in government vessels, it would still be unable to counterpoise the natural increase of population among the blacks; and as it could not remove as many men in a year as are born upon its territory within that time, it could not prevent the growth of the evil which is daily increasing in the states. The Negro race will never leave those shores of the American continent to which it was brought by the passions and the vices of Europeans; and it will not disappear from the New World as long as it continues to exist. The inhabitants of the United States may retard the calamities which they apprehend, but they cannot now destroy their efficient cause.

In 1855, Tocqueville wrote the following text published by Maria Weston Chapman in the Liberty Bell: Testimony against Slavery : I do not think it is for me, a foreigner, to indicate to the United States the time, the measures, or the men by whom Slavery shall be abolished. Still, as the persevering enemy of despotism everywhere, and under all its forms, I am pained and astonished by the fact that the freest people in the world is, at the present time, almost the only one among civilized and Christian nations which yet maintains personal servitude; and this while serfdom itself is about disappearing, where it has not already disappeared, from the most degraded nations of Europe.

An old and sincere friend of America, I am uneasy at seeing Slavery retard her progress, tarnish her glory, furnish arms to her detractors, compromise the future career of the Union which is the guaranty of her safety and greatness, and point out beforehand to her, to all her enemies, the spot where they are to strike. As a man, too, I am moved at the spectacle of man's degradation by man, and I hope to see the day when the law will grant equal civil liberty to all the inhabitants of the same empire, as God accords the freedom of the will, without distinction, to the dwellers upon earth.

[ 52 ] French historian of colonialism Olivier Le Cour Grandmaison argues that Tocqueville (along with Jules Michelet ) was ahead of his time in his use of the term " extermination " to describe what was happening during the colonization of Western United States and the Indian removal period.

[ 53 ] On policies of assimilation [ edit ] According to Tocqueville, assimilation of black people would be almost impossible, as was already being demonstrated in the Northern states; however, assimilation was the best solution for Native Americans, and since they were too proud to assimilate, they would inevitably become extinct.

Displacement was another part of America's Indian policy . Both populations were "undemocratic", or without the qualities, intellectual and otherwise, needed to live in a democracy. Tocqueville shared many views on assimilation and segregation of his and the coming epochs but opposed Arthur de Gobineau 's theories as found in An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races (1853–1855).

[ 54 ] On the United States and Russia as future global powers [ edit ] In his Democracy in America , Tocqueville also forecast the preeminence of the United States and Russia as the two main global powers. In his book, he stated: "There are now two great nations in the world, which starting from different points, seem to be advancing toward the same goal: the Russians and the Anglo-Americans. ... Each seems called by some secret design of Providence one day to hold in its hands the destinies of half the world." [ 55 ] On civil jury service [ edit ] Tocqueville believed that the American jury system was particularly important in educating citizens in self-government and rule of law.

[ 56 ] He often expressed how the civil jury system was one of the most effective showcases of democracy because it connected citizens with the true spirit of the justice system. In his 1835 treatise Democracy in America , he explained: "The jury, and more especially the civil jury, serves to communicate the spirit of the judges to the minds of all the citizens; and this spirit, with the habits which attend it, is the soundest preparation for free institutions. ... It invests each citizen with a kind of magistracy; it makes them all feel the duties which they are bound to discharge toward society; and the part which they take in the Government." [ 57 ] Tocqueville believed that jury service not only benefited the society as a whole but also enhanced jurors' qualities as citizens. Because of the jury system, "they were better informed about the rule of law, and they were more closely connected to the state. Thus, quite independently of what the jury contributed to dispute resolution, participation on the jury had salutary effects on the jurors themselves." [ 56 ] Views on Algeria [ edit ] Alexis de Tocqueville was an important figure in the colonization of Algeria. A member of French parliament during the French conquest of Algeria and subsequent July Monarchy , Tocqueville took it upon himself to become an expert on the Algeria question, and to this end penned a number of discourses and letters. He also made a point of studying Islam, the Quran, and the Arabic language, in order to better understand the country.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] 1837 letters on Algeria [ edit ] In a series of letters penned by Alexis de Tocqueville, he describes the situation of France as well as the geography and society of Algeria at the time.

"Suppose that the Emperor of China, landing in France at the head of an armed power, should make himself master of our largest cities and of our capital. That after having burned all the public registers before suffering to read them, and having destroyed or dispersed all of the civil service without inquiring into their various attributions, he should finally seize every functionary – from the head of the government to the campesino guards, the peers, the deputies, and in general the whole ruling class – and deport them all at once to some distant country. Do you not think that this great prince, in spite of his powerful army, his fortresses and his treasures, will soon find himself extremely unprepared in administering the conquered country; that his new subjects, deprived of all those who conducted or could conduct affairs of state, will be unable to govern themselves, while he, coming from the antipodes, knows neither the religion, nor the language, nor the laws, nor the habits, nor the administrative customs of the country, and who has taken care to remove all those who could have instructed him in them, will be in no state rule them. You will therefore have no difficulty in foreseeing that if the parts of France which are materially occupied by the victor obey him, the rest of the country will soon be given over to an immense anarchy." [ 61 ] Despite being initially critical of the French invasion of Algeria, Toccqueville also believed that geopolitical necessities of the time would not allow for a withdrawal of military forces for two reasons: first, his understanding of the international situation and France's position in the world; and second, changes in French society.

[ 62 ] Tocqueville believed that war and colonization would "restore national pride; threatened", he believed, by "the gradual softening of social mores" in the middle classes. Their taste for "material pleasures" was spreading to the whole of society, giving it "an example of weakness and egotism".

[ 63 ] 1841 discourse on the conquest of Algeria [ edit ] Tocqueville expressed himself in an 1841 essay concerning the conquest of Algeria in which he called for a dual program of " domination " and " colonization ".

[ 61 ] [ 64 ] For my part, I have brought back from Africa the distressing notion that at the moment we are waging war in a much more barbaric manner than the Arabs themselves. At present, theirs is the side of civilization. This way of waging war seems to me as stupid as it is cruel. It can only enter into the crude and brutal mind of a soldier. It was not worth putting displacing the Turks to reproduce that which in them deserved the detestation of the world. That, even from the point of view of interest, is much more harmful than useful; because, as another officer said to me, if we only aim to equal the Turks we will be by the fact in a position much lower than them: barbarians among barbarians, the Turks will always have on us the advantage of being Muslim barbarians. It is thus to a principle superior to theirs that we must appeal.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] I have often heard in France men whom I respect, but whom I do not agree with, say that it wrong to burn the harvests, to empty the silos and finally to imprison unarmed men, women and children. These are, in my opinion, unfortunate necessities, but ones to which any people who want to make war on the Arabs will be obliged to submit. And, if I must say what I think, these acts do not revolt me more or even as much as several others which the law of war obviously authorizes and which take place in all the wars of Europe. Why is it more odious to burn harvests and take women and children prisoner than to bombard the harmless population of a besieged city or to seize merchant ships belonging to the subjects of an enemy power at sea? The one is, in my opinion, much crueler and less justifiable than the other.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] Applauding the methods of General Bugeaud , Tocqueville went so far to claim that "war in Africa is a science. Everyone is familiar with its rules and everyone can apply those rules with almost complete certainty of success. One of the greatest services that Field Marshal Bugeaud has rendered his country is to have spread, perfected and made everyone aware of this new science." [ 63 ] Tocqueville advocated racial segregation as a form of consociationalism in Algeria with two distinct legislations, one for European colonists and one for the Arab population.

[ 69 ] Without doubt, it would be as dangerous as it would be useless to try to suggest to them our morals, our ideas, our customs. It is not in the direction of our European civilization that we must now push them, but in the direction of their own civilization; we must ask of them what they desire and not what they despise. Individual property, industry, sedentary living are not contrary to the religion of Mohammed. Arabs have known or know these things elsewhere; they are appreciated and enjoyed by some of them in Algeria itself. Why should we despair of making them familiar to the greatest number? It has already been attempted on some points with success. Islam is not absolutely impenetrable to the Enlightenment; it has often admitted in its bosom certain sciences or certain arts. Why should we not try to make these flourish under our empire? Let us not force the natives to come to our schools, but let us help them to raise theirs, to multiply those who teach there, to train the men of law and the men of religion, of whom the Muslim civilization cannot do without any more than us.

[ 61 ] Such a two-tier arrangement would be fully realised with the 1870 Crémieux decree and the Indigenousness Code , which extended French citizenship to European settlers and Algerian Jews whereas Muslim Algerians would be governed under the Code de l'indigénat; however Tocqueville hoped for an eventual mixing of the French and Arab populations into a single body: Every day the French are developing clearer and more accurate notions about the inhabitants of Algeria. They learn their languages, become familiar with their customs, and one even sees some who show a kind of unthinking enthusiasm for them. On the other hand, the whole of the young Arab generation in Algiers speaks our language and has already taken on some of our customs. ... There is therefore no reason to believe that time cannot succeed in amalgamating the two races. God does not prevent it; only the faults of men could impede it.

[ 61 ] Opposition to the invasion of Kabylia [ edit ] 1849 caricature by Honoré Daumier In opposition to Olivier Le Cour Grandmaison, Jean-Louis Benoît said that given the extent of racial prejudices during the colonization of Algeria, Tocqueville was one of its "most moderate supporters". Benoît said that it was wrong to assume Tocqueville was a supporter of Bugeaud despite his 1841 apologetic discourse. It seems that Tocqueville modified his views after his second visit to Algeria in 1846 as he criticized Bugeaud's desire to invade Kabylia in an 1847 speech to the Assembly.

[ citation needed ] Although Tocqueville had favoured retention of distinct traditional law, administrators, schools and so on for Arabs who had come under French control, he compared the Berber tribes of Kabylia (in his second of Two Letters on Algeria , 1837) to Rousseau's concept of the "noble savage", stating: If Rousseau had known the Kabyles ... he would not have spouted so much nonsense about the Caribbean and other American Indians: He would have looked to the Atlas for his models; there he would have found men who are subject to a kind of social police and yet almost as free as the isolated individual who enjoys his wild independence in the depths of the woods; men who are neither rich nor poor, neither servants nor masters; who appoint their own chiefs, and scarcely notice that they have chiefs, who are content with their state and remain in it [ 70 ] Tocqueville's views on the matter were complex. Although in his 1841 report on Algeria he applauded Bugeaud for making war in a way that defeated Abd-el-Kader 's resistance, he had advocated in the Two Letters that the French military advance leave Kabylia undisturbed and in subsequent speeches and writings he continued to oppose intrusion into Kabylia.

[ 70 ] In the debate about the 1846 extraordinary funds, Tocqueville denounced Bugeaud's conduct of military operations and succeeded in convincing the Assembly not to vote funds in support of Bugeaud's military columns.

[ 71 ] Tocqueville considered Bugeaud's plan to invade Kabylia despite the opposition of the Assembly as a seditious act in the face of which the government was opting for cowardice.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] 1847 "Report on Algeria" [ edit ] In his 1847 "Report on Algeria", Tocqueville declared that Europe should avoid making the same mistake they made with the European colonization of the Americas in order to avoid the bloody consequences.

[ 74 ] More particularly he reminds his countrymen of a solemn caution whereby he warns them that if the methods used towards the Algerian people remain unchanged, colonization will end in a blood bath. Tocqueville includes in his report on Algeria that the fate of their soldiers and finances depended on how the French government treats the various native populations of Algeria, including the various Arab tribes, independent Kabyles living in the Atlas Mountains and the powerful political leader Abd-el-Kader . The latter stresses the obtainment and protection of land and passageways that promise commercial wealth. In the case of Algeria, the Port of Algiers and the control over the Strait of Gibraltar were considered by Tocqueville to be particularly valuable whereas direct control of the political operations of the entirety of Algeria was not. Thus, the author stresses domination over only certain points of political influence as a means to colonization of commercially valuable areas.

[ 64 ] Tocqueville argued that although unpleasant, domination via violent means is necessary for colonization and justified by the laws of war. Such laws are not discussed in detail; however, given that the goal of the French mission in Algeria was to obtain commercial and military interest as opposed to self-defense, it can be deduced that Tocqueville would not concur with just war theory 's jus ad bellum criteria of just cause. Furthermore, given that Tocqueville approved of the use of force to eliminate civilian housing in enemy territory, his approach does not accord with just war theory's jus in bello criteria of proportionality and discrimination.

[ 75 ] The Old Regime and the Revolution [ edit ] Main article: The Old Regime and the Revolution In 1856, Tocqueville published The Old Regime and the Revolution . The book analyzes French society before the French Revolution —the ancien régime —and investigates the forces that caused the Revolution.

[ 76 ] References in popular literature [ edit ] Tocqueville was quoted in several chapters of Toby Young 's memoirs How to Lose Friends and Alienate People to explain his observation of widespread homogeneity of thought even amongst intellectual elites at Harvard University during his time spent there. He is frequently quoted and studied in American history classes. Tocqueville is the inspiration for Australian novelist Peter Carey in his 2009 novel Parrot and Olivier in America .

[ 77 ] Tocqueville and his memoir Recollections are mentioned in Ada Palmer 's novel Too Like the Lightning to describe someone with divided loyalty.

Works [ edit ] Ritter, Yusuf.

Travels in Algeria, United Empire Loyalists . Tikhanov Library, 2023.

"Travels in Algeria, United Empire Loyalists" Alexis de Tocqueville and Gustave de Beaumont in America: Their Friendship and Their Travels , edited by Olivier Zunz , translated by Arthur Goldhammer (University of Virginia Press, 2011, ISBN 978-0813930626 ), 698 pages. Includes previously unpublished letters, essays, and other writings.

Du système pénitentaire aux États-Unis et de son application en France (1833) – On the Penitentiary System in the United States and Its Application to France, with Gustave de Beaumont .

De la démocratie en Amérique (1835/1840) – Democracy in America . It was published in two volumes, the first in 1835, the second in 1840. English language versions: Tocqueville, Democracy in America , trans. and eds, Harvey C. Mansfield and Delba Winthrop, University of Chicago Press, 2000; Tocqueville, Democracy in America (Arthur Goldhammer, trans.; Olivier Zunz , ed.) (The Library of America, 2004) ISBN 978-1931082549 .

L'Ancien Régime et la Révolution (1856) – The Old Regime and the Revolution . It is Tocqueville's second most famous work.

Recollections (1893) – This work was a private journal of the Revolution of 1848. He never intended to publish this during his lifetime; it was published by his wife and his friend Gustave de Beaumont after his death.

Journey to America (1831–1832) – Alexis de Tocqueville's travel diary of his visit to America; translated into English by George Lawrence, edited by J.-P. Mayer , Yale University Press, 1960; based on vol. V, 1 of the Œuvres Complètes of Tocqueville.

L'État social et politique de la France avant et depuis 1789 – Alexis de Tocqueville Memoir on Pauperism: Does public charity produce an idle and dependant class of society?

(1835) originally published by Ivan R. Dee. Inspired by a trip to England. One of Tocqueville's more obscure works.

Journeys to England and Ireland , 1835.

See also [ edit ] France portal Liberalism portal Biography portal The Alexis de Tocqueville Tour: Exploring Democracy in America Alexis de Tocqueville Institution Benjamin Constant , author of Liberty of the Ancients and the Moderns Ferdinand de Lesseps , French diplomat and developer of Suez Canal Prix Alexis de Tocqueville General [ edit ] Contributions to liberal theory List of historians of the French Revolution Notes [ edit ] ^ / ˈ t ɒ k v ɪ l , ˈ t oʊ k v ɪ l / TO(H)K -vil ; French: [alɛksi də tɔkvil] References [ edit ] ^ Boucaud-Victoire, Kévin (2017).

La guerre des gauches . Editions du Cerf.

^ Véricour, Louis Raymond (1848).

Modern French Literature . Gould, Kendall and Lincoln. p.

104 .

^ a b Jaume, Lucien (2013).

Tocqueville: The Aristocratic Sources of Liberty . Princeton University Press. p. 6.

The 'liberal' label is not misplaced, because Tocqueville described himself as a liberal.

^ a b Kahan, Alan S. (2010).

Alexis de Tocqueville . A&C Black. pp.

112– 122.

^ a b Muthu, Sankar (2012). "Republicanism, Liberalism, and Empire in Postrevolutionary France".

Empire and Modern Political Thought . Cambridge University Press. pp.

261– 291.

^ Lakoff, Sanford (1998).

"Tocqueville, Burke, and the Origins of Liberal Conservatism" .

The Review of Politics .

60 (3): 435– 464.

doi : 10.1017/S003467050002742X .

ISSN 1748-6858 .

S2CID 145118465 .

^ a b Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Tocqueville, Alexis Henri Charles Maurice Clerel, Comte de" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 1043.

^ a b Hansen, Paul R. (2009).

Contesting the French Revolution . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1405160841 .

^ Jennings, Jeremy (2011).

Revolution and the Republic: A History of Political Thought in France Since the Eighteenth Century . Oxford University Press. p.

188 .

ISBN 978-0198203131 .

^ Richter, Melvin (2004). "Tocqueville and Guizot on democracy: from a type of society to a political regime".

History of European Ideas .

30 (1): 61– 82.

doi : 10.1016/j.histeuroideas.2003.08.006 .

S2CID 143728735 .

^ Bonin, Hugo (2021).

"Friend or foe? British receptions of Tocqueville's Democracy in America, 1835–1885" .

British Politics .

19 (4): 590– 608.

doi : 10.1057/s41293-021-00182-8 .

ISSN 1746-9198 .

S2CID 236226826 . Retrieved 15 January 2025 .

^ a b Kahan, Alan S. (2013). "Alexis de Tocqueville". In Meadowcroft, John (ed.).

Major conservative and libertarian thinkers . Vol. 7. Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1441176998 . Retrieved 25 May 2017 .

^ "Le lycée Fabert: 1000 ans d'histoire" .

Lycée Fabert (in French). Archived from the original on 8 July 2010 . Retrieved 18 September 2010 .

^ Jardin, Andre (1989).

Tocqueville: A Biography . Macmillan. pp.

386– 387.

^ "Liberty and democracy: It took a Frenchman" .

The Economist . 23 November 2006.

Archived from the original on 24 March 2025.

^ "APS Member History" .

American Philosophical Society . Archived from the original on 23 January 2025 . Retrieved 12 April 2021 .

^ Kahan, Alan S. (2010).

Alexis de Tocqueville . A&C Black. p. 101.

^ Jaume, Lucien (2013).

Tocqueville: The Aristocratic Sources of Liberty . Princeton University Press. p. 84.

^ a b "Regularization" is a term used by Tocqueville himself, see Souvenirs , Third part, pp. 289–290 French ed. (Paris, Gallimard , 1999).

^ Coutant Arnaud, Tocqueville et la constitution democratique , Paris, Mare et Martin, 2008, 680 p. See also "Le blog de arnaud.coutant.over-blog.com" .

^ a b Epstein, Joseph (2006).

Alexis De Tocqueville: Democracy's Guide .

HarperCollins . p. 148.

ISBN 0060598980 .

^ a b Epstein, Alexis De Tocqueville: Democracy's Guide (2006), p. 160.

^ Weingroff, Richard F. (2023).

"Alexis de Tocqueville on Transportation in America" .

U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration .

^ "Alexis de Tocqueville's visit to Lower Canada in 1831" .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Joshua Kaplan (2005). "Political Theory: The Classic Texts and their Continuing Relevance". The Modern Scholar.

14 lectures; (lectures #11 & #12) – see disc 6.

^ Gustave de Beaumont.

"Marie: ou l'Esclavage aux États-Unis; Online Library of Liberty" .

oll.libertyfund.org . Retrieved 28 October 2023 .

^ Gustave de Beaumont.

"Marie ou l'Esclavage aux États-Unis" .

Archived 21 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e Mayer, J. P. (1968). "Introduction".

Alexis de Tocqueville, Journeys to England and Ireland [1833–35] . New York: Anchor Books. pp.

xiii– xiv.

^ a b Carroll, Ross (2018).

"The Hidden Labors of Mary Mottley, Madame de Tocqueville" .

Hypatia .

33 (4): (643–662) 644.

doi : 10.1111/hypa.12442 .

hdl : 10871/32784 .

ISSN 0887-5367 .

JSTOR 45153720 .

^ a b de Tocqueville, Alexis. (1968).

Journeys to England and Ireland [1833–35] . New York: Anchor Books.

^ Wrynn, John F (1992).

"If You Ever Go Across the Sea to Ireland ...", Alexis de Tocqueville's Journey in Ireland: July-August, 1835 Translated and edited by Emmet Larkin Catholic University of America Press, 1990" .

Irish Literary Supplement .

11 (1): 9.

^ Edna, O'Doherty (2020).

"The Poor Man At His Gate" .

DRB . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

^ a b c Pitts, Jennifer (1999).

"Liberalism and empire: Tocqueville on Algeria" .

www.la.utexas.edu . Retrieved 30 December 2024 .

^ a b Richter, Melvin (1963).

"Tocqueville on Algeria" .

The Review of Politics .

25 (3): 362– 398.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670500006112 .

ISSN 0034-6705 .

JSTOR 1405738 .

^ a b c "Mary Mottley A Remembrance Madame Marie de Tocqueville" .

www.stmarysalv.free-online.co.uk . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

^ Sueur, Sheila Le (2015).

Open Every Door: Mary Mottley – Mme. Marie de Tocqueville . Dandelion Books.

ISBN 978-0996708906 .

^ Tocqueville, Alexis de.

Democracy in America , Chicago: University of Chicago, 2000, pp. 282–283.

^ a b Berlin, Isiah (1965).

"The Thought of de Tocqueville: Review of Jack Lively, The Social and Political Thought of Alexis de Tocqueville (Oxford, 1962: Clarendon Press)" (PDF) .

History (50): (198–206), 205.

^ Lakoff, Sanford (1987).

"Liberty, Equality, Democracy: Tocqueville's Response to Rousseau" . In Feaver, George; Rosen, Frederick (eds.).

Lives, Liberties and the Public Good: New Essays in Political Theory for Maurice Cranston . Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 104, 113.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-08006-9_6 .

ISBN 978-1349080069 .

^ Tocqueville, Alexis de (1840).

Democracy in America . Translated by Henry Reeve. London: Saunders and Otley. p.

116 .

OCLC 1064604970 .

^ Volume One, Part I, Chapter 3. In the original, "Il y a en effet une passion mâle et légitime pour l'égalité qui excite les hommes à vouloir être tous forts et estimés. Cette passion tend à élever les petits au rang des grands, mais il se rencontre aussi dans le cœur humain un goût dépravé pour l'égalité, qui porte les faibles à vouloir attirer les forts à leur niveau, et qui réduit les hommes à préférer l'égalité dans la servitude à l'inégalité dans la liberté." [1] ^ "Slavery Quotes" . Notable-quotes.com. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ Vol. One, Part I, Ch. 5, George Lawrence translation.

^ q:Alexis de Tocqueville .

^ a b Zaleski, Pawel (2008).

"Tocqueville on Civilian Society. A Romantic Vision of the Dichotomic Structure of Social Reality" (PDF) .

Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte .

50 . Felix Meiner Verlag.

ISSN 0003-8946 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 October 2018.

^ a b Daniel Schwindt (January 2014).

"Refuting Tocqueville by Way of Tocqueville" . Ethika Politika . Retrieved 24 August 2016 .

^ James Wood.

"Tocqueville In America" .

The New Yorker . 17 May 2010.

^ "Tocqueville: Book II Chapter 18" . Xroads.virginia.edu. Archived from the original on 7 June 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ Beginning of chapter 18 of Democracy in America , "The Present and Probably Future Condition of the Three Races that Inhabit the Territory of the United States".

^ Democracy in America , Vintage Books, 1945, pp. 31–32.

^ Democracy in America , Alexis de Tocqueville, Henry Reeve; Google Books, 1899, pp. 383.

[2] ^ In Oeuvres completes , Gallimard, T. VII, pp. 1663–1664.

^ Olivier LeCour Grandmaison (2 February 2005).

"Le négationnisme colonial" .

Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 28 February 2006.

^ Correspondence avec Arthur de Gobineau as quoted by Jean-Louis Benoît .

Archived 16 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America , pp. 412–413.

^ a b Hans, Valerie P.; Gastil, John; and Feller, Traci, "Deliberative Democracy and the American Civil Jury" (2014). Cornell Law Faculty Publications. Paper 1328.

^ Tocqueville, Alexis de ([1835] 1961).

Democracy in America Archived 9 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine . New York: Schocken.

^ Richter, Melvin (16 March 1963).

"Tocqueville on Algeria" .

The Review of Politics .

25 (3): 362– 398.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670500006112 .

JSTOR 1405738 .

^ Kohn, Margaret (16 March 2024).

"Empire's Law: Alexis de Tocqueville on Colonialism and the State of Exception" .

Canadian Journal of Political Science / Revue Canadienne de Science Politique .

41 (2): 255– 278.

doi : 10.1017/S0008423908080402 .

JSTOR 25166254 .

^ Pitts, Jennifer (2000).

"Empire and Democracy: Tocqueville and the Algeria Question" .

Journal of Political Philosophy .

8 (3): 295– 318.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9760.00104 .

^ a b c d Alexis de Tocqueville, Travels in Algeria , ed. Yusuf Ritter, Tikhanov Library, 2023 ^ Olivier LeCour Grandmaison (June 2001).

"Torture in Algeria: Past Acts That Haunt France – Liberty, Equality and Colony" .

Le Monde diplomatique .

^ a b Alexis de Tocqueville, "Rapports sur l'Algérie", in Œuvres complètes , Paris, Gallimard, Bibliothèque de la Pléiade , 1991, p. 806, quoted in Olivier LeCour Grandmaison (June 2001).

"Torture in Algeria: Past Acts That Haunt France – Liberty, Equality and Colony" .

Le Monde diplomatique .

^ a b Alexis De Tocqueville, Writings on Empire and Slavery , ed. Jennifer Pitts, Johns Hopkins (Baltimore), 2001, pp. 57–64.

^ 1841 – Extract of Travail sur l'Algérie , in Œuvres complètes , Gallimard, Pléïade, 1991, pp. 704–705.

^ Olivier LeCour Grandmaison (June 2001).

"Torture in Algeria: Past Acts That Haunt France – Liberty, Equality and Colony" .

Le Monde diplomatique .

(quoting Alexis de Tocqueville, Travail sur l'Algérie in Œuvres complètes , Paris, Gallimard, Bibliothèque de la Pléiade , 1991, pp. 704–705).

^ Olivier LeCour Grandmaison (2001).

"Tocqueville et la conquête de l'Algérie" (in French). La Mazarine.

^ Davis, Stuart (2023).

Sanctions as War: Anti-Imperialist Perspectives on American Geo-Economic Strategy . Haymarket Books. p. 52.

ISBN 978-1642598124 .

OCLC 1345216431 .

^ Travail sur l'Algérie , op.cit.

p. 752. Quoted in Olivier LeCour Grandmaison (June 2001).

"Torture in Algeria: Past Acts That Haunt France – Liberty, Equality and Colony" .

Le Monde diplomatique .

^ a b Alexis de Tocqueville.

Travels in Algeria, The United Empire Loyalists . Translated by Yusuf Ritter. Tikhanov Library. p. 17.

ISBN 978-1777646097 .

^ Tocqueville, Oeuvres completes , III, 1, Gallimard, 1962, pp. 299–300.

^ Tocqueville, Oeuvres completes , III, 1, Gallimard, 1962, p. 303.

^ Tocqueville, Œuvres complètes , III, 1, Gallimard, 1962, pp. 299–306.

^ (in French) Jean-Louis Benoît.

"Arguments in favor of Tocqueville" .

Archived 16 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine .

^ De Tocqueville.

Writings on Empire and Slavery , ed. Jennifer Pitts (2001), pp. 57–64, 70–78.

^ Alexis de Tocqueville.

The Old Regime and the French Revolution . New York: Anchor Books (1955).

^ "Parrot and Olivier in America" . Petercareybooks.com. 28 April 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

Further reading [ edit ] Allen, Barbara.

Tocqueville, Covenant, and the Democratic Revolution: Harmonizing Earth with Heaven . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2005.

Allen, James Sloan. "Alexis de Tocqueville: Democracy in America." Worldly Wisdom: Great Books and the Meanings of Life . Savannah, GA: Frederic C. Beil, 2008.

Benoît, Jean-Louis.

Comprendre Tocqueville . Paris: Armand Colin/Cursus, 2004.

Benoît, Jean-Louis, and Eric Keslassy.

Alexis de Tocqueville: Textes économiques Anthologie critique . Paris: Pocket/Agora, 2005. See "Jean-Louis Benoit" .

Benoît, Jean-Louis.

Tocqueville, Notes sur le Coran et autres textes sur les religions . Paris: Bayard, 2005. See also "Relectures de Tocqueville" and "Tocqueville aurait-il enfin trouvé ses juges ? Ôter son masque au parangon de la vertu démocratique" .

Boesche, Roger .

The Strange Liberalism of Alexis de Tocqueville . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987.

Boesche, Roger.

Tocqueville's Road Map: Methodology, Liberalism, Revolution, and Despotism . Lnahma, MD: Lexington Books, 2006.

Brogan, Hugh.

Alexis De Tocqueville . London: Profile Books, and New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006.

Cossu-Beaumont, Laurence.

Marie ou l'esclavage aux Etats-Unis de Gustave de Beaumont (1835). Paris: Forges de Vulcain, 2014.

ISBN 978-2919176526 .

Coutant, Arnaud.

Tocqueville et la Constitution democratique . Mare et Martin, 2008.

Coutant, Arnaud.

Une Critique républicaine de la démocratie libérale, de la démocratie en Amérique de Tocqueville . Mare et Martin, 2007.

Craiutu, Aurelian, and Jeremy Jennings, eds.

Tocqueville on America after 1840: Letters and Other Writings . (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009) 560 pp.

ISBN 978-0521859554 .

Damrosch, Leo.

Tocqueville's Discovery of America . New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, 2010.

Drescher Seymour.

Tocqueville and England . Cambridge, MA: Harward University Press, 1964.

Drescher, Seymour.

Dilemmas of Democracy: Tocqueville and Modernization . Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1968.

Epstein, Joseph.

Alexis De Tocqueville: Democracy's Guide . New York: Atlas Books, 2006.

Feldman, Jean-Philippe. "Alexis de Tocqueville et le fédéralisme américain".

Revue du droit public et de la science politique en France et à l'Étranger , n° 4 (20 June 2006): 879–901.

Galbo, Joseph. "Ethnographies of empire and resistance: 'wilderness' and the 'vanishing Indian' in Alexis de Tocqueville's 'A Fortnight in the Wilderness' and John Tanner's Narrative of Captivity ".

The International Journal of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences . Vol. 4 (5) 2009: 197–212. ( Academia ) Gannett, Robert T.

Tocqueville Unveiled: The Historian and His Sources for the Old Regime and the Revolution . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2003.

Geenens, Raf and Annelien De Dijn (eds), Reading Tocqueville: From Oracle to Actor . London: Palgrave Macmillan. 2007.

Hein, David. "Christianity and Honor." The Living Church , 18 August 2013, pp. 8–10.

Herr, Richard.

Tocqueville and the Old Regime . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1962.

Jardin, Andre.

Tocqueville . New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, 1989.

Jaume, Lucien, Tocqueville . Bayard, 2008.

Kahan, Alan S.

Aristocratic Liberalism: The Social and Political Thought of Jacob Burckhardt, Johns Stuart Mill and Alexis de Tocqueville . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1992; Transaction, 2001.

Kahan, Alan S.

Alexis de Tocqueville . New York: Continuum, 2010.

Kuznicki, Jason (2008).

"Tocqueville, Alexis de (1805–1859)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

507– 509.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n310 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Lively, Jack .

The Social and Political Thought of Alexis De Tocqueville . Oxford: Clarendon Press of Oxford University Press, 1962.

Mansfield, Harvey C.

Tocqueville: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2010.

Mélonio, Françoise.

Tocqueville and the French . Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1998.

Mitchell, Harvey.

Individual Choice and the Structures of History – Alexis de Tocqueville as an historian reappraised . Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Mitchell, Joshua.

The Fragility of Freedom: Tocqueville on Religion, Democracy, and the American Future . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1995.

Pierson, George.

Tocqueville and Beaumont in America . New York: Oxford University Press, 1938. Reissued as Tocqueville in America . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996.

Pitts, Jennifer.

A Turn to Empire . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005.

Ritter, Yusuf.

Travels in Algeria, United Empire Loyalists . Tikhanov Library, 2023.

Sanders, Luk. "The Strange Belief of Alexis de Tocqueville: Christianity as Philosophy".

International Journal of Philosophy and Theology , 74:1 (2013): 33–53.

Schuettinger, Robert. "Tocqueville and the Bland Leviathan".

New Individualist Review , Volume 1, Number 2 (Summer 1961): 12–17.

Schleifer, James T.

The Chicago Companion to Tocqueville's Democracy in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012.

ISBN 978-0226737034 .

Schleifer, James T.

The Making of Tocqueville's Democracy in America . Chapell Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1980; 2nd ed., Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund , 1999.

Shiner, L.E.

The Secret Mirror: Literary Form and History in Tocqueville's Recollections Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988.

Swedberg, Richard Tocqueville's Political Economy Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009.

Welch, Cheryl.

De Tocqueville . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.

Welch, Cheryl.

The Cambridge Companion to Tocqueville . Cambridge, Eng., and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Williams, Roger L., "Tocqueville on Religion," Journal of the Historical Society , 8:4 (2008): 585–600.

Wolin, Sheldon .

Tocqueville Between Two Worlds . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Alexis-Charles-Henri Clérel de Tocqueville Wikiquote has quotations related to Alexis de Tocqueville .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Alexis de Tocqueville .

Works by Alexis de Tocqueville at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Alexis de Tocqueville at the Internet Archive Works by Alexis de Tocqueville at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) "Alexis de Tocqueville's First Letter on Algeria" . 4 June 2023 . Retrieved 21 October 2023 .

"Alexis, Charles, Henri Clérel de Tocqueville (1805–1859)" .

Assemblée nationale (in French) . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

"Alexis de Tocqueville" . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

"Alexis de Tocqueville (1805–1859)" .

Académie française (in French). Archived from the original on 13 December 2010 . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

"Charles Alexis Henri Clérel de Tocqueville" .

Encyclopédie Larousse (in French) . Retrieved 14 May 2012 .

Les classiques des sciences sociales Works in the original French.

Yale Tocqueville Manuscripts . General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.

The Tocqueville castle in the footsteps of Alexis de Tocqueville Political offices Preceded by Édouard Drouyn de Lhuys Minister of Foreign Affairs 2 June 1849 – 31 October 1849 Succeeded by Alphonse de Rayneval v t e Alexis de Tocqueville Books Democracy in America (1835, 1840) The Old Regime and the Revolution (1856) Concepts American exceptionalism Mutual liberty Soft despotism Soft tyranny Tocqueville effect In culture The Alexis de Tocqueville Tour: Exploring Democracy in America (1997–1998) Parrot and Olivier in America (2010) Dream On (2015) Links to related articles v t e Democracy in America by Alexis de Tocqueville Ideas Mutual liberty Soft despotism Associated persons (contemporaries) Gustave de Beaumont Francis J. Lippitt Henry Reeve Jared Sparks John C. Spencer Scholars, editors, and translators Leo Damrosch Harvey Mansfield George Wilson Pierson Other The Old Regime and the Revolution The Alexis de Tocqueville Tour: Exploring Democracy in America v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Académie française seat 18 Jean Baudoin (1634) François Charpentier (1650) Jean François de Chamillart (1702) Claude Louis Hector de Villars, Marshal-Duke of Villars (1714) Honoré Armand de Villars, Duke of Villars (1734) "Cardinal Loménie de Brienne" (1770) Jean-Gérard Lacuée, count of Cessac (1803) Alexis de Tocqueville (1841) Jean Baptiste Henri Lacordaire (1860) Albert de Broglie, Duke of Broglie (1862) Melchior de Vogüé (1901) Ferdinand Foch (1918) Philippe Pétain (1929) André François-Poncet (1952) Edgar Faure (1978) Michel Serres (1990) Mario Vargas Llosa (2021) v t e Foreign ministers of France Ancien Régime Revol Villeroy A. J. Richelieu Sillery R. Phélypeaux Bouthillier Chavigny Brienne Lionne Pomponne Croissy Torcy Huxelles Dubois Morville Chauvelin Chaillou Noailles Argenson Puisieulx Saint-Contest Rouillé Bernis É. Choiseul C. Choiseul É. Choiseul L. Phélypeaux Aiguillon Bertin Vergennes Montmorin Vauguyon Montmorin Lessart Dumouriez Naillac Chambonas Dubouchage Sainte-Croix First Republic Lebrun-Tondu Deforgues Goujon Herman Delacroix Talleyrand Reinhard Talleyrand First Empire Talleyrand Champagny Bassano Caulaincourt First Restoration Laforest Talleyrand Hundred Days Caulaincourt Bignon Second Restoration Talleyrand A. E. Richelieu Dessolles Pasquier M. Montmorency Chateaubriand Damas La Ferronays Montmorency-Laval Portalis Polignac Mortemart July Monarchy Bignon Jourdan Molé Maison Sébastiani V. Broglie Rigny Bresson Rigny V. Broglie Thiers Molé Montebello Soult Thiers Guizot Second Republic Lamartine Bastide Bedeau Bastide Drouyn de Lhuys Tocqueville Rayneval La Hitte Drouyn de Lhuys Brénier Baroche Turgot Drouyn de Lhuys Second Empire Drouyn de Lhuys Walewski Baroche Thouvenel Drouyn de Lhuys La Valette Moustier La Valette La Tour Auvergne Daru Ollivier Gramont La Tour d'Auvergne Third Republic Favre Rémusat A. Broglie Decazes Banneville Waddington Freycinet Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire Gambetta Freycinet Duclerc Fallières Challemel-Lacour Ferry Freycinet Flourens Goblet Spuller Ribot Develle Casimir-Perier Hanotaux Berthelot Bourgeois Hanotaux Delcassé Rouvier Bourgeois Pichon Cruppi Selves Poincaré Jonnart Pichon Doumergue Bourgeois Viviani Doumergue Delcassé Viviani Briand Ribot Barthou Pichon Millerand Leygues Briand Poincaré Lefebvre Herriot Briand Herriot Briand Laval Tardieu Herriot Paul-Boncour Daladier Barthou Laval Flandin Delbos Paul-Boncour Bonnet Daladier Reynaud Daladier Reynaud Baudouin Vichy France Baudouin Laval Flandin Darlan Laval Provisional Government Bidault Blum Fourth Republic Bidault Schuman Bidault Mendès France Faure Pinay Pineau Pleven Couve de Murville Fifth Republic Couve de Murville Debré Schumann Bettencourt Jobert Sauvagnargues Guiringaud François-Poncet Cheysson Dumas Raimond Dumas Juppé Charette Védrine Villepin Barnier Douste-Blazy Kouchner Alliot-Marie Juppé Fabius Ayrault Le Drian Colonna Séjourné Barrot v t e Second cabinet of Odilon Barrot (2 June 1849 to 31 October 1849) Under the Presidency of Louis Napoleon President of the Council, Minister of Justice Odilon Barrot Odilon Barrot President of the Council Interior Jules Armand Dufaure Foreign Affairs: Alexis de Tocqueville Finance Hippolyte Passy Agriculture Victor Lanjuinais Public Works Théobald de Lacrosse War Joseph Marcellin Rulhières Navy and Colonies Victor Destutt de Tracy Public Education and Cults Frédéric Alfred Pierre, comte de Falloux Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece 2 Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qgzq6
Cached time: 20250817061701
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.341 seconds
Real time usage: 2.747 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25066/1000000
Revision size: 86443/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 741236/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 210363/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 352328/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.358/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27880020/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2184.290      1 -total
 23.13%  505.201      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 18.15%  396.368      2 Template:Reflist
 11.60%  253.460      1 Template:Navboxes
  8.42%  183.863      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.97%  174.001      8 Template:Navbox
  6.42%  140.336      1 Template:Efn
  6.26%  136.828     19 Template:Cite_book
  6.06%  132.365     17 Template:Infobox_officeholder/office
  5.85%  127.890      1 Template:Liberalism Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:164153:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817061701 and revision id 1306336762. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alexis_de_Tocqueville&oldid=1306336762 " Categories : Alexis de Tocqueville 1805 births 1859 deaths 19th-century French male writers 19th-century French philosophers Knights of the Legion of Honour Economic sociologists French liberal politicians French diplomats 19th-century French historians French male non-fiction writers Counts of France French political philosophers French political scientists French political writers French Roman Catholics French sociologists Historians of the French Revolution Historians of the United States Members of the 1848 Constituent Assembly Members of the 5th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 6th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 7th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the Académie Française Members of the National Legislative Assembly of the French Second Republic Party of Order politicians French philosophers of culture French philosophers of history Philosophers of law Politicians from Paris Writers from Paris University of Paris alumni Natural law ethicists International members of the American Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Pages with French IPA Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles containing French-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2021 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Official website not in Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 06:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alexis de Tocqueville 76 languages Add topic

