Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History 3 Sports 4 Transport 5 Demographic evolution 6 Notable residents 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Pontebba 53 languages العربية Aragonés تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Қазақша Kurdî Ladin Latina Lombard Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 46°30′N 13°19′E ﻿ / ﻿ 46.500°N 13.317°E ﻿ / 46.500; 13.317 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Comune in Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Italy Pontebba Pontafel ( German ) Tablja ( Slovene ) Comune Comune di Pontebba Flag Location of Pontebba Pontebba Location of Pontebba in Italy Show map of Italy Pontebba Pontebba (Friuli-Venezia Giulia) Show map of Friuli-Venezia Giulia Coordinates: 46°30′N 13°19′E ﻿ / ﻿ 46.500°N 13.317°E ﻿ / 46.500; 13.317 Country Italy Region Friuli-Venezia Giulia Province Udine (UD) Frazioni Aupa, Loc. Casali Costa, Loc. Casali Graben, Loc. Frattis, Loc. Gamischen, Passo Pramollo, Loc. Piani, Pietratagliata, Lagleise San Leopoldo, Studena Alta, Studena Bassa Government • Mayor Ivan Buzzi Area [ 1 ] • Total 97.7 km 2 (37.7 sq mi) Population (Oct. 2020) [ 2 ] • Total 1,344 • Density 14/km 2 (36/sq mi) Demonym Pontebbani Time zone UTC+1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+2 ( CEST ) Postal code 33016 Dialing code 0428 ISTAT code 030076 Patron saint Natività di Maria Saint day September 8 Website Official website Pontebba ( German : Pontafel ; Slovene : Tablja ; Friulian : Ponteibe ) is a comune (municipality) in the Regional decentralization entity of Udine in the Italian region of Friuli-Venezia Giulia .

Geography [ edit ] Pontebba, named after Italian : ponte meaning "bridge", is situated at the confluence of the Pontebbana creek and the Fella River, itself a tributary of the Tagliamento . It is located about 100 kilometres (62 mi) northwest of Trieste and about 50 kilometres (31 mi) north of Udine , near the border with Austria . As of 31 October 2020, Pontebba had a population of 1,344 and an area of 97.7 square kilometres (37.7 sq mi).

[ 3 ] The municipality contains the frazioni (boroughs) of Aupa, Loc. Casali Costa, Loc. Casali Graben, Loc. Frattis, Loc. Gamischen, Passo Pramollo, Loc. Piani, Pietratagliata, Lagleise San Leopoldo, Studena Alta, Studena Bassa Pontebba borders the following municipalities: Dogna in the south, Hermagor-Pressegger See (Austria) in the north, Malborghetto Valbruna in the east and Moggio Udinese in the west.

History [ edit ] Historical border stone the Flügelaltar in Pieve of Santa Maria Maggiore From the early 10th century onward, Pontebbana Creek formed the border between the March of Verona , the former Lombard Duchy of Friuli to the south, and the Bavarian March of Carinthia to the north. After the 1420 conquest of the Patriarchate of Aquileia , the settlement of Pontebba south of the creek belonged to the Domini di Terraferma of Venice . The corresponding settlement of Pontafel north of the bridge belonged to the Carinthian Canal Valley, an exclave held by the Imperial Prince-Bishopric of Bamberg , which was incorporated into the Inner Austrian territories of the Habsburg dynasty in 1759.

It was only in 1874 that the Telegraph came to Pontafel. The opening of a k.k. State telegraph station with "limited daily services" took place at the same time as in other smaller places of the monarchy.

[ 4 ] After World War I according to the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye , the border of the Kingdom of Italy with the Republic of Austria was shifted up the Canal Valley north to the town of Tarvisio . The two settlements of Pontebba (Italy) and Pontafel (formerly Austrian) were finally merged on 15 August 1924. During World War II , the rail line through the town was the target of heavy aerial bombardment by the United States Army Air Forces because it was used by Germany to transport supplies to Italy. However, the aerial bombardment did not succeed in damaging the rail line, which is still in use today.

Sports [ edit ] Aquile Friuli-Venezia Giulia , the region's flagship ice hockey team, plays its home games at the PalaVuerich arena in Pontebba and is affiliated with the local ice sports society Sport Ghiaccio Pontebba . The team is a member of the Serie A and won the 2008 Italian Cup.

Transport [ edit ] Road to Pontebba from the east Pontebba can be reached via the A23 autostrada , European route E55 , running from Palmanova and the A4 to Tarvisio and the Austrian A2 Süd Autobahn , as well as by the parallel Strada Statale 13 Pontebbana . Here the Strade Provinciale 110 to the Naßfeld Pass ( Italian : Passo di Pramollo ) branches off.

The Pontebba train station is at the new Pontebbana railway line from Udine to Tarvisio and the Austrian border. Opened in 2000, it replaces the old k.k. Staatsbahn Tarvis-Pontafel built in 1879.

Demographic evolution [ edit ] Notable residents [ edit ] Adele Faccio , politician Ernesto Lomasti , mountaineer References [ edit ] ^ "Superficie di Comuni Province e Regioni italiane al 9 ottobre 2011" . Italian National Institute of Statistics . Retrieved 16 March 2019 .

^ "Popolazione Residente al 1° Gennaio 2018" . Italian National Institute of Statistics . Retrieved 16 March 2019 .

^ All demographics and other statistics: Italian statistical institute Istat .

^ "Kundmachungen" .

Klagenfurter Zeitung (in German).

Klagenfurt : ANNO . 1874-12-10. p. 6 . Retrieved 2019-09-07 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pontebba .

www.comune.pontebba.ud.it v t e Friuli-Venezia Giulia · Comuni of the Regional decentralization entity of Udine Aiello del Friuli Amaro Ampezzo Aquileia Arta Terme Artegna Attimis Bagnaria Arsa Basiliano Bertiolo Bicinicco Bordano Buja Buttrio Camino al Tagliamento Campoformido Campolongo Tapogliano Carlino Cassacco Castions di Strada Cavazzo Carnico Cercivento Cervignano del Friuli Chiopris-Viscone Chiusaforte Cividale del Friuli Codroipo Colloredo di Monte Albano Comeglians Corno di Rosazzo Coseano Dignano Dogna Drenchia Enemonzo Faedis Fagagna Fiumicello Villa Vicentina Flaibano Forgaria nel Friuli Forni Avoltri Forni di Sopra Forni di Sotto Gemona del Friuli Gonars Grimacco Latisana Lauco Lestizza Lignano Sabbiadoro Lusevera Magnano in Riviera Majano Malborghetto Valbruna Manzano Marano Lagunare Martignacco Mereto di Tomba Moggio Udinese Moimacco Montenars Mortegliano Moruzzo Muzzana del Turgnano Nimis Osoppo Ovaro Pagnacco Palazzolo dello Stella Palmanova Paluzza Pasian di Prato Paularo Pavia di Udine Pocenia Pontebba Porpetto Povoletto Pozzuolo del Friuli Pradamano Prato Carnico Precenicco Premariacco Preone Prepotto Pulfero Ragogna Ravascletto Raveo Reana del Rojale Remanzacco Resia Resiutta Rigolato Rive d'Arcano Rivignano Teor Ronchis Ruda San Daniele del Friuli San Giorgio di Nogaro San Giovanni al Natisone San Leonardo San Pietro al Natisone San Vito al Torre San Vito di Fagagna Santa Maria la Longa Sauris Savogna di Cividale Sedegliano Socchieve Stregna Sutrio Taipana Talmassons Tarcento Tarvisio Tavagnacco Terzo d'Aquileia Tolmezzo Torreano Torviscosa Trasaghis Treppo Grande Treppo Ligosullo Tricesimo Trivignano Udinese Udine Varmo Venzone Verzegnis Villa Santina Visco Zuglio Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Czech Republic Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pontebba&oldid=1253024448 " Categories : Municipalities of the Province of Udine Cities and towns in Friuli-Venezia Giulia Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages using the EasyTimeline extension CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Slovene-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using infobox settlement with image map1 but not image map Articles containing Friulian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 24 October 2024, at 00:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pontebba 53 languages Add topic

