Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ontological difference 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fundamental ontology 3 languages Deutsch فارسی Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia In Being and Time , the philosopher Martin Heidegger makes the distinction between ontical and ontological , or between beings and being as such. He labeled this the "ontological difference." It is from this distinction that he develops the concept of fundamental ontology ( German : Fundamentalontologie ).

The history of ontology in Western philosophy is, in Heidegger's terms, ontical, whereas ontology ought to designate fundamental ontology. He says this "ontological inquiry" is required to understand the basis of the sciences.

[ 1 ] Ontological difference [ edit ] Traditional ontology asks "Why is there anything?", whereas Heidegger's fundamental ontology asks, "What does it mean for something to be?", writes Taylor Carman (2003). Carman elaborates: Heidegger's fundamental ontology is relevant to traditional ontology in that it concerns "What any understanding of entities necessarily presupposes, namely, our understanding of that in virtue of which entities are entities?" [ 2 ] This ontological difference ( German : ontologische Differenz ) is central to Heidegger's philosophy.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In his 1937 " Contributions to Philosophy " Heidegger described it as " the essence of Dasein ," where "Dasein" refers to a being (such as the human) for whom the meaning of being is itself an issue.

[ 5 ] He accuses the Western philosophical tradition of incorrectly focusing on the "ontic"—and thus forgetful of this distinction. This has led to the mistake of understanding being (as such) as a kind of ultimate entity, for example as idea , energeia , substantia , or will to power .

[ 3 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] According to Richard Rorty , Heidegger envisioned no "hidden power of Being" as an ultimate entity.

[ 8 ] Heidegger tries to rectify ontic philosophy by focusing instead on the meaning of being , that is, fundamental ontology. This "ontological inquiry" is required to understand the basis of the sciences, according to Being and Time (1927).

[ 1 ] Fundamental ontology is the result of Heidegger 's decision to re-interpret phenomenology , as developed earlier by  his mentor Edmund Husserl . According to Heidegger, the phenomenological project required new terminology and a redefinition of traditional concepts. For instance, the thesis that a phenomenon is the essence of a thing could not be articulated solely with traditional concepts and terms. In fact, Heidegger consistently refused to use these concepts in their Husserlian senses.

Moreover, Heidegger went on to separate his fundamental ontology from previous ontologies. Heidegger wrote that clarifying the meaning of being  is required for the basis of all fields of science. For Heidegger, the ontical forms of research conducted by scientists presuppose the fundamental-ontological. As he expresses it: The question of Being aims… at ascertaining the a priori conditions not only for the possibility of the sciences which examine beings as beings of such and such a type, and, in doing so, already operate with an understanding of Being, but also for the possibility of those ontologies themselves which are prior to the ontical sciences and which provide their foundations.

Basically, all ontology, no matter how rich and firmly compacted a system of categories it has at its disposal, remains blind and perverted from its ownmost aim, if it has not first adequately clarified the meaning of Being, and conceived this clarification as its fundamental task .

[ 1 ] In Husserl's definition, "phenomenon" appeared comprehensive and sufficient for his philosophical ventures. But Heidegger saw room for new development. By shifting the priority from consciousness (psychology) to existence (ontology), Heidegger opened a new direction for phenomenological inquiry.

See also [ edit ] Foundation ontology Kehre Meta-ontology Ontotheology Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Martin Heidegger, Being and Time , §3.

^ Carman (2003).

Heidegger's Analytic Interpretation, Discourse and Authenticity in Being and Time . pp.

8– 52.

^ a b Wheeler, Michael (2020).

"Martin Heidegger" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Schalow, Frank (2010). "Ontological Difference".

Historical Dictionary of Heidegger's Philosophy . Scarecrow Press.

^ Contributions to Philosophy (Of the Event), 2012, p. 369.

^ Dahlstrom, D. O. (2004). "Ontology".

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Gale.

^ Korab-Karpowicz, W. J.

"Heidegger, Martin" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Grippe, Edward, "Richard Rorty (1931—2007)" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , ISSN 2161-0002 .

References [ edit ] Heidegger, Martin (1997).

Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics .

Heidegger, Martin (1988).

Basic Problems of Phenomenology .

Heidegger, Martin (2010).

Being and Time .

v t e Martin Heidegger Philosophy Aletheia Dasein Ekstase Fundamental ontology Gestell Hermeneutic circle " Language speaks " Metaphysics of presence Ontic Terminology Thrownness World disclosure Works Being and Time (1927) " What Is Metaphysics?

" (1929) Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics (1929) " Introduction to Metaphysics " (1935) Black Notebooks (1931–41) " The Age of the World Picture " (1938) Contributions to Philosophy (1936–1938) " Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister" " (1942) " Letter on Humanism " (1947) The Question Concerning Technology (1949) " The Origin of the Work of Art " (1950) What Is Called Thinking?

(1951–2) What Is Philosophy?

(1955) " Only a God Can Save Us " (1966) Heidegger Gesamtausgabe Film and TV Der Zauberer von Meßkirch (1989) Human, All Too Human (1999) The Ister (2004) Being in the World (2010) Related topics Heidegger scholars Heidegger Studies Studia Heideggeriana Relationship with Nazism Cassirer–Heidegger debate Thing theory Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fundamental_ontology&oldid=1285263896 " Categories : Philosophical categories 20th century in philosophy Phenomenology Ontology Philosophy of Martin Heidegger Hidden category: Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 12 April 2025, at 17:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fundamental ontology 3 languages Add topic

