Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Motives Toggle Motives subsection 1.1 Divestment for financial goals 1.2 Divestment for social goals 2 Method of divestment 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Divestment 13 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Svenska Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reduction of some kind of asset for an objective or sale of an existing business by a firm This article is about the routine business practice. For politically motivated boycott, see disinvestment .

This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Finance Markets Assets Asset (economics) Bond Asset growth Capital asset Commodity Derivatives Domains Equity Foreign exchange Money Over-the-counter Private equity Real estate Spot Stock Participants Angel investor Bull (stock market speculator) Financial planner Investor institutional Retail Speculator Locations Financial centres Offshore financial centres Conduit and sink OFCs Instruments Bond Cash Collateralised debt obligation Credit default swap Time deposit ( certificate of deposit ) Credit line Deposit Derivative Futures contract Indemnity Insurance Letter of credit Loan Mortgage Option ( call exotic put ) Performance bonds Repurchase agreement Stock Security Syndicated loan Synthetic CDO Corporate General Accounting Audit Capital budgeting Capital structure Corporate finance Credit rating agency Enterprise risk management Enterprise value Risk management Financial statements Transactions Leveraged buyout Mergers and acquisitions Structured finance Venture capital Taxation Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) Corporate tax haven Tax inversion Tax haven Transfer pricing Personal Credit / Debt Employment contract Financial planning Retirement Student loan Public Government spending Final consumption expenditure Operations Redistribution Transfer payment Government revenue Taxation Deficit spending Budget ( balance ) Debt Non-tax revenue Warrant of payment Banking Central bank Deposit account Fractional-reserve Full-reserve Investment banking Loan Money supply Lists of banks Bank regulation Banking license Basel Accords Bank for International Settlements Financial Stability Board Deposit insurance Separation of investment and retail banking Regulation · Financial law International Financial Reporting Standards ISO 31000 Professional certification Fund governance Economic history Private equity and venture capital Recession Stock market bubble Stock market crash Accounting scandals Outline Business and Economics portal Money portal v t e In finance and economics , divestment or divestiture is the reduction of some kind of asset for financial, ethical, or political objectives or sale of an existing business by a firm. A divestment is the opposite of an investment . Divestiture is an adaptive change and adjustment of a company's ownership and business portfolio made to confront with internal and external changes.

[ 1 ] Motives [ edit ] Firms may have several motives for divestitures: a firm may divest (sell) businesses that are not part of its core operations so that it can focus on what it does best. For example, Eastman Kodak , Ford Motor Company , Future Group and many other firms have sold various businesses that were not closely related to their core businesses.

to obtain funds. Divestitures generate funds for the firm because it is selling one of its businesses in exchange for cash. For example, CSX Corporation made divestitures to focus on its core railroad business and also to obtain funds so that it could pay off some of its existing debt.

a firm's "break-up" value is sometimes believed to be greater than the value of the firm as a whole. In other words, the sum of a firm's individual asset liquidation values exceeds the market value of the firm's combined assets. This encourages firms to sell off what would be worth more when liquidated than when retained.

divesting a part of a firm may enhance stability.

Philips , for example, divested its chip division - NXP - because the chip market was so volatile and unpredictable that NXP was responsible for the majority of Philips's stock fluctuations while it represented only a very small part of Philips NV.

divesting a part of a company may eliminate a division which is under-performing or even failing.

regulatory authorities may demand divestiture, for example in order to create competition.

pressure from shareholders for social reasons (sometimes also called disinvestment ).  Examples include disinvestment from South Africa in the former era of apartheid (now ended), disinvestment from Israel due to the occupation of the Palestinian territories , disinvestment from Russia due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and calls for fossil fuel divestment in response to climate change .

Divestment for financial goals [ edit ] Often the term is used as a means to grow financially in which a company sells off a business unit in order to focus their resources on a market it judges to be more profitable, or promising. Sometimes, such an action can be a spin-off . In the United States, divestment of certain parts of a company can occur when required by the Federal Trade Commission before a merger with another firm is approved. A company can divest assets to wholly owned subsidiaries.

It is a process of selling an asset. 
The largest corporate divestiture in history was the 1984 U.S. Department of Justice -mandated breakup of the Bell System into AT&T and the seven Baby Bells .

Of the 1000 largest global companies, those that are actively involved in both acquiring and divesting create as much as 1.5 to 4.7 percentage points higher shareholder returns than those primarily focused on acquisitions.

[ 2 ] Divestment for social goals [ edit ] See also: Disinvestment Examples of divestment for social goals include: Disinvestment from Israel , a movement by critics of Israel (since 1920s) Disinvestment from South Africa in the former era of apartheid (1960s-1990s) [ 3 ] Tobacco industry divestment, coordinated by the NGO Tobacco-Free Portfolios (since 2000s) Fossil fuel divestment in response to global warming , coordinated by the NGO 350.org (since 2010s) Factory farming divestment [ 4 ] and big livestock divestment in response to environmental destruction, animal suffering, and human health concerns, coordinated by NGO Feedback Global.

[ 5 ] Method of divestment [ edit ] Some firms are using technology to facilitate the process of divesting some divisions. They post the information about any division that they wish to sell on their website so that it is available to any firm that may be interested in buying the division. For example, Alcoa has established an online showroom of the divisions that are for sale. By communicating the information online, Alcoa has reduced its hotel, travel, and meeting expenses.

Firms use transitional service agreements to increase the strategic benefits of divestitures.

Divestment execution includes five critical work streams: governance, tax, carve-out financial statements, deal-basis information, and operational separation.

[ 6 ] Companies often create cross-disciplined teams composed of IT, HR, legal, tax, and other key business units, to implement a business separation.

[ 7 ] With economic liberalization of the Indian economy , India's Ministry of Finance set up a separate Department of Disinvestments .

See also [ edit ] Mergers and acquisitions Corporate spin-off Consolidation (business) Corporate social responsibility Demerger Disinvestment Fossil fuel divestment Financial economics Tax resistance Socially responsible investing Stranded asset References [ edit ] ^ Brauer, Matthias (December 2006).

"What Have We Acquired and What Should We Acquire in Divestiture Research? A Review and Research Agenda" .

Journal of Management .

32 (6): 751– 785.

doi : 10.1177/0149206306292879 .

ISSN 0149-2063 .

S2CID 144147684 .

^ O’Connell, Sean; Park, Michael; Thomsen, Jannick.

"Divestitures: How to Invest for Success" . Transaction Advisors.

ISSN 2329-9134 .

^ Hunt, Chelsie; Weber, Olaf; Dordi, Truzaar (2017-01-02).

"A comparative analysis of the anti-Apartheid and fossil fuel divestment campaigns" .

Journal of Sustainable Finance & Investment .

7 (1): 64– 81.

doi : 10.1080/20430795.2016.1202641 .

ISSN 2043-0795 .

S2CID 168472615 .

^ "Factory farming divestment: what you need to know" .

The Guardian . 2016-03-03.

Archived from the original on 2023-05-17.

^ "End of Big Livestock" .

Feedback . 16 April 2019 . Retrieved 2019-06-02 .

^ Hammes, Paul.

"Are You Considering Divesting Assets? If Not, You Should Be" . Transaction Advisors.

ISSN 2329-9134 .

^ Markel, Carina; Smith, Lawson; Farkas, Jennifer.

"A Billion Dollar Successful Separation" . Transaction Advisors.

ISSN 2329-9134 .

v t e Corporate finance and investment banking Capital structure Convertible debt Exchangeable debt Mezzanine debt Pari passu Preferred equity Second lien debt Senior debt Senior secured debt Shareholder loan Stock Subordinated debt Warrant Transactions (terms/conditions) Equity offerings At-the-market offering Book building Bookrunner Bought deal Bought out deal Corporate spin-off Direct public offering Equity carve-out Follow-on offering Greenshoe Reverse Initial public offering Pre-IPO Private placement Public offering Rights issue Seasoned equity offering Secondary market offering Underwriting Mergers and acquisitions Buy side Contingent value rights Control premium Demerger Divestment Drag-along right Management due diligence Managerial entrenchment Mandatory offer Minority discount Pitch book Pre-emption right Proxy fight Post-merger integration Sell side Shareholder rights plan Special-purpose entity Special situation Squeeze-out Staggered board of directors Stock swap Supermajority amendment Synergy Tag-along right Takeover Reverse Tender offer Leverage Debt restructuring Debtor-in-possession financing Dividend recapitalization Financial sponsor Leveraged buyout Leveraged recapitalization High-yield debt Private equity Project finance Valuation Accretion/dilution analysis Adjusted present value Associate company Business valuation Conglomerate discount Cost of capital Weighted average Discounted cash flow Economic value added Enterprise value Fairness opinion Financial modeling Free cash flow Free cash flow to equity Market value added Minority interest Mismarking Modigliani–Miller theorem Net present value Pure play Real options Residual income Stock valuation Sum-of-the-parts analysis Tax shield Terminal value Valuation using multiples List of investment banks Outline of finance Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Divestment&oldid=1292069523 " Categories : Investment Corporate finance Outsourcing Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from February 2021 All articles that may contain original research This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 01:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Divestment 13 languages Add topic

