Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Definition and classification 3 Induction 4 Suggestion Toggle Suggestion subsection 4.1 Conscious and unconscious mind 4.2 Ideo-dynamic reflex 5 Susceptibility 6 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 6.1 Hypnotherapy 6.2 Forensic hypnosis 6.3 Military 6.4 Self-hypnosis 6.5 Stage hypnosis 6.6 Music 6.7 Satanic brainwashing 6.8 Crime 6.9 Sexual 7 State vs. non-state Toggle State vs. non-state subsection 7.1 Hyper-suggestibility 7.2 Conditioned inhibition 7.3 Neuropsychology 7.4 Dissociation 7.5 Neodissociation 7.6 Social role-taking theory 7.7 Cognitive-behavioural theory 7.8 Information theory 7.9 Systems theory 7.10 Societies 8 History 9 See also Toggle See also subsection 9.1 Historical figures 9.2 Modern researchers 9.3 Related subjects 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Hypnosis 82 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia State of increased suggestibility Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see Hypnotized (disambiguation) , Hypnotize (disambiguation) , and Hypnotist (disambiguation) .

Medical intervention Hypnosis Jean-Martin Charcot demonstrating hypnosis on a " hysterical " Salpêtrière patient, "Blanche" ( Marie Wittman ), who is supported by Joseph Babiński [ 1 ] MeSH D006990 [ edit on Wikidata ] Hypnotic Séance (1887) by Richard Bergh Photographic Studies in Hypnosis, Abnormal Psychology (1938) Hypnosis Applications Age regression in therapy Animal magnetism Hypnotherapy Stage hypnosis Self-hypnosis Hypnoanalysis Hypnosurgery Origins/History History of hypnosis Royal Commission on Animal Magnetism Key figures Theodore Xenophon Barber Deirdre Barrett Henri-Étienne Beaunis Hippolyte Bernheim Alexandre Bertrand Gil Boyne James Braid John Milne Bramwell William Joseph Bryan Jean-Martin Charcot Robert Hanham Collyer Émile Coué John Bovee Dods Baron du Potet Dave Elman William Collins Engledue Milton H. Erickson James Esdaile John Elliotson Sigmund Freud Erika Fromm Johann Joseph Gassner Ernest Hilgard Josephine R. Hilgard Clark L. Hull Pierre Janet Irving Kirsch Ambroise-Auguste Liébeault Jules Liégeois Franz Mesmer Martin Theodore Orne Charles Poyen Morton Prince Marquis of Puységur Andrew Salter Theodore R. Sarbin Nicholas Spanos Charles Lloyd Tuckey André Muller Weitzenhoffer Michael D. Yapko Related topics Absorption Automaticity Autosuggestion Coding Covert conditioning Covert hypnosis Guided imagery Hypnotherapy in the United Kingdom Hypnotic induction Hypnotic susceptibility Ideomotor phenomenon Neuro-linguistic programming Posthypnotic amnesia Suggestion Suggestion theory Trance v t e Hypnosis is a human condition involving focused attention (the selective attention/selective inattention hypothesis, SASI), [ 2 ] reduced peripheral awareness, and an enhanced capacity to respond to suggestion .

[ 3 ] There are competing theories explaining hypnosis and related phenomena.

Altered state theories see hypnosis as an altered state of mind or trance , marked by a level of awareness different from the ordinary state of consciousness .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In contrast, non-state theories see hypnosis as, variously, a type of placebo effect, [ 6 ] [ 7 ] a redefinition of an interaction with a therapist [ 8 ] or a form of imaginative role enactment .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] During hypnosis, a person is said to have heightened focus and concentration [ 12 ] [ 13 ] and an increased response to suggestions.

[ 14 ] Hypnosis usually begins with a hypnotic induction involving a series of preliminary instructions and suggestions. The use of hypnosis for therapeutic purposes is referred to as " hypnotherapy ", [ 15 ] while its use as a form of entertainment for an audience is known as " stage hypnosis ", a form of mentalism .

The use of hypnosis as a form of therapy to retrieve and integrate early trauma is controversial within the scientific mainstream. Research indicates that hypnotising an individual may aid the formation of false memories, [ 16 ] [ 17 ] and that hypnosis "does not help people recall events more accurately".

[ 18 ] Medical hypnosis is often considered pseudoscience or quackery .

[ 19 ] Etymology [ edit ] The words hypnosis and hypnotism both derive from the term neuro-hypnotism (nervous sleep), all of which were coined by Étienne Félix d'Henin de Cuvillers in the 1820s. The term hypnosis is derived from the ancient Greek ὑπνος hypnos , "sleep", and the suffix -ωσις - osis , or from ὑπνόω hypnoō , "put to sleep" ( stem of aorist hypnōs -) and the suffix - is .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] These words were popularised in English by the Scottish surgeon James Braid (to whom they are sometimes wrongly attributed) around 1841.

[ 22 ] Braid based his practice on that developed by Franz Mesmer and his followers (which was called "Mesmerism" or " animal magnetism "), but differed in his theory as to how the procedure worked.

Definition and classification [ edit ] A person in a state of hypnosis has focused attention, a deeply relaxed physical and mental state, and increased suggestibility .

[ 23 ] The hypnotized individual appears to heed only the communications of the hypnotist and typically responds in an uncritical, automatic fashion while ignoring all aspects of the environment other than those pointed out by the hypnotist. In a hypnotic state an individual tends to see, feel, smell, and otherwise perceive in accordance with the hypnotist's suggestions, even though these suggestions may be in apparent contradiction to the actual stimuli present in the environment. The effects of hypnosis are not limited to sensory change; even the subject's memory and awareness of self may be altered by suggestion, and the effects of the suggestions may be extended (post-hypnotically) into the subject's subsequent waking activity.

[ 24 ] It could be said that hypnotic suggestion is explicitly intended to make use of the placebo effect. For example, in 1994, Irving Kirsch characterized hypnosis as a "non-deceptive placebo", i.e., a method that openly makes use of suggestion and employs methods to amplify its effects.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] A definition of hypnosis, derived from academic psychology , was provided in 2005, when the Society for Psychological Hypnosis, Division 30 of the American Psychological Association (APA), published the following formal definition: Hypnosis typically involves an introduction to the procedure during which the subject is told that suggestions for imaginative experiences will be presented. The hypnotic induction is an extended initial suggestion for using one's imagination, and may contain further elaborations of the introduction. A hypnotic procedure is used to encourage and evaluate responses to suggestions. When using hypnosis, one person (the subject) is guided by another (the hypnotist) to respond to suggestions for changes in subjective experience, alterations in perception, [ 25 ] [ 26 ] sensation, [ 27 ] emotion, thought or behavior. Persons can also learn self-hypnosis, which is the act of administering hypnotic procedures on one's own. If the subject responds to hypnotic suggestions, it is generally inferred that hypnosis has been induced. Many believe that hypnotic responses and experiences are characteristic of a hypnotic state. While some think that it is not necessary to use the word "hypnosis" as part of the hypnotic induction, others view it as essential.

[ 28 ] Michael Nash provides a list of eight definitions of hypnosis by different authors, in addition to his own view that hypnosis is "a special case of psychological regression ": Janet , near the turn of the century, and more recently Ernest Hilgard ..., have defined hypnosis in terms of dissociation .

Social psychologists Sarbin and Coe ... have described hypnosis in terms of role theory . Hypnosis is a role that people play; they act "as if" they were hypnotised.

T. X. Barber ... defined hypnosis in terms of nonhypnotic behavioural parameters, such as task motivation and the act of labeling the situation as hypnosis.

In his early writings, Weitzenhoffer ... conceptualised hypnosis as a state of enhanced suggestibility. Most recently ... he has defined hypnotism as "a form of influence by one person exerted on another through the medium or agency of suggestion." Psychoanalysts Gill and Brenman ... described hypnosis by using the psychoanalytic concept of "regression in the service of the ego".

Edmonston ... has assessed hypnosis as being merely a state of relaxation.

Spiegel and Spiegel ... have implied that hypnosis is a biological capacity.

[ 29 ] Erickson ... is considered the leading exponent of the position that hypnosis is a special, inner-directed, altered state of functioning.

[ 29 ] Joe Griffin and Ivan Tyrrell (the originators of the human givens approach ) define hypnosis as "any artificial way of accessing the REM state, the same brain state in which dreaming occurs" and suggest that this definition, when properly understood, resolves "many of the mysteries and controversies surrounding hypnosis".

[ 30 ] They see the REM state as being vitally important for life itself, for programming in our instinctive knowledge initially (after Dement [ 31 ] and Jouvet [ 32 ] ) and then for adding to this throughout life. They attempt to explain this by asserting that, in a sense, all learning is post-hypnotic, which they say explains why the number of ways people can be put into a hypnotic state are so varied: according to them, anything that focuses a person's attention, inward or outward, puts them into a trance.

[ 33 ] Induction [ edit ] Main article: Hypnotic induction Hypnosis is normally preceded by a "hypnotic induction" technique. Traditionally, this was interpreted as a method of putting the subject into a "hypnotic trance"; however, subsequent "nonstate" theorists have viewed it differently, seeing it as a means of heightening client expectation, defining their role, focusing attention, etc. The induction techniques and methods are dependent on the depth of hypnotic trance level and for each stage of trance, the number of which in some sources ranges from 30 stages to 50 stages, there are different types of inductions.

[ 34 ] There are several different induction techniques. One of the most influential methods was Braid's "eye-fixation" technique, also known as "Braidism". Many variations of the eye-fixation approach exist, including the induction used in the Stanford Hypnotic Susceptibility Scale (SHSS), the most widely used research tool in the field of hypnotism.

[ 35 ] Braid's original description of his induction is as follows: Take any bright object (e.g. a lancet case) between the thumb and fore and middle fingers of the left hand; hold it from about eight to fifteen inches from the eyes, at such position above the forehead as may be necessary to produce the greatest possible strain upon the eyes and eyelids, and enable the patient to maintain a steady fixed stare at the object.

The patient must be made to understand that he is to keep the eyes steadily fixed on the object, and the mind riveted on the idea of that one object. It will be observed, that owing to the consensual adjustment of the eyes, the pupils will be at first contracted: They will shortly begin to dilate, and, after they have done so to a considerable extent, and have assumed a wavy motion, if the fore and middle fingers of the right hand, extended and a little separated, are carried from the object toward the eyes, most probably the eyelids will close involuntarily, with a vibratory motion. If this is not the case, or the patient allows the eyeballs to move, desire him to begin anew, giving him to understand that he is to allow the eyelids to close when the fingers are again carried towards the eyes, but that the eyeballs must be kept fixed, in the same position, and the mind riveted to the one idea of the object held above the eyes. In general, it will be found, that the eyelids close with a vibratory motion, or become spasmodically closed.

[ 36 ] Braid later acknowledged that the hypnotic induction technique was not necessary in every case, and subsequent researchers have generally found that on average it contributes less than previously expected to the effect of hypnotic suggestions.

[ 37 ] Variations and alternatives to the original hypnotic induction techniques were subsequently developed. However, this method is still considered authoritative.

[ citation needed ] In 1941, Robert White wrote: "It can be safely stated that nine out of ten hypnotic techniques call for reclining posture, muscular relaxation, and optical fixation followed by eye closure." [ 38 ] Suggestion [ edit ] Main article: Suggestion When James Braid first described hypnotism, he did not use the term "suggestion" but referred instead to the act of focusing the conscious mind of the subject upon a single dominant idea. Braid's main therapeutic strategy involved stimulating or reducing physiological functioning in different regions of the body. In his later works, however, Braid placed increasing emphasis upon the use of a variety of different verbal and non-verbal forms of suggestion, including the use of "waking suggestion" and self-hypnosis. Subsequently, Hippolyte Bernheim shifted the emphasis from the physical state of hypnosis on to the psychological process of verbal suggestion: I define hypnotism as the induction of a peculiar psychical [i.e., mental] condition which increases the susceptibility to suggestion. Often, it is true, the [hypnotic] sleep that may be induced facilitates suggestion, but it is not the necessary preliminary. It is suggestion that rules hypnotism.

[ 39 ] Bernheim's conception of the primacy of verbal suggestion in hypnotism dominated the subject throughout the 20th century, leading some authorities to declare him the father of modern hypnotism.

[ 40 ] Contemporary hypnotism uses a variety of suggestion forms including direct verbal suggestions, "indirect" verbal suggestions such as requests or insinuations, metaphors and other rhetorical figures of speech, and non-verbal suggestion in the form of mental imagery, voice tonality, and physical manipulation. A distinction is commonly made between suggestions delivered "permissively" and those delivered in a more "authoritarian" manner. Harvard hypnotherapist Deirdre Barrett writes that most modern research suggestions are designed to bring about immediate responses, whereas hypnotherapeutic suggestions are usually post-hypnotic ones that are intended to trigger responses affecting behaviour for periods ranging from days to a lifetime in duration. The hypnotherapeutic ones are often repeated in multiple sessions before they achieve peak effectiveness.

[ 41 ] Conscious and unconscious mind [ edit ] Some hypnotists view suggestion as a form of communication that is directed primarily to the subject's conscious mind, [ 42 ] whereas others view it as a means of communicating with the " unconscious " or " subconscious " mind.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] These concepts were introduced into hypnotism at the end of the 19th century by Sigmund Freud and Pierre Janet . Sigmund Freud's psychoanalytic theory describes conscious thoughts as being at the surface of the mind and unconscious processes as being deeper in the mind.

[ 44 ] Braid, Bernheim, and other Victorian pioneers of hypnotism did not refer to the unconscious mind but saw hypnotic suggestions as being addressed to the subject's conscious mind. Indeed, Braid actually defines hypnotism as focused (conscious) attention upon a dominant idea (or suggestion). Different views regarding the nature of the mind have led to different conceptions of suggestion. Hypnotists who believe that responses are mediated primarily by an "unconscious mind", like Milton Erickson , make use of indirect suggestions such as metaphors or stories whose intended meaning may be concealed from the subject's conscious mind. The concept of subliminal suggestion depends upon this view of the mind. By contrast, hypnotists who believe that responses to suggestion are primarily mediated by the conscious mind, such as Theodore Barber and Nicholas Spanos , have tended to make more use of direct verbal suggestions and instructions.

[ 45 ] Ideo-dynamic reflex [ edit ] Main article: Ideomotor response The first neuropsychological theory of hypnotic suggestion was introduced early by James Braid who adopted his friend and colleague William Carpenter's theory of the ideo-motor reflex response to account for the phenomenon of hypnotism. Carpenter had observed from close examination of everyday experience that, under certain circumstances, the mere idea of a muscular movement could be sufficient to produce a reflexive, or automatic, contraction or movement of the muscles involved, albeit in a very small degree. Braid extended Carpenter's theory to encompass the observation that a wide variety of bodily responses besides muscular movement can be thus affected, for example, the idea of sucking a lemon can automatically stimulate salivation, a secretory response. Braid, therefore, adopted the term "ideo-dynamic", meaning "by the power of an idea", to explain a broad range of "psycho-physiological" (mind–body) phenomena. Braid coined the term "mono-ideodynamic" to refer to the theory that hypnotism operates by concentrating attention on a single idea in order to amplify the ideo-dynamic reflex response. Variations of the basic ideo-motor, or ideo-dynamic, theory of suggestion have continued to exercise considerable influence over subsequent theories of hypnosis, including those of Clark L. Hull , Hans Eysenck , and Ernest Rossi.

[ 42 ] In Victorian psychology the word "idea" encompasses any mental representation, including mental imagery, memories, etc.

Susceptibility [ edit ] Main article: Hypnotic susceptibility Braid made a rough distinction between different stages of hypnosis, which he termed the first and second conscious stage of hypnotism; [ 46 ] he later replaced this with a distinction between "sub-hypnotic", "full hypnotic", and "hypnotic coma" stages.

[ 46 ] Jean-Martin Charcot made a similar distinction between stages which he named somnambulism, lethargy, and catalepsy. However, Ambroise-Auguste Liébeault and Hippolyte Bernheim introduced more complex hypnotic "depth" scales based on a combination of behavioural, physiological, and subjective responses, some of which were due to direct suggestion and some of which were not. In the first few decades of the 20th century, these early clinical "depth" scales were superseded by more sophisticated "hypnotic susceptibility" scales based on experimental research. The most influential were the Davis–Husband and Friedlander–Sarbin scales developed in the 1930s.

André Weitzenhoffer and Ernest R. Hilgard developed the Stanford Scale of Hypnotic Susceptibility in 1959, consisting of 12 suggestion test items following a standardised hypnotic eye-fixation induction script, and this has become one of the most widely referenced research tools in the field of hypnosis. Soon after, in 1962, Ronald Shor and Emily Carota Orne developed a similar group scale called the Harvard Group Scale of Hypnotic Susceptibility (HGSHS).

Whereas the older "depth scales" tried to infer the level of "hypnotic trance" from supposed observable signs such as spontaneous amnesia, most subsequent scales have measured the degree of observed or self-evaluated responsiveness to specific suggestion tests such as direct suggestions of arm rigidity (catalepsy). The Stanford, Harvard, HIP, and most other susceptibility scales convert numbers into an assessment of a person's susceptibility as "high", "medium", or "low". Approximately 80% of the population are medium, 10% are high, and 10% are low. There is some controversy as to whether this is distributed on a "normal" bell-shaped curve or whether it is bi-modal with a small "blip" of people at the high end.

[ 47 ] Hypnotisability scores are highly stable over a person's lifetime. Research by Deirdre Barrett has found that there are two distinct types of highly susceptible subjects, which she terms fantasisers and dissociaters. Fantasisers score high on absorption scales, find it easy to block out real-world stimuli without hypnosis, spend much time daydreaming, report imaginary companions as a child, and grew up with parents who encouraged imaginary play. Dissociaters often have a history of childhood abuse or other trauma, learned to escape into numbness, and to forget unpleasant events. Their association to "daydreaming" was often going blank rather than creating vividly recalled fantasies. Both score equally high on formal scales of hypnotic susceptibility.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] Individuals with dissociative identity disorder have the highest hypnotisability of any clinical group, followed by those with post-traumatic stress disorder .

[ 51 ] Applications [ edit ] There are numerous applications for hypnosis across multiple fields of interest, including medical/psychotherapeutic uses, military uses, self-improvement, and entertainment. The American Medical Association currently has no official stance on the medical use of hypnosis.

Hypnosis has been used as a supplemental approach to cognitive behavioral therapy since as early as 1949. Hypnosis was defined in relation to classical conditioning ; where the words of the therapist were the stimuli and the hypnosis would be the conditioned response. Some traditional cognitive behavioral therapy methods were based in classical conditioning. It would include inducing a relaxed state and introducing a feared stimulus. One way of inducing the relaxed state was through hypnosis.

[ 52 ] Hypnotism has also been used in forensics , sports , education, physical therapy , and rehabilitation .

[ 53 ] Hypnotism has also been employed by artists for creative purposes, most notably the surrealist circle of André Breton who employed hypnosis, automatic writing , and sketches for creative purposes. Hypnotic methods have been used to re-experience drug states [ 54 ] and mystical experiences.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Self-hypnosis is popularly used to quit smoking , alleviate stress and anxiety, promote weight loss , and induce sleep hypnosis. Stage hypnosis can persuade people to perform unusual public feats.

[ 57 ] Some people have drawn analogies between certain aspects of hypnotism and areas such as crowd psychology , religious hysteria, and ritual trances in preliterate tribal cultures.

[ 58 ] Hypnotherapy [ edit ] Main article: Hypnotherapy Hypnotherapy is a use of hypnosis in psychotherapy.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Physicians and psychologists may use hypnosis to treat depression, anxiety, eating disorders , sleep disorders , compulsive gambling , phobias and post-traumatic stress , [ 61 ] [ 62 ] while certified hypnotherapists who are not physicians or psychologists often treat smoking and weight management. Hypnotherapy is generally not considered to be based on scientific evidence, and is rarely recommended in clinical practice guidelines .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Hypnotherapy was historically used in psychiatric and legal settings to enhance the recall of repressed or degraded memories, but this application of the technique has declined as scientific evidence accumulated that hypnotherapy can increase confidence in false memories .

[ 65 ] Proponents of hypnotherapy claim it can have additive effects when treating psychological disorders alongside of scientifically proven cognitive therapies . The effectiveness of hypnotherapy has not yet been accurately assessed, [ 66 ] and, due to the lack of evidence indicating any level of efficiency, [ 67 ] it is regarded as a type of alternative medicine by numerous reputable medical organisations, such as the National Health Service .

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Forensic hypnosis [ edit ] Main article: Forensic hypnosis The use of hypnosis to exhume information thought to be buried within the mind in the investigative process and as evidence in court became increasingly popular from the 1950s to the early 1980s with its use being debated into the 1990s when its popular use mostly diminished.

[ 70 ] Forensic hypnosis's uses are hindered by concerns with its reliability and accuracy. Controversy surrounds the use of hypnotherapy to retrieve memories, especially those from early childhood. The American Medical Association and the American Psychological Association caution against recovered-memory therapy in cases of alleged childhood trauma, stating that "it is impossible, without corroborative evidence, to distinguish a true memory from a false one." [ 71 ] Past life regression is regarded as pseudoscience .

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Military [ edit ] A 2006 declassified 1966 document obtained by the US Freedom of Information Act archive shows that hypnosis was investigated for military applications.

[ 74 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The full paper explores the potentials of operational uses.

[ 74 ] The overall conclusion of the study was that there was no evidence that hypnosis could be used for military applications, and no clear evidence whether "hypnosis" is a definable phenomenon outside ordinary suggestion, motivation, and subject expectancy. According to the document: The use of hypnosis in intelligence would present certain technical problems not encountered in the clinic or laboratory. To obtain compliance from a resistant source, for example, it would be necessary to hypnotise the source under essentially hostile circumstances. There is no good evidence, clinical or experimental, that this can be done.

[ 74 ] Furthermore, the document states that: It would be difficult to find an area of scientific interest more beset by divided professional opinion and contradictory experimental evidence... No one can say whether hypnosis is a qualitatively unique state with some physiological and conditioned response components or only a form of suggestion induced by high motivation and a positive relationship between hypnotist and subject...

T. X. Barber has produced "hypnotic deafness" and "hypnotic blindness", analgesia and other responses seen in hypnosis—all without hypnotising anyone... Orne has shown that unhypnotised persons can be motivated to equal and surpass the supposed superhuman physical feats seen in hypnosis.

[ 74 ] The study concluded that there are no reliable accounts of its effective use by an intelligence service in history.

[ 74 ] Research into hypnosis in military applications is further verified by the Project MKUltra experiments, also conducted by the CIA .

[ 75 ] [ non-primary source needed ] According to Congressional testimony, [ 76 ] the CIA experimented with utilising LSD and hypnosis for mind control . Many of these programs were done domestically and on participants who were not informed of the study's purposes or that they would be given drugs.

[ 76 ] Self-hypnosis [ edit ] Main article: Self-hypnosis Self-hypnosis happens when a person hypnotises oneself, commonly involving the use of autosuggestion . The technique is often used to increase motivation for a diet , to quit smoking, or to reduce stress. People who practise self-hypnosis sometimes require assistance; some people use devices known as mind machines to assist in the process, whereas others use hypnotic recordings.

Self-hypnosis is claimed to help with stage fright, relaxation, and physical well-being.

[ 77 ] Stage hypnosis [ edit ] Main article: Stage hypnosis Stage hypnosis is a form of entertainment, traditionally employed in a club or theatre before an audience. Due to stage hypnotists' showmanship, many people believe that hypnosis is a form of mind control. Stage hypnotists typically attempt to hypnotise the entire audience and then select individuals who are "under" to come up on stage and perform embarrassing acts, while the audience watches. However, the effects of stage hypnosis are probably due to a combination of psychological factors, participant selection, suggestibility, physical manipulation, stagecraft, and trickery.

[ 78 ] The desire to be the centre of attention, having an excuse to violate their own fear suppressors, and the pressure to please are thought to convince subjects to "play along".

[ 79 ] Books by stage hypnotists sometimes explicitly describe the use of deception in their acts; for example, Ormond McGill 's New Encyclopedia of Stage Hypnotism describes an entire "fake hypnosis" act that depends upon the use of private whispers throughout.

[ citation needed ] Music [ edit ] The idea of music as hypnosis developed from the work of Franz Mesmer . Instruments such as pianos, violins, harps and, especially, the glass harmonica often featured in Mesmer's treatments; and were considered to contribute to Mesmer's success.

[ 80 ] Hypnotic music became an important part in the development of a 'physiological psychology' that regarded the hypnotic state as an 'automatic' phenomenon that links to physical reflex. In their experiments with sound hypnosis, Jean-Martin Charcot used gongs and tuning forks, and Ivan Pavlov used bells. The intention behind their experiments was to prove that physiological response to sound could be automatic, bypassing the conscious mind.

[ 81 ] Satanic brainwashing [ edit ] In the 1980s and 1990s, a moral panic took place in the US fearing Satanic ritual abuse . As part of this, certain books such as The Devil's Disciples claimed that some bands, particularly in the musical genre of heavy metal, brainwashed American teenagers with subliminal messages to lure them into the worship of the devil, sexual immorality, murder, and especially suicide.

[ 82 ] Crime [ edit ] Various people have been suspected of or convicted for hypnosis-related crimes, including robbery and sexual abuse.

In 1951, Palle Hardrup shot and killed two people during a botched robbery in Copenhagen - see Hypnosis murders . Hardrup claimed that his friend and former cellmate Bjørn Schouw Nielsen had hypnotised him to commit the robbery, inadvertently causing the deaths. Both were sentenced to jail time.

[ 83 ] In 2013, the then-40-year-old amateur hypnotist Timothy Porter attempted to sexually abuse his female weight-loss client. She reported awaking from a trance and finding him behind her with his pants down, telling her to touch herself. He was subsequently called to court and included on the sex offender list.

[ 84 ] In 2015, Gary Naraido, then 52, was sentenced to 10 years in prison for several hypnosis-related sexual abuse charges. Besides the primary charge by a 22-year-old woman who he sexually abused in a hotel under the guise of a free therapy session, he also admitted to having sexually assaulted a 14-year-old girl.

[ 85 ] In December 2018, a Brazilian medium named João Teixeira de Faria (also known as "João de Deus"), famous for performing Spiritual Surgeries through hypnosis techniques, was accused of sexual abuse by 12 women.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] In 2016 an Ohio lawyer was sentenced to 12 years of prison after hypnotizing a dozen different clients into committing sexual acts under the guise of a mindfulness exercise.

[ 88 ] Sexual [ edit ] Main article: Erotic hypnosis Erotic hypnosis is a broad term for activities involving hypnotic suggestions applied to create arousal.

[ 89 ] Some erotic hypnosis is practiced in the context of BDSM relationships and communities [ 90 ] , and is an example of a sexual fetish or paraphilia .

State vs. non-state [ edit ] The central theoretical disagreement regarding hypnosis is known as the "state versus non-state" debate. When Braid introduced the concept of hypnotism, he equivocated over the nature of the "state", sometimes describing it as a specific sleep-like neurological state comparable to animal hibernation or yogic meditation, while at other times he emphasized that hypnotism encompasses a number of different stages or states that are an extension of ordinary psychological and physiological processes. Overall, Braid appears to have moved from a more "special state" understanding of hypnotism toward a more complex "non-state" orientation.

[ citation needed ] State theorists interpret the effects of hypnotism as due primarily to a specific, abnormal, and uniform psychological or physiological state of some description, often referred to as "hypnotic trance" or an "altered state of consciousness". Non-state theorists rejected the idea of hypnotic trance and interpret the effects of hypnotism as due to a combination of multiple task-specific factors derived from normal cognitive, behavioural, and social psychology, such as social role-perception and favorable motivation ( Sarbin ), active imagination and positive cognitive set ( Barber ), response expectancy (Kirsch), and the active use of task-specific subjective strategies ( Spanos ). The personality psychologist Robert White is often cited as providing one of the first non-state definitions of hypnosis in a 1941 article: Hypnotic behaviour is meaningful, goal-directed striving, its most general goal being to behave like a hypnotised person as this is continuously defined by the operator and understood by the client.

[ 91 ] Put simply, it is often claimed that, whereas the older "special state" interpretation emphasizes the difference between hypnosis and ordinary psychological processes, the "non-state" interpretation emphasizes their similarity.

Comparisons between hypnotised and non-hypnotised subjects suggest that, if a "hypnotic trance" does exist, it only accounts for a small proportion of the effects attributed to hypnotic suggestion, most of which can be replicated without hypnotic induction.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ self-published source?

] Hyper-suggestibility [ edit ] Braid can be taken to imply, in later writings, that hypnosis is largely a state of heightened suggestibility induced by expectation and focused attention. In particular, Hippolyte Bernheim became known as the leading proponent of the "suggestion theory" of hypnosis, at one point going so far as to declare that there is no hypnotic state, only heightened suggestibility. There is a general consensus that heightened suggestibility is an essential characteristic of hypnosis. In 1933, Clark L. Hull wrote: If a subject after submitting to the hypnotic procedure shows no genuine increase in susceptibility to any suggestions whatever, there seems no point in calling him hypnotised, regardless of how fully and readily he may respond to suggestions of lid-closure and other superficial sleeping behaviour.

[ 94 ] Conditioned inhibition [ edit ] Ivan Pavlov stated that hypnotic suggestion provided the best example of a conditioned reflex response in human beings; i.e., that responses to suggestions were learned associations triggered by the words used: Speech, on account of the whole preceding life of the adult, is connected up with all the internal and external stimuli which can reach the cortex, signaling all of them and replacing all of them, and therefore it can call forth all those reactions of the organism which are normally determined by the actual stimuli themselves. We can, therefore, regard "suggestion" as the most simple form of a typical reflex in man.

[ 95 ] He also believed that hypnosis was a "partial sleep", meaning that a generalised inhibition of cortical functioning could be encouraged to spread throughout regions of the brain. He observed that the various degrees of hypnosis did not significantly differ physiologically from the waking state and hypnosis depended on insignificant changes of environmental stimuli. Pavlov also suggested that lower-brain-stem mechanisms were involved in hypnotic conditioning.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Pavlov's ideas combined with those of his rival Vladimir Bekhterev and became the basis of hypnotic psychotherapy in the Soviet Union, as documented in the writings of his follower K.I. Platonov. Soviet theories of hypnotism subsequently influenced the writings of Western behaviourally oriented hypnotherapists such as Andrew Salter .

Neuropsychology [ edit ] Changes in brain activity have been found in some studies of highly responsive hypnotic subjects. These changes vary depending upon the type of suggestions being given.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] The state of light to medium hypnosis, where the body undergoes physical and mental relaxation, is associated with a pattern mostly of alpha waves.

[ 100 ] [ better source needed ] However, what these results indicate is unclear. They may indicate that suggestions genuinely produce changes in perception or experience that are not simply a result of imagination. However, in normal circumstances without hypnosis, the brain regions associated with motion detection are activated both when motion is seen and when motion is imagined, without any changes in the subjects' perception or experience.

[ 101 ] This may therefore indicate that highly suggestible hypnotic subjects are simply activating to a greater extent the areas of the brain used in imagination, without real perceptual changes. It is, however, premature to claim that hypnosis and meditation are mediated by similar brain systems and neural mechanisms.

[ 102 ] Another study has demonstrated that a colour hallucination suggestion given to subjects in hypnosis activated colour-processing regions of the occipital cortex.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] A 2004 review of research examining the EEG laboratory work in this area concludes: Hypnosis is not a unitary state and therefore should show different patterns of EEG activity depending upon the task being experienced. In our evaluation of the literature, enhanced theta is observed during hypnosis when there is task performance or concentrative hypnosis, but not when the highly hypnotizable individuals are passively relaxed, somewhat sleepy and/or more diffuse in their attention.

[ 105 ] Studies have shown an association of hypnosis with stronger theta-frequency activity as well as with changes to the gamma -frequency activity.

[ 106 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Neuroimaging techniques have been used to investigate neural correlates of hypnosis.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] The induction phase of hypnosis may also affect the activity in brain regions that control intention and process conflict . Anna Gosline claims: Gruzelier and his colleagues studied brain activity using an fMRI while subjects completed a standard cognitive exercise, called the Stroop task . The team screened subjects before the study and chose 12 that were highly susceptible to hypnosis and 12 with low susceptibility. They all completed the task in the fMRI under normal conditions and then again under hypnosis. Throughout the study, both groups were consistent in their task results, achieving similar scores regardless of their mental state. During their first task session, before hypnosis, there were no significant differences in brain activity between the groups. But under hypnosis, Gruzelier found that the highly susceptible subjects showed significantly more brain activity in the anterior cingulate gyrus than the weakly susceptible subjects. This area of the brain has been shown to respond to errors and evaluate emotional outcomes. The highly susceptible group also showed much greater brain activity on the left side of the prefrontal cortex than the weakly susceptible group. This is an area involved with higher level cognitive processing and behaviour.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Dissociation [ edit ] Pierre Janet originally developed the idea of dissociation of consciousness from his work with hysterical patients. He believed that hypnosis was an example of dissociation, whereby areas of an individual's behavioural control separate from ordinary awareness. Hypnosis would remove some control from the conscious mind, and the individual would respond with autonomic, reflexive behaviour. Weitzenhoffer describes hypnosis via this theory as "dissociation of awareness from the majority of sensory and even strictly neural events taking place." [ 40 ] Neodissociation [ edit ] Ernest Hilgard , who developed the "neodissociation" theory of hypnotism, hypothesised that hypnosis causes the subjects to divide their consciousness voluntarily. One part responds to the hypnotist while the other retains awareness of reality. Hilgard made subjects take an ice water bath. None mentioned the water being cold or feeling pain. Hilgard then asked the subjects to lift their index finger if they felt pain and 70% of the subjects lifted their index finger. This showed that, even though the subjects were listening to the suggestive hypnotist, they still sensed the water's temperature.

[ 111 ] Social role-taking theory [ edit ] The main theorist who pioneered the influential role-taking theory of hypnotism was Theodore Sarbin . Sarbin argued that hypnotic responses were motivated attempts to fulfill the socially constructed roles of hypnotic subjects. This has led to the misconception that hypnotic subjects are simply "faking". However, Sarbin emphasised the difference between faking, in which there is little subjective identification with the role in question, and role-taking, in which the subject not only acts externally in accord with the role but also subjectively identifies with it to some degree, acting, thinking, and feeling "as if" they are hypnotised. Sarbin drew analogies between role-taking in hypnosis and role-taking in other areas such as method acting , mental illness, and shamanic possession, etc. This interpretation of hypnosis is particularly relevant to understanding stage hypnosis, in which there is clearly strong peer pressure to comply with a socially constructed role by performing accordingly on a theatrical stage.

Hence, the social constructionism and role-taking theory of hypnosis suggests that individuals are enacting (as opposed to merely playing ) a role and that really there is no such thing as a hypnotic trance. A socially constructed relationship is built depending on how much rapport has been established between the "hypnotist" and the subject (see Hawthorne effect , Pygmalion effect , and placebo effect ).

Psychologists such as Robert Baker and Graham Wagstaff claim that what we call hypnosis is actually a form of learned social behaviour, a complex hybrid of social compliance, relaxation, and suggestibility that can account for many esoteric behavioural manifestations.

[ 112 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Cognitive-behavioural theory [ edit ] Barber, Spanos, and Chaves (1974) proposed a nonstate "cognitive-behavioural" theory of hypnosis, similar in some respects to Sarbin's social role-taking theory and building upon the earlier research of Barber. On this model, hypnosis is explained as an extension of ordinary psychological processes like imagination, relaxation, expectation, social compliance, etc. In particular, Barber argued that responses to hypnotic suggestions were mediated by a "positive cognitive set" consisting of positive expectations, attitudes, and motivation. Daniel Araoz subsequently coined the acronym "TEAM" to symbolise the subject's orientation to hypnosis in terms of "trust", "expectation", "attitude", and "motivation".

[ 37 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Barber et al. noted that similar factors appeared to mediate the response both to hypnotism and to cognitive behavioural therapy, in particular systematic desensitisation.

[ 37 ] Hence, research and clinical practice inspired by their interpretation has led to growing interest in the relationship between hypnotherapy and cognitive behavioural therapy.

[ 113 ] : 105 [ 114 ] Information theory [ edit ] An approach loosely based on information theory uses a brain-as-computer model. In adaptive systems, feedback increases the signal-to-noise ratio , which may converge towards a steady state. Increasing the signal-to-noise ratio enables messages to be more clearly received. The hypnotist's object is to use techniques to reduce interference and increase the receptability of specific messages (suggestions).

[ 115 ] Systems theory [ edit ] Systems theory , in this context, may be regarded as an extension of Braid's original conceptualisation of hypnosis as involving "the brain and nervous system generally".

[ 116 ] : 31 Systems theory considers the nervous system 's organisation into interacting subsystems. Hypnotic phenomena thus involve not only increased or decreased activity of particular subsystems, but also their interaction. A central phenomenon in this regard is that of feedback loops, which suggest a mechanism for creating hypnotic phenomena.

[ 117 ] Societies [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) There is a huge range of societies in England who train individuals in hypnosis; however, one of the longest-standing organisations is the British Society of Clinical and Academic Hypnosis (BSCAH). It origins date back to 1952 when a group of dentists set up the 'British Society of Dental Hypnosis'. Shortly after, a group of sympathetic medical practitioners merged with this fast-evolving organisation to form 'The Dental and Medical Society for the Study of Hypnosis'; and, in 1968, after various statutory amendments had taken place, the 'British Society of Medical and Dental Hypnosis' (BSMDH) was formed. This society always had close links with the Royal Society of Medicine and many of its members were involved in setting up a hypnosis section at this centre of medical research in London. And, in 1978, under the presidency of David Waxman, the Section of Medical and Dental Hypnosis was formed. A second society, the British Society of Experimental and Clinical Hypnosis (BSECH), was also set up a year before, in 1977, and this consisted of psychologists, doctors and dentists with an interest in hypnosis theory and practice. In 2007, the two societies merged to form the 'British Society of Clinical and Academic Hypnosis' (BSCAH). This society only trains health professionals and is interested in furthering research into clinical hypnosis.

The American Society of Clinical Hypnosis (ASCH) is unique among organisations for professionals using hypnosis because members must be licensed healthcare workers with graduate degrees. As an interdisciplinary organisation, ASCH not only provides a classroom to teach professionals how to use hypnosis as a tool in their practice, it provides professionals with a community of experts from different disciplines. The ASCH's missions statement is to provide and encourage education programs to further, in every ethical way, the knowledge, understanding, and application of hypnosis in health care; to encourage research and scientific publication in the field of hypnosis; to promote the further recognition and acceptance of hypnosis as an important tool in clinical health care and focus for scientific research; to cooperate with other professional societies that share mutual goals, ethics and interests; and to provide a professional community for those clinicians and researchers who use hypnosis in their work. The ASCH also publishes the American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis .

History [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from History of hypnosis .

[ edit ] Hypnosis Applications Age regression in therapy Animal magnetism Hypnotherapy Stage hypnosis Self-hypnosis Hypnoanalysis Hypnosurgery Origins/History History of hypnosis Royal Commission on Animal Magnetism Key figures Theodore Xenophon Barber Deirdre Barrett Henri-Étienne Beaunis Hippolyte Bernheim Alexandre Bertrand Gil Boyne James Braid John Milne Bramwell William Joseph Bryan Jean-Martin Charcot Robert Hanham Collyer Émile Coué John Bovee Dods Baron du Potet Dave Elman William Collins Engledue Milton H. Erickson James Esdaile John Elliotson Sigmund Freud Erika Fromm Johann Joseph Gassner Ernest Hilgard Josephine R. Hilgard Clark L. Hull Pierre Janet Irving Kirsch Ambroise-Auguste Liébeault Jules Liégeois Franz Mesmer Martin Theodore Orne Charles Poyen Morton Prince Marquis of Puységur Andrew Salter Theodore R. Sarbin Nicholas Spanos Charles Lloyd Tuckey André Muller Weitzenhoffer Michael D. Yapko Related topics Absorption Automaticity Autosuggestion Coding Covert conditioning Covert hypnosis Guided imagery Hypnotherapy in the United Kingdom Hypnotic induction Hypnotic susceptibility Ideomotor phenomenon Neuro-linguistic programming Posthypnotic amnesia Suggestion Suggestion theory Trance v t e The development of concepts, beliefs and practices related to hypnosis and hypnotherapy have been documented since prehistoric to modern times.

Although often viewed as one continuous history, the term hypnosis was coined in the 1880s in France, some twenty years after the death of James Braid , who had adopted the term hypnotism (in 1841) — which specifically applied to the state of the subject, rather than techniques applied by the operator — to contrast his own, unique, subject-centred, approach with those of the operator-centred mesmerists/animal magnetists who preceded him.

See also [ edit ] List of hypnotists and list of fictional hypnotists Historical figures [ edit ] Alfred Binet James Braid John Milne Bramwell William Joseph Bryan Emile Dantinne John Elliotson George Estabrooks Abbé Faria Ainslie Meares Franz Anton Mesmer Mahmoud K. Muftić Julian Ochorowicz Charles Lloyd Tuckey Otto Georg Wetterstrand Modern researchers [ edit ] Etzel Cardeña Alan Gauld Jack Stanley Gibson Ernest Hilgard Albert Abraham Mason Ainslie Meares Dylan Morgan David Spiegel Michel Weber [ 118 ] Michael D. Yapko Gary R. Elkins Related subjects [ edit ] Covert hypnosis Guided meditation Highway hypnosis Hypnagogia Hypnoid state Hypnosis in popular culture Hypnosurgery Hypnotherapy Hypnotic Ego-Strengthening Procedure Ideomotor phenomenon List of ineffective cancer treatments Psychonautics Recreational hypnosis Royal Commission on Animal Magnetism Scientology and hypnosis Sedative (also known as sedative-hypnotic drug) The Zoist: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and Their Applications to Human Welfare References [ edit ] ^ See: A Clinical Lesson at the Salpêtrière .

^ Hall, Harriet (2021). "Hypnosis revisited".

Skeptical Inquirer .

45 (2): 17– 19.

^ In 2015, the American Psychological Association Division 30 defined hypnosis as a "state of consciousness involving focused attention and reduced peripheral awareness characterized by an enhanced capacity for response to suggestion". For critical commentary on this definition, see: Lynn SJ, Green JP, Kirsch I, Capafons A, Lilienfeld SO, Laurence JR, Montgomery GH (April 2015). "Grounding Hypnosis in Science: The "New" APA Division 30 Definition of Hypnosis as a Step Backward".

The American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis .

57 (4): 390– 401.

doi : 10.1080/00029157.2015.1011472 .

PMID 25928778 .

S2CID 10797114 .

^ Encyclopædia Britannica , 2004: "a special psychological state with certain physiological attributes, resembling sleep only superficially and marked by a functioning of the individual at a level of awareness other than the ordinary conscious state".

^ Erika Fromm; Ronald E. Shor (2009).

Hypnosis: Developments in Research and New Perspectives . Rutgers.

ISBN 978-0-202-36262-5 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 27 September 2014 .

^ a b Kirsch I (October 1994). "Clinical hypnosis as a nondeceptive placebo: empirically derived techniques".

The American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis .

37 (2): 95– 106.

doi : 10.1080/00029157.1994.10403122 .

PMID 7992808 .

^ a b Kirsch, I., "Clinical Hypnosis as a Nondeceptive Placebo", pp. 211–25 in Kirsch, I., Capafons, A., Cardeña-Buelna, E., Amigó, S. (eds.), Clinical Hypnosis and Self-Regulation: Cognitive-Behavioral Perspectives , American Psychological Association, (Washington), 1999 ISBN 1-55798-535-9 ^ Theodore X. Barber (1969).

Hypnosis: A Scientific Approach . J. Aronson, 1995.

ISBN 978-1-56821-740-6 .

^ Lynn S, Fassler O, Knox J (2005). "Hypnosis and the altered state debate: something more or nothing more?".

Contemporary Hypnosis .

22 : 39– 45.

doi : 10.1002/ch.21 .

^ Coe WC, Buckner LG, Howard ML, Kobayashi K (July 1972). "Hypnosis as role enactment: focus on a role specific skill".

The American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis .

15 (1): 41– 45.

doi : 10.1080/00029157.1972.10402209 .

PMID 4679790 .

^ Steven J. Lynn; Judith W. Rhue (1991).

Theories of hypnosis: current models and perspectives . Guilford Press.

ISBN 978-0-89862-343-7 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 .

^ Orne, M. T. (1962). On the social psychology of the psychological experiment: With particular reference to demand characteristics and their implications. American
Psychologist, 17, 776-783 ^ Segi, Sherril (2012). "Hypnosis for pain management, anxiety and behavioral disorders".

The Clinical Advisor: For Nurse Practitioners .

15 (3): 80.

ISSN 1524-7317 .

^ Lyda, Alex. "Hypnosis Gaining Ground in Medicine." Columbia News Archived 7 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine . Columbia.edu. Retrieved on 1 October 2011.

^ Spanos, N. P., Spillane, J., & McPeake, J. D. (1976). Cognitive strategies and response to suggestion in hypnotic
and task-motivated subjects. American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, 18, 252-262.

^ Lynn, Steven Jay; Krackow, Elisa; Loftus, Elizabeth F.

; Locke, Timothy G.; Lilienfeld, Scott O.

(2014). "Constructing the past: problematic memory recovery techniques in psychotherapy". In Lilienfeld, Scott O.; Lynn, Steven Jay; Lohr, Jeffrey M. (eds.).

Science and pseudoscience in clinical psychology (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press . pp.

245– 275.

ISBN 9781462517510 .

OCLC 890851087 .

^ French, Christopher C. (2023). "Hypnotic Regression and False Memories". In Ballester-Olmos, V.J.; Heiden, Richard W. (eds.).

The Reliability of UFO Witness Testimony . Turin, Italy: UPIAR. pp.

283– 294.

ISBN 9791281441002 .

^ Hall, Celia (26 August 2001).

"Hypnosis does not help accurate memory recall, says study" .

Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 11 March 2019 .

^ Naudet, Florian; Falissard, Bruno ; Boussageon, Rémy; Healy, David (2015).

"Has evidence-based medicine left quackery behind?" (PDF) .

Internal and Emergency Medicine .

10 (5): 631– 634.

doi : 10.1007/s11739-015-1227-3 .

ISSN 1970-9366 .

PMID 25828467 .

S2CID 20697592 .

Treatments such as relaxation techniques, chiropractic, therapeutic massage, special diets, megavitamins, acupuncture, naturopathy, homeopathy, hypnosis and psychoanalysis are often considered as pseudoscience or quackery with no credible or respectable place in medicine, because in evaluation they have not been shown to work ^ hypnos , hypnoō .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"hypnosis" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Ph.D, Melvin A. Gravitz (1 July 1993).

"Etienne Félix d'Hénin de Cuvillers: A Founder of Hypnosis" .

American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis .

doi : 10.1080/00029157.1993.10403033 .

ISSN 0002-9157 .

^ T.L. Brink. (2008) Psychology: A Student Friendly Approach. "Unit 5: Perception." p. 88 [1] Archived 16 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "hypnosis." Encyclopædia Britannica web edition. Retrieved: 20 March 2016.

^ Leslie M (6 September 2000), "Research supports the notion that hypnosis can transform perception" , Stanford Report , Stanford University, archived from the original on 2 August 2013 , retrieved 16 June 2013 ^ Mauer MH, Burnett KF, Ouellette EA, Ironson GH, Dandes HM (April 1999). "Medical hypnosis and orthopedic hand surgery: pain perception, postoperative recovery, and therapeutic comfort".

The International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis .

47 (2): 144– 61.

doi : 10.1080/00207149908410027 .

PMID 10208075 .

^ De Pascalis V, Magurano MR, Bellusci A (December 1999). "Pain perception, somatosensory event-related potentials and skin conductance responses to painful stimuli in high, mid, and low hypnotizable subjects: effects of differential pain reduction strategies".

Pain .

83 (3): 499– 508.

doi : 10.1016/S0304-3959(99)00157-8 .

PMID 10568858 .

S2CID 3158482 .

INIST 1291393 .

^ "New Definition: Hypnosis" Archived 10 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine . Society of Psychological Hypnosis Division 30 – American Psychological Association.

^ a b Lynn, Steven J.; Rhue, Judith W. (4 October 1991).

Theories of Hypnosis: Current Models and Perspectives . Guilford Press.

ISBN 9780898623437 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 7 November 2015 – via Google Books.

^ Griffin J, Tyrrell I (2013).

Human Givens: The new approach to emotional health and clear thinking . HG Publishing. p. 67.

ISBN 978-1-899398-31-7 .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2014 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

^ Roffwarg HP, Muzio JN, Dement WC (April 1966). "Ontogenetic development of the human sleep-dream cycle".

Science .

152 (3722): 604– 19.

Bibcode : 1966Sci...152..604R .

doi : 10.1126/science.152.3722.604 .

PMID 17779492 .

^ Jouvet M (1978). "Does a genetic programming of the brain occur during paradoxical sleep". In Buser PA, Rougeul-Buser A (eds.).

Cerebral correlates of conscious experience: proceedings of an international symposium on cerebral correlates of conscious experience, held in Senanque Abbey, France, on 2–8 August 1977 . New York: North-Holland.

ISBN 978-0-7204-0659-7 .

^ Griffin J, Tyrrell I (2011).

Godhead: the brain's big bang: the strange origin of creativity, mysticism and mental illness . Chalvington: Human Givens. pp.

106– 22.

ISBN 978-1-899398-27-0 .

Archived from the original on 25 March 2015 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

^ Irawan, Chandra.

"Combination of Hypnosis Therapy and Range of Motion Exercise on Upper-Extremity Muscle Strength in Patients With Non-Hemorraghic[sic] Stroke" .

researchgate.net .

Archived from the original on 4 May 2022 . Retrieved 4 May 2022 .

^ Weitzenhoffer & Hilgard (1959).

Stanford Hypnotic Susceptibility Scales, Forms A & B . Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

^ Braid (1843), p. 27.

^ a b c Barber, TX, Spanos, NP. & Chaves, JF., Hypnosis, imagination, and human potentialities . Pergamon Press, 1974.

Archived 2 July 2023 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 0-08-017931-2 .

^ White, Robert W. (1941). "A preface to the theory of hypnotism".

Journal of Abnormal & Social Psychology .

36 (4): 477–505 (498).

doi : 10.1037/h0053844 .

^ Bernheim, Hippolyte (11 July 1964).

"Hypnosis & Suggestion in Psychotherapy: A Treatise on the Nature and Uses of Hypnotism. Tr. from the 2d Rev. Ed" . University Books.

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 11 October 2019 – via Google Books.

^ a b Weitzenhoffer AM (1953).

Hypnotism – An Objective Study in Suggestibility . New York: Wiley.

ISBN 978-1-258-02536-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) [ page needed ] ^ Barrett D (1998).

The Pregnant Man: Cases from a Hypnotherapist's Couch . Times Books.

^ a b c Rossi EL, Rossi KL (April 2007).

"What is a suggestion? The neuroscience of implicit processing heuristics in therapeutic hypnosis and psychotherapy" (PDF) .

American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis .

49 (4): 267– 81.

doi : 10.1080/00029157.2007.10524504 .

PMID 17444364 .

S2CID 12202594 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 December 2013 . Retrieved 24 April 2013 .

^ Lovatt WF (1933–34).

"Hypnosis and suggestion" (PDF) . Rider & Co. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 24 April 2013 .

^ Daniel L. Schacter; Daniel T. Gilbert; Daniel M. Wegner, Psychology , 2009, 2011 ^ Spanos, Nicholas P.; Barber, Theodore X. (1974).

"Toward a convergence in hypnosis research" .

American Psychologist .

29 (7): 500– 511.

doi : 10.1037/h0036795 .

ISSN 1935-990X .

PMID 4416672 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 28 September 2022 .

^ a b Braid, James (11 July 2008).

The Discovery of Hypnosis: The Complete Writings of James Braid, the Father of Hypnotherapy . UKCHH Ltd.

ISBN 9780956057006 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 7 November 2015 – via Google Books.

^ Piccione C, Hilgard ER, Zimbardo PG (February 1989). "On the degree of stability of measured hypnotizability over a 25-year period".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

56 (2): 289– 95.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.586.1971 .

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.56.2.289 .

PMID 2926631 .

^ Barrett, Deirdre. Deep Trance Subjects: A Schema of Two Distinct Subgroups. in R. Kunzendorf (Ed.) Imagery: Recent Developments, NY: Plenum Press, 1991, pp. 101–12.

^ Barrett D (December 1992). "Fantasizers and dissociaters: data on two distinct subgroups of deep trance subjects".

Psychological Reports .

71 (3 Pt 1): 1011– 14.

doi : 10.2466/pr0.1992.71.3.1011 .

PMID 1454907 .

S2CID 44878822 .

^ Barrett, Deirdre. Fantasizers and Dissociaters: Two types of High Hypnotizables, Two Imagery Styles. in R. Kuzendorf, N. Spanos, & B. Wallace (Eds.) Hypnosis and Imagination, NY: Baywood, 1996 ISBN 0-89503-139-6 ^ Spiegel D, Loewenstein RJ, Lewis-Fernández R, Sar V, Simeon D, Vermetten E, Cardeña E, Dell PF (September 2011).

"Dissociative disorders in DSM-5" (PDF) .

Depression and Anxiety .

28 (9): 824– 52.

doi : 10.1002/da.20874 .

PMID 21910187 .

S2CID 46518635 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2013.

^ Chapman, Robin (2005).

Clinical Use of Hypnosis in Cognitive Behavior Therapy: A Practitioner's Casebook . Springer Publisher Company. p. 6.

^ André M. Weitzenbhoffer.

The Practice of Hypnotism 2nd ed, Toronto, John Wiley & Son Inc., Chapter 16, pp. 583–87, 2000 ISBN 0-471-29790-9 ^ Fogel S, Hoffer A (1962). "The use of hypnosis to interrupt and to reproduce an LSD-25 experience".

Journal of Clinical and Experimental Psychopathology & Quarterly Review of Psychiatry and Neurology .

23 : 11– 16.

PMID 13893766 .

^ Van Quekelberghe R, Göbel P, Hertweck E (1995). "Simulation of near-death and out-of-body experiences under hypnosis".

Imagination, Cognition and Personality .

14 (2): 151– 64.

doi : 10.2190/gdfw-xlel-enql-5wq6 .

S2CID 145579925 .

^ "Using Hypnosis to Encourage Mystical Experience" Archived 29 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Counselinginoregon.com. Retrieved on 1 October 2011.

^ "History of the Stage Hypnotist and Stage Hypnosis Shows." Archived 1 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine . stagehypnosisshow.co.uk. Retrieved on 23 January 2015.

^ Wier DR (1996).

Trance: from magic to technology . Ann Arbor, MI: TransMedia.

ISBN 978-1-888428-38-4 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Hypnotherapy | University of Maryland Medical Center" . 27 June 2013. Archived from the original on 27 June 2013.

^ "Australian Society of Clinical Hypnotherapists" . Archived from the original on 26 January 2016.

^ Deirdre Barrett (1998).

The Pregnant Man: Tales from a Hypnotherapist's Couch (1998/hardback, 1999 paper ed.). NY: Times Books/Random House.

ISBN 978-0-8129-2905-8 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 7 November 2015 .

^ Assen Alladin (2008).

Cognitive hypnotherapy: an integrated approach to the treatment of emotional disorders . J. Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-470-03251-0 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 .

^ Chan NA, Zhang Z, Yin G, Li Z, Ho RC (2021). "Update on hypnotherapy for psychiatrists".

BJPsych Advances .

29 (6). Royal College of Psychiatrists: 381– 387.

doi : 10.1192/bja.2021.54 .

ISSN 2056-4678 .

^ "Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) | Health Careers" . Archived from the original on 26 June 2018.

^ Lynn, Steven Jay (11 August 2020).

"Myths and misconceptions about hypnosis and suggestion: Separating fact and fiction" .

Applied Cognitive Psychology .

34 (6): 1260.

doi : 10.1002/acp.3730 .

S2CID 225412389 .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2022 . Retrieved 27 September 2022 .

^ Flammer E, Bongartz W (2006).

"On the efficacy of hypnosis: a meta-analytic study" (PDF) .

Contemporary Hypnosis .

20 (4). Wiley: 179– 197.

doi : 10.1002/ch.277 .

ISSN 0960-5290 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 February 2016 . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

^ Barnes J, McRobbie H, Dong CY, Walker N, Hartmann-Boyce J (14 June 2019).

"Hypnotherapy for smoking cessation" .

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2019 (6). Wiley: CD001008.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.cd001008.pub3 .

ISSN 1465-1858 .

PMC 6568235 .

PMID 31198991 .

^ "Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) | Health Careers" . Archived from the original on 26 June 2018.

^ "Hypnotherapy" . 19 January 2018.

Archived from the original on 11 August 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2019 .

^ Winter, Alison (1 March 2013).

"The rise and fall of forensic hypnosis" .

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences . Special Issue: Forensic Cultures.

44 (1): 26– 35.

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsc.2012.09.011 .

ISSN 1369-8486 .

PMID 23142619 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2019 . Retrieved 4 May 2023 .

^ "Questions and Answers about Memories of Childhood Abuse" . American Psychological Association. Archived from the original on 5 December 2006 . Retrieved 22 January 2007 .

^ Astin JA, Shapiro SL, Eisenberg DM, Forys KL (2003). "Mind-body medicine: state of the science, implications for practice".

The Journal of the American Board of Family Practice .

16 (2): 131– 47.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.501.9041 .

doi : 10.3122/jabfm.16.2.131 .

PMID 12665179 .

S2CID 2309771 .

^ "Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioral Sciences – University of Virginia School of Medicine" (PDF) . Medicine.virginia.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2013 . Retrieved 20 September 2018 .

^ a b c d e Hypnosis in Intelligence Archived 16 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine , The Black Vault , 2008 ^ MKULTRA Program , The Black Vault , 2008 Archived 23 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Congressional Hearing by MKULTRA Archived 18 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine , The Black Vault ^ "Self-hypnosis as a skill for busy research workers." Archived 13 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine London's Global University Human Resources. ucl.ac.uk.

^ Yapko, Michael (1990).

Trancework: An introduction to the practice of Clinical Hypnosis . New York: Brunner/Mazel. p. 28.

^ Wagstaff GF (1981).

Hypnosis, Compliance and Belief . New York: St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-0-312-40157-3 .

[ page needed ] ^ Polter 1934, p. 15. See also Franklin 1785, p. 23. Gallo and Finger 2000; Hadlock 2000a; Hyatt King 1945.

^ Pavlov 1928; Todes 2002.

^ Godwin 1986, 1995; Peters and Peters 1985.

^ Martinsen, Poul (2012).

Hypnosemorderen – dobbeltmennesket Palle Hardrup (in Danish). Gyldendal.

ISBN 978-87-02-12200-8 .

^ Evil hypnotist made me into his sex slave: He admits vile acts while client was in trance Archived 7 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Mirror ^ Clarke-Billings L (28 September 2015).

"Hypnotist jailed for ten years after sexually assaulting woman under his spell" .

Daily Telegraph .

ISSN 0307-1235 .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 1 November 2017 .

^ Darlington S (11 December 2018).

"Celebrity Healer in Brazil Is Accused of Sexually Abusing Followers" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2022 . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "Twelve Women Accuse Medium John of God of Sexual Abuse" . 9 December 2018.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2018 . Retrieved 14 December 2018 .

^ "Lawyer Who Hypnotized Women For His Own Sexual Pleasure Sentenced to Prison" .

Time . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ Griffiths, Mark D. (14 December 2016).

"Hypnosis And Sexual Health" .

Psychology Today .

^ Sloan, Kate (2021).

101 Kinky Things Even You Can Do . Laurence King Publishing. pp.

76– 77.

ISBN 9781913947217 .

^ White, R.W. (1941). "A preface to the theory of hypnotism".

Journal of Abnormal Psychology .

36 (4): 477– 505.

doi : 10.1037/h0053844 .

^ Hasegawa, Harutomo; Jamieson, Graham A. (September 2002).

"Conceptual issues in hypnosis research: explanations, definitions and the state/non-state debate" .

Contemporary Hypnosis .

19 (3): 103– 117.

doi : 10.1002/ch.247 .

ISSN 0960-5290 .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2023 . Retrieved 11 January 2023 .

^ "Theories of Hypnosis | Hypnosis And Suggestion" .

hypnosisandsuggestion.org .

Archived from the original on 18 June 2022 . Retrieved 24 June 2022 .

^ Clark Leonard Hull (1933).

Hypnosis and suggestibility: an experimental approach . D. Appleton-Century company. p. 392.

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 .

^ Pavlov, quoted in Salter, What is Hypnosis ?, 1944: 23 ^ Pavlov IP (1957).

Experimental Psychology . New York: Philosophical Library.

[ page needed ] ^ Barker W, Burgwin S (1948). "Brain wave patterns accompanying changes in sleep and wakefulness during hypnosis".

Psychosomatic Medicine .

10 (6): 317– 26.

doi : 10.1097/00006842-194811000-00002 .

PMID 18106841 .

S2CID 31249127 .

^ Raz A, Fan J, Posner MI (July 2005).

"Hypnotic suggestion reduces conflict in the human brain" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

102 (28): 9978– 83.

Bibcode : 2005PNAS..102.9978R .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0503064102 .

PMC 1174993 .

PMID 15994228 .

^ Derbyshire SW, Whalley MG, Stenger VA, Oakley DA (September 2004). "Cerebral activation during hypnotically induced and imagined pain".

NeuroImage .

23 (1): 392– 401.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.04.033 .

PMID 15325387 .

S2CID 16786564 .

^ London College of Clinical Hypnosis. "What is Clinical Hypnosis?" [2] . Accessed 14 September 2013 ^ Grossman ED, Blake R (2001).

"Brain activity evoked by inverted and imagined biological motion" .

Vision Research .

41 ( 10– 11): 1475– 82.

doi : 10.1016/S0042-6989(00)00317-5 .

PMID 11322987 .

S2CID 6078493 .

^ Functional neuroimaging studies of hypnosis and meditation: A comparative perspective Archived 8 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Landry, Mathieu; Lifshitz, Michael; Raz, Amir (1 October 2017).

"Brain correlates of hypnosis: A systematic review and meta-analytic exploration" .

Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews . The power of instructions: the influence of instructions on cognition, behaviour and physical states.

81 (Pt A): 75– 98.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.02.020 .

ISSN 0149-7634 .

PMID 28238944 .

^ Kosslyn SM, Thompson WL, Costantini-Ferrando MF, Alpert NM, Spiegel D (August 2000). "Hypnotic visual illusion alters color processing in the brain".

The American Journal of Psychiatry .

157 (8): 1279– 84.

doi : 10.1176/appi.ajp.157.8.1279 .

PMID 10910791 .

S2CID 18060042 .

^ Horton; Crawford (2004).

The Highly Hypnotisable Subject . p. 140.

^ Jensen MP, Adachi T, Hakimian S (January 2015).

"Brain Oscillations, Hypnosis, and Hypnotizability" .

The American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis (Review).

57 (3): 230– 53.

doi : 10.1080/00029157.2014.976786 .

PMC 4361031 .

PMID 25792761 .

^ Mazzoni G, Venneri A, McGeown WJ, Kirsch I (February 2013).

"Neuroimaging resolution of the altered state hypothesis" .

Cortex; A Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and Behavior (Review).

49 (2): 400– 10.

doi : 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.08.005 .

PMID 23026758 .

S2CID 206984627 .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2021 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

^ Landry M, Raz A (January 2015). "Hypnosis and imaging of the living human brain".

The American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis (Review).

57 (3): 285– 313.

doi : 10.1080/00029157.2014.978496 .

PMID 25928680 .

S2CID 844244 .

^ Gosline A (10 September 2004).

"Hypnosis really changes your mind" .

New Scientist . Retrieved 27 August 2007 .

^ Egner T, Jamieson G, Gruzelier J (October 2005). "Hypnosis decouples cognitive control from conflict monitoring processes of the frontal lobe".

NeuroImage .

27 (4): 969– 78.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.05.002 .

PMID 15964211 .

S2CID 13979703 .

^ McEntarffer, Robert; Weseley, Allyson (2007).

Barron's AP Psychology 2008 . Hauppauge, N.Y.: Barron's Educational Series, Inc.

ISBN 978-0-7641-3665-8 .

OCLC 73742844 .

^ Baker RA (1990).

They Call It Hypnosis . Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books.

ISBN 978-0-87975-576-8 .

[ page needed ] ^ Robin A. Chapman (2006).

The clinical use of hypnosis in cognitive behavior therapy: a practitioner's casebook . Springer Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0-8261-2884-3 .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 .

^ Bolocofsky DN, Spinler D, Coulthard-Morris L (January 1985).

"Effectiveness of hypnosis as an adjunct to behavioral weight management" (PDF) .

Journal of Clinical Psychology .

41 (1): 35– 41.

doi : 10.1002/1097-4679(198501)41:1<35::AID-JCLP2270410107>3.0.CO;2-Z .

PMID 3973038 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 December 2013.

^ Kroger, William S. (1977) Clinical and experimental hypnosis in medicine, dentistry, and psychology.

Lippincott, Philadelphia, p. 31.

ISBN 0-397-50377-6 ^ Braid J (1843).

Neurypnology or The rationale of nervous sleep considered in relation with animal magnetism . Buffalo, NY: John Churchill.

^ Morgan J.D. (1993).

The Principles of Hypnotherapy . Eildon Press.

^ Michel Weber is working on a Whiteheadian interpretation of hypnotic phenomena: see his « Hypnosis: Panpsychism in Action Archived 1 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine », in Michel Weber and William Desmond, Jr. (eds.), Handbook of Whiteheadian Process Thought Archived 9 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Frankfurt / Lancaster, ontos verlag, Process Thought X1 & X2, 2008, I, pp. 15–38, 395–414; cf. « Syntonie ou agencement ethnopsychiatrique ?

Archived 8 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine », Michel Weber et Vincent Berne (sous la direction de), Chromatikon IX. Annales de la philosophie en procès – Yearbook of Philosophy in Process Archived 3 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Les Editions Chromatika, 2013, pp. 55–68.

Bibliography [ edit ] Baudouin, C. (Paul, E & Paul, C. trans.), Suggestion and Autosuggestion: A Psychological and Pedagogical Study Based on the Investigations made by the New Nancy School , George Allen & Unwin, (London), 1920.

Braid J (1843).

Neurypnology; or The Rationale of Nervous Sleep considered in relation with Animal Magnetism . London: John Churchill.

Braid, J. (1850), Observations on Trance; or, Human Hybernation , London: John Churchill.

Braid, J. (1855), "On the Nature and Treatment of Certain Forms of Paralysis", Association Medical Journal , Vol.3, No.141, (14 September 1855), pp. 848–855.

Brann, L., Owens J. Williamson, A. (eds.) (2015), The Handbook of Contemporary Clinical Hypnosis: Theory and Practice , Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-1190-5727-7 Brown, T.

(1851), Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind (Nineteenth Edition) , Edinburgh: Adam & Charles Black.

Coates, James (1904), Human Magnetism; or, How to Hypnotise: A Practical Handbook for Students of Mesmerism , London: Nichols & Co.

Gibson HB (1991).

Hypnosis in Therapy . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-8637-7155-2 .

Glueck, B.

, "New Nancy School", The Psychoanalytic Review , Vol. 10, (January 1923), pp. 109–12.

Harte, R., Hypnotism and the Doctors, Volume I: Animal Magnetism: Mesmer/De Puysegur , L.N. Fowler & Co., (London), 1902 .

Harte, R., Hypnotism and the Doctors, Volume II: The Second Commission; Dupotet And Lafontaine; The English School; Braid's Hypnotism; Statuvolism; Pathetism; Electro-Biology , L.N. Fowler & Co., (London), 1903 .

Lynn, Steven (1991).

Theories of Hypnosis: Current Models and Perspectives . Guilford Press.

ISBN 978-0-89862-343-7 .

Yeates, Lindsay B. (2005), An Account of Thomas Brown’s Philosophy of the Human Mind , (unpublished manuscript), School of the History and Philosophy of Science, Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, University of New South Wales, Kensington, New South Wales, Australia.

Yeates, L.B. (2013), James Braid: Surgeon, Gentleman Scientist, and Hypnotist , Ph.D. Dissertation, School of History and Philosophy of Science, Faculty of Arts & Social Sciences, University of New South Wales, January 2013.

Yeates, L.B. (2014), "Hartland’s Legacy (II): The Ego-Strengthening Monologue", Australian Journal of Clinical Hypnotherapy & Hypnosis , 36 (1), pp. 19–36.

Yeates, Lindsay B. (2016a), "Émile Coué and his Method (I): The Chemist of Thought and Human Action", Australian Journal of Clinical Hypnotherapy & Hypnosis , Volume 38, No. 1, (Autumn 2016), pp. 3–27.

Yeates, Lindsay B. (2016b), "Émile Coué and his Method (II): Hypnotism, Suggestion, Ego-Strengthening, and Autosuggestion", Australian Journal of Clinical Hypnotherapy & Hypnosis , Volume 38, No.1, (Autumn 2016), pp. 28–54.

Yeates, Lindsay B. (2016c), "Émile Coué and his Method (III): Every Day in Every Way", Australian Journal of Clinical Hypnotherapy & Hypnosis , Volume 38, No. 1, (Autumn 2016), pp. 55–79.

Yeates, L.B. (2018), "James Braid (II): Mesmerism, Braid’s Crucial Experiment, and Braid’s Discovery of Neuro-Hypnotism", Australian Journal of Clinical Hypnotherapy & Hypnosis , Vol. 40, No. 1, (Autumn 2018), pp. 40–92.

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Hypnotism ".

Media related to Hypnosis at Wikimedia Commons Classification D MeSH : D006990 v t e Psychotherapy Schools Psychodynamic Adlerian therapy Analytical therapy Mentalization-based treatment Psychoanalysis Transference focused psychotherapy Cognitive and behavioral Clinical behavior analysis Acceptance and commitment therapy Functional analytic psychotherapy Cognitive behavioral therapy Cognitive therapy Dialectical behavior therapy Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy Rational emotive behavior therapy Humanistic Emotionally focused therapy Existential therapy Focusing Gestalt therapy Logotherapy Person-centered therapy Other Art therapy Dance therapy Feminist therapy Music therapy Narrative therapy Play therapy Reality therapy Systemic therapy Transactional analysis List Integrative Eclectic psychotherapy Multimodal therapy Transtheoretical model Approaches Brief psychotherapy Counseling Online therapy Telephone therapy Residential treatment Self-help Support group Research Clinical formulation Clinical pluralism Common factors theory Discontinuation History Practitioner–scholar model Techniques Behaviour therapy Aversion therapy Chaining Contingency management Shaping Stimulus control Token economy Counterconditioning Desensitization / Exposure therapy Systematic desensitization Other individual therapy Autogenic training Biofeedback Clean language Cognitive restructuring Emotion regulation Affect labeling Free association Homework Hypnotherapy Modeling Group psychotherapy Co-therapy Couples therapy Family therapy Psychodrama Sensitivity training People Philippe Pinel Josef Breuer Sigmund Freud Pierre Janet Alfred Adler Sándor Ferenczi Carl Jung Ludwig Binswanger Melanie Klein Otto Rank Karen Horney Harry Stack Sullivan Fritz Perls Anna Freud Donald Winnicott Wilhelm Reich Milton H. Erickson Jacques Lacan Erik Erikson Carl Rogers Viktor Frankl George Kelly Rollo May Virginia Axline Carl Whitaker Albert Ellis Silvano Arieti James Bugental Joseph Wolpe Virginia Satir Aaron Beck Salvador Minuchin Paul Watzlawick Haim Ginott Ogden Lindsley Paul Watzlawick Arthur Janov Eugene Gendlin R. D. Laing Jean Baker Miller Otto F. Kernberg Nathan Azrin Irvin D. Yalom Arnold Lazarus Lorna Smith Benjamin Marsha M. Linehan Vittorio Guidano Les Greenberg William R. Miller Steven C. Hayes Michael White Jeffrey Young Peter Fonagy Associations Association for the Advancement of Psychotherapy Association for Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies Association for Behavior Analysis International European Association for Psychotherapy Society for Psychotherapy Research World Council for Psychotherapy Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9c5x2
Cached time: 20250817172752
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.378 seconds
Real time usage: 1.592 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12011/1000000
Revision size: 97288/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 345858/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20995/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 421265/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.878/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28256062/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1387.710      1 -total
 53.80%  746.651      1 Template:Reflist
 19.51%  270.705     39 Template:Cite_journal
 11.25%  156.167     32 Template:Cite_book
  7.69%  106.720     15 Template:Fix
  7.37%  102.219      2 Template:LSJ
  6.44%   89.312      2 Template:Lang
  5.10%   70.797      2 Template:Hypnosis
  5.00%   69.435      2 Template:Short_description
  4.90%   68.043      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14417:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817172752 and revision id 1302708751. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hypnosis&oldid=1302708751 " Categories : Hypnosis Medical treatments Mental states Paranormal terminology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010 CS1: abbreviated year range CS1 Danish-language sources (da) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2016 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from September 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from June 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2021 Articles needing additional references from September 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts Inconsistent wikidata for Commons category Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 02:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hypnosis 82 languages Add topic

