Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nationality policy in the Soviet Union 2 Researchers' assessments 3 Post-Soviet Russia 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Soviet people 24 languages Azərbaycanca Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Latviešu Lietuvių Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Soviets ) Citizens and nationals of the Soviet Union "Soviets" redirects here. For the bygone political organizations in Russia, see Soviet (council) . For other uses, see Soviet (disambiguation) .

Ethnic group Soviet people Советский народ Flag of the Soviet Union Map of the country's constituent Union Republics in 1989 Total population 286,730,819 ( 1989 census ) Languages Russian , [ 1 ] Ukrainian , Belarusian , Kazakh , Azerbaijani , Georgian , Armenian , Uzbek , Kyrgyz , Tajik , Turkmen , Latvian , Estonian , Romanian , Lithuanian , others (see: Languages of the Soviet Union ) Religion Christianity , Islam , Judaism , Buddhism , Atheism , others (see: Religion in the Soviet Union ) Related ethnic groups Citizens of the post-Soviet states Part of a series on the Culture of the Soviet Union History Great October Socialist Revolution Great Patriotic War People Languages Cuisine Festivals Religion Islam Art Architecture Art Literature Music Media Radio Television Cinema Censorship Propaganda Sport Monuments World Heritage Sites Symbols Flag Coat of arms National anthem Cultural icons Soviet Union portal v t e The Soviet people ( Russian : сове́тский наро́д , romanized : sovetsky narod ) were the citizens and nationals of the Soviet Union . This demonym was presented in the ideology of the country as the "new historical unity of peoples of different nationalities " ( новая историческая общность людей различных национальностей ).

[ 2 ] Nationality policy in the Soviet Union [ edit ] During the history of the Soviet Union , different doctrines and practices on ethnic distinctions within the Soviet population were applied at different times. Minority national cultures were never completely abolished. Instead the Soviet definition of national cultures required them to be " socialist by content and national by form", an approach that was used to promote the official aims and values of the state. The goal was always to cement the nationalities together in a common state structure. In the 1920s and the early 1930s, the policy of national delimitation was used to demarcate separate areas of national culture into territorial-administrative units, and the policy of korenizatsiya (indigenisation) was used to promote involvement non-Russian nationalities in government on all levels  and strengthen non-Russian languages and cultures. By the late 1930s, however, the policy was changed to a more active promotion of the Russian language and later to more overt Russification , which accelerated in the 1950s, [ citation needed ] especially in Soviet education . Although some assimilation did occur, it did not on the whole succeed. The continued development of the many national cultures in the Soviet Union led to the drafting of the New Union Treaty in 1991 and the subsequent dissolution of the Soviet Union .

[ 3 ] Researchers' assessments [ edit ] Assessments of the success of the creation of the new community are divergent. On the one hand, the ethnologist V. A. Tishkov and other historians believe that "for all the socio-political deformities, the Soviet people represented a civil nation." [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The philosopher and sociologist B. A. Grushin noted that sociology in the USSR "recorded a unique historical type of society that had already gone into oblivion". At the same time, according to the sociologist T.N. Zaslavskaya, it "did not solve the main task associated with the typological identification of Soviet society".

Some historians evaluating the Soviet Union as a colonial empire ( Soviet empire ), applied the " prison of nations " idea to the USSR. Thomas Winderl wrote: "The USSR became in a certain sense more a prison-house of nations than the old Empire had ever been." [ 6 ] In an interview with Euronews in 2011, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev recalled the use of the term "Soviet people" as a "unified community" in the Soviet Union but added that "these constructions were largely theoretical".

[ 7 ] Post-Soviet Russia [ edit ] In contrast to Soviet national identity politics, which declared the Soviet people as a supranational community, the post-Soviet Russian Constitution speaks of a "multinational people of the Russian Federation ". From the outset, the idea of the "Russian nation" as a community of all Russian citizens has met with opposition.

[ 8 ] In December 2010, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev pointed out the lack of an all-Russian unifying idea as a problem during a discussion in the State Council and proposed multiethnic patriotism as a replacement for the idea of "the Soviet people".

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Demographics of the Soviet Union Homo Sovieticus Melting pot New Soviet man Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality – the ideological doctrine of Russian emperor Nicholas I Rootless cosmopolitan Russification Sovok Zhonghua minzu – the equivalent notion in the People's Republic of China Yugoslavs References [ edit ] ^ "Language Policy in the former Soviet Union" .

H. Schiffman .

University of Pennsylvania . 19 November 2002.

^ Great Soviet Encyclopedia , article "Советский народ" by Suren Kaltakhchian [ ru ] ^ Anderson, Barbara A.; Silver, Brian D. (2019). "Some Factors in the Linguistic and Ethnic Russification of Soviet Nationalities: Is Everyone Becoming Russian?". In Hajda, Lubomyr; Beissinger, Mark (eds.).

The Nationality Factor in Soviet Politics and Society . Routledge. pp.

95– 130.

ISBN 9781000303766 .

^ "Российский народ и национальная идентичность" .

Известия (in Russian). 2007-06-19 . Retrieved 2021-08-09 .

^ admin.

"СОВЕТСКИЙ НАРОД: ГОСУДАРСТВЕННО-ПОЛИТИЧЕСКИЙ КОНСТРУКТ | Аналитика культурологии" .

analiculturolog.ru (in Russian) . Retrieved 2021-08-09 .

^ Bekus, Nelly (2010-01-01).

Struggle Over Identity: The Official and the Alternative "Belarusianness" . Central European University Press. p. 42.

ISBN 978-963-9776-68-5 .

^ ГРИШИН, Александр (2011-09-10).

"Дмитрий Медведев: "Термин "советский народ" оказался теоретическим" " .

kp.ru (in Russian) . Retrieved 2021-08-09 .

^ Malinova O. "Symbolic politics and the construction of macropolitical identity in post-Soviet Russia".

Polis. Political Studies .

2 : 90– 105.

^ "Власти РФ предлагают укреплять общество "общероссийским патриотизмом" " .

РИА Новости (in Russian). 2010-12-27 . Retrieved 2021-08-09 .

External links [ edit ] The Soviet People—A New Historical Community , a Soviet work from 1974 expounding on the concept Present-Day Ethnic Processes in the USSR , a Soviet work from 1982 v t e Soviet Union topics Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union Bibliography of the Post Stalinist Soviet Union History Index of Soviet Union–related articles Outline Russian Revolution February October Russian Civil War Russian SFSR Creation treaty New Economic Policy Stalinism Great Purge Great Patriotic War (World War II) Evacuation The Holocaust Cold War Khrushchev thaw Sino-Soviet split Soviet space program Caribbean Crisis Stagnation Soviet–Afghan War Perestroika Glasnost Chernobyl disaster Revolutions of 1989 August Coup Parade of sovereignties Dissolution Transition period and cessation of the existence Succession, continuity and legacy Post-Soviet states Nostalgia Geography Subdivisions Republics Autonomous Krais Oblasts Autonomous Autonomous okrugs Closed city Regions Baltic States Caspian Sea Caucasus Mountains Central Asia Crimea European Russia North Caucasus Russian Far East Siberia Transcaucasia Ural Mountains Volga Region West Siberian Plain Politics General Conscription Constitution 1924 1936 1977 Elections Foreign relations Brezhnev Doctrine Gun control Government List Ministries State Committees Human rights LGBT Law Capital punishment Leaders Collective leadership National delimitation Passport system Propiska Political parties State ideology Marxism–Leninism Leninism Stalinism Soviet anti-Zionism Bodies Communist Party organisation Congress Central Committee Presidium/Politburo Secretariat General Secretary Congress of Soviets (1922–1936) Supreme Soviet (1938–1991) Congress of People's Deputies (1989–1991) Supreme Court Military Collegium All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions Creative unions Offices Heads of state President Premier Deputy Premier First Deputy Premier Security services Cheka GPU NKVD Destruction battalions MVD Militsiya MGB KGB Chairmen Soviet Border Troops Soviet Armed Forces Soviet Army / Spetsnaz GRU • Soviet Navy • Soviet Air Forces / Soviet Airborne Forces Political repression Red Terror Collectivization Great Purge Population transfer Forced labor Foreign forced labor POW labor Gulag List Holodomor Political abuse of psychiatry Anti-abuse struggle War crimes Atrocities against prisoners of war Ideological repression Persecution of Christians Eastern Catholics Science Censorship Censorship of images Economy Agriculture Banking Central Bank State Labor Savings Banks System Economic planning Energy policy Enterprises Five-year plans Industrialization Internet domain Inventions Net material product OGAS Economic reforms 1956–1962 Wage reform 1957 1965 1973 1979 Rouble (currency) Monetary reforms 1947 1961 1991 Automotive industry Construction Transport Ministry of Railways Railway system Rail transport Railway electrification List of metro systems Vehicle registration plates Science Communist Academy Cybernetics Academy of Sciences Academy of Medical Sciences Lenin All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences Sharashkas Naukograds List Society Antisemitism Crime Demographics Soviet people Working class 1989 census Drug policy Ethnic conflicts Family Languages Linguistics Cyrillisation Prohibition Racism Culture Ballet Cinema Fashion Literature Music Opera Phraseology Printed media Propaganda Publishing houses Religion Islam Sports Stalinist architecture Broadcasting Radio Television Opposition Anti-Soviet agitation Soviet dissidents and their groups List Symbols Anthem Republics Emblem Republics Flag Republics Hammer and sickle Soviet Union portal Category Authority control databases : National France BnF data Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soviet_people&oldid=1301778807 " Categories : Soviet people Demographics of the Soviet Union Propaganda in the Soviet Union Soviet ethnic policy Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles containing Russian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 16:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soviet people 24 languages Add topic

