Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organization 3 Research 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Spanish Astrobiology Center 4 languages Català Español Français Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Astrobiology Center ( Centro de Astrobiología ) Founder Juan Pérez-Mercader Established 19 November 1999 Mission Astrobiology research Focus Origin of life Director Víctor Parro García Owner INTA - CSIC Location Madrid , Spain Website cab .inta-csic .es /en / Spanish Astrobiology Center (Spanish: Centro de Astrobiología ( CAB )) is a state-run institute in Spain dedicated to astrobiology research, and it is part of the National Institute of Aerospace Technology (INTA) as well as the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC).

[ 1 ] It was created in 1999 and it is affiliated with NASA Astrobiology Institute .

Its main objective is "understanding life as a consequence of the evolution of the matter and energy in the Universe." [ 2 ] History [ edit ] The foundation of Spain's Astrobiology Center (CAB) had its beginnings in 1998 when a group of Spanish scientists led by Juan Pérez-Mercader , presented a proposal of affiliation to the newly created NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI).

[ 3 ] The affiliation was accepted and the center was officially created on 19 November 1999. It operated from offices at the National Institute of Aerospace Technology (INTA) until it moved to its own building inaugurated in January 2003.

Organization [ edit ] The Astrobiology Center is based in Madrid, Spain , its director is Víctor Parro García , and the Vicedirector is Francisco Najarro . The center is organized into several research and support units, and some of these are associated to Spanish universities, including the University of Valladolid and the Autonomous University of Madrid . The center is part of the National Institute of Aerospace Technology (INTA) as well as the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC).

[ 1 ] The center is structured in several departments: [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Astrophysics Department, Molecular Evolution Department, Planetary Science and Habitability Department, Advanced Instrumentations Department, as well as several support units.

Research [ edit ] CAB has contributed to NASA in its mission to better characterize and find conditions for life in the Universe, and has prioritized Martian weather research and endurance of some extremophile microorganisms.

[ 3 ] CAB has developed instruments for multiple missions: Rover Environmental Monitoring Station (REMS) for the Curiosity rover Temperature and Winds for InSight (TWINS) on the InSight mission MEDA ( Mars Environmental Dynamics Analyzer ), which rides on NASA's Perseverance rover launched in 2020 Raman Laser Spectrometer (RLS) for detecting minerals and potential biological pigments for the European Space Agency 's Rosalind Franklin rover also to be launched in 2022.

[ 3 ] CAB is also developing a life-detector called Signs Of LIfe Detector (SOLID) to be potentially flown in a future mission.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Centro de Astrobiología - CSIC - INTA ^ Centro de Astrobiología . Departamentos y Unidades de Apoyo. Accessed on 6 December 2018.

^ a b c d Spain's Centro de Astrobiología . Elizabeth Howell, Astrobiology Magazine . 18 January 2019.

^ Lines of Investigation . CAB. Accessed on 6 November 2018.

^ CAB - Official Flier . Accessed on 6 December 2018.

External links [ edit ] Official website Official flier of the Astrobiology Center (in English) v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e Space program of Spain Satellites Communications Spainsat / XTAR-LANT XTAR-EUR Spainsat NG Amazonas 1 2 3 4A 4B (cancelled) 5 Hispasat 1A 1B 1C 1D AG1 1F Lume-1 Earth observation Deimos 1 2 Paz Ingenio Science & technology Intasat Minisat 01 Nanosat 1 1B UPM-Sat 1 2 Xatcobeo OPTOS Rockets Suborbital Argo INTA 100 255 300 Miura 1 Orbital Capricornio Bloostar Miura 5 Miura Next Meso Tracking and launch sites El Arenosillo Gando Air Base El Hierro (proposed) Madrid Deep Space Communications Complex Maspalomas Station Cebreros Station Villafranca Station Other facilities PLD Space Propulsion Test Facilities Institutions Agencia Espacial Española Instituto Nacional de Técnica Aeroespacial Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Commercial space industry PLD Space Pangea Aerospace Zero 2 Infinity Alén Space Hispasat Hisdesat Astronauts Pedro Duque Pablo Álvarez Fernández Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany France BnF data This article about an organisation based in Spain is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spanish_Astrobiology_Center&oldid=1253374157 " Categories : Science and technology in Spain Government of Spain 1999 establishments in Spain Research institutes in the Community of Madrid Astrobiology Origin of life Instituto Nacional de Técnica Aeroespacial Spanish organisation stubs Hidden categories: Articles containing Spanish-language text All stub articles This page was last edited on 25 October 2024, at 17:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spanish Astrobiology Center 4 languages Add topic

