Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Ideology Toggle Ideology subsection 2.1 Social democratic nationalism 2.2 Social ethno-nationalism 2.3 Socialist nationalism 2.4 Marxist interpretation 2.4.1 Stalinism and revolutionary patriotism 2.4.2 Titoism 2.5 By country 2.6 Africa 2.6.1 Mauritius 2.6.2 Ethiopia 2.7 Americas 2.7.1 Latin America 2.7.1.1 Cuba 2.7.1.2 Venezuela 2.7.2 North America 2.7.2.1 Canada 2.7.2.2 United States 2.8 East Asia 2.8.1 Korea 2.8.1.1 Korea under Japanese rule 2.8.1.2 North Korea 2.8.1.3 South Korea 2.8.2 Taiwan (Republic of China) 2.9 Europe 2.9.1 France 2.9.2 Ireland 2.9.3 Poland 2.9.4 Scotland 2.9.5 Spain 2.9.6 Turkey 2.9.7 Ukraine 2.9.8 Wales 2.10 Oceania 2.10.1 Australia 2.11 South Asia 2.11.1 Bangladesh 3 List of left-wing nationalist political parties Toggle List of left-wing nationalist political parties subsection 3.1 Current parties 3.2 Historical parties 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Left-wing nationalism 30 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latviešu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of nationalism This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Left-wing nationalism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Nationalism Nation forming Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Church Colours Emblem Father Flag Epic God Identity Persona Language Myth Sport State Symbol Treasure Animal Core values Allegiance Independence Patriotism Self-determination Solidarity Types Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Communist Constitutional patriotism Corporate Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic Ethnopluralism Expansionist Homosexual Indigenism Integral Left-wing ( populism ) Musical Mystic Neo- Pan- Racial Religious Clerical Resource Revolutionary National syndicalist National Bolshevik Fascism Nazism Ethnocacerism Romantic Technological Territorial Trans- Ultra- Organizations List of nationalist organizations Related concepts Anationalism Anti-nationalism Anti-globalization movement Anti-imperialism Banal nationalism Civil religion Communitarianism Cosmopolitanism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Ethnocentrism Francoism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Globalism Historiography and nationalism Imagined community Imperialism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Localism Militarism National indifference Nationalism studies Nativism Plurinationalism Post- Racism Revanchism Right-wing populism Seasonal or cultural festival Subsidiarity in Catholicism Trumpism Xenophobia Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Progressivism Movements 50501 movement BLM Conservation movement ECG Ethical movement Environmental movement Indivisible movement Labour LGBTQ movements #MeToo Occupy Wall Street Reform Social hygiene " The Resistance " Taiwan independence YIMBY Ideas Direct democracy Economic development Environmentalism Broad measures of economic progress Gender equality Green politics Human enhancement Indigenous rights Intersectionality Liberation theology Metaphysics Minority rights LGBTQ rights Multiculturalism Modernism Post Moral universalism Progress Philosophy of progress Progressive education In Latin America Progressive stack Progressive nationalism Progressive taxation Religious liberalism Reparations for slavery In the US Scientific management Scientific progress Social change Social constructivism Social justice Social justice warrior Social organization Social progress List of countries Solidarity unionism Strategic essentialism Sustainable design Ecological engineering Sustainable development Techno-progressivism Welfare state Women's suffrage Workplace democracy Youth rights Variants Christian Confucian Conservative Economic Islamic Neoliberal Techno Ideologies Ecevitism Kirchnerism Lulism Roosevelt Republican Activists Abbott (Edith) Abbott (Grace) Addams Armstrong Ahmed Ajamu X Alexander Alinsky Archer Belmont Bond Brandeis Breckinridge Cambell Cloward Dees Gilman Hammer Hanna Hassan Heumann Huang Jackson (Esther) Jackson (George) Jackson (Jesse) Kahane King (Shaun) King (Jr.) Lennon Ludmer Markey McIlrath Mckesson Page Pearson Roosevelt (Eleanor) Rothblatt Seligmann Smeeth Soros (Alexander) Soros (George) Su Walia Windsor Wong (Alice) Wong (Joshua) Woodhull Commentators Bedborough Brewis Cohen Conover Criado Perez Danskin Duberman Ellis Faust Favreau Fiorentini Glaude Goldberg Hartmann Hasan Jennings Klippenstein Kochinski Krugman Kulinski Levy Lovett Marshall McKay Miller (Stephanie) Moore Morgan Nagle Oliver Pakman Pfeiffer Piker Rather Reich (Robert) Reid Seder Sharpton Smith Stewart Thorn Vietor Withers Wise Wynn Welles Zuckerberg Intellectuals Addams Allen Anderson Benedict Benjamin Ben-Moshe Beveridge Black Blackwell Bornstein Brand Brandeis Butler Carpenter de Condorcet Cornell Davis (Mike) Dewey DiAngelo Douglas (Kelly) Douglas (William) Du Bois Dyson Ellis Fredrickson Friedan Gilmore Hammonds Helms Hirschfeld hooks Jeffries Karenga Keller Kendi McIntosh Merriam Meyers Mills Money Moore Oastler Ostrowski Painter Patterson Peled-Elhanan Rawls Reich (Wilhelm) Roberts Rothstein Saini Sanger Seuss Shaw Stanley Stein TallBear Wachowskis (Lana/Lilly) Wells Welsing West Whedon Wilderson III Zuboff Politicians Albanese Ardern Attlee Boric Brandt Bryan Casar Crockett da Silva Debs Drees Frost Gorbachev Harris Hawkins Hessel Hunter Jackson Jayapal Johnson Kennedy (John F.) Kennedy (Ted) Khanna La Follette La Guardia Lai Layton Lee (Barbara) Lee (Summer) Lewis Lyuh Mamdani Manley Markey McGovern Merkley Mottley Murayama Murphy (Emily) Murphy (Chris) Nader Nehru Norris Norton Obrador Ocasio-Cortez Omar Petro Pocan Pressley Raskin Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Sánchez Sanders Tlaib Trudeau Tsai Turner Wallace Walz Warren Weaver Wilson (Harold) Yamamoto Yavlinsky Zapatero Literature Looking Backward (1888) Equality (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) Man and Superman (1903) The Universal Kinship (1906) The Open Conspiracy (1928) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) Sexuality in the Cultural Struggle (1936) Beveridge Report (1942) Rules for Radicals (1971) Humanist Manifesto II (1973) Woman Hating (1974) The Handmaid's Tale (1985) Black Athena (1987–2006) The Racial Contract (1997) War Against the Weak (2003) The Audacity of Hope (2006) The Invention of the Jewish People (2008) The New Jim Crow (2010) The Speech (2011) Our Revolution (2016) White Rage (2016) The Color of Law (2017) Inferior (2017) Not All Dead White Men (2018) White Fragility (2018) Invisible Women (2019) How to Be an Antiracist (2019) Race After Technology (2019) Superior (2019) Nice Racism (2021) Organizations Amadeu Antonio Foundation ACLU ASHA BLMGNF CGS Brennan Center for Justice Color of Change Democracy Alliance Ella Baker Center for Human Rights Equality and Human Rights Commission ENAR Fabian Society " Coefficients " FIRM Ford Foundation ILGA InCAR IPPA MacArthur Foundation Movement for Black Lives No one is illegal NWRO New SDS OSF Our Revolution PFAW Progressive Alliance Progressive International Progressive League Progressive Majority ProgressNow Red Flare RWJF SftP Tides Foundation Media CTXT HuffPost Jacobin Jezebel Lucifer Mother Jones MSNBC The Nation New Statesman The Progressive Salon Searchlight The Young Turks Rational Wiki By region Japan South Korea Taiwan United States Related Accelerationism Communitarianism Counterculture of the 1960s Critical theory Democratic capitalism Democratic socialism Red–green alliance Social democracy Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Left-wing populism Liberalism Classical radicalism Social liberalism In United States New Left Pink tide Progress Studies Progressive Era Technocracy Unitarian Universalism Woke Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Left-wing nationalism or leftist nationalism (in certain contexts also called popular nationalism by those who do not adhere to the left-right plane, or in contrast to conservative nationalism ) is a form of nationalism which is based upon national self-determination , popular sovereignty , and left-wing political positions such as social equality .

[ 1 ] Left-wing nationalism can also include anti-imperialism and national liberation movements.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Left-wing nationalism often stands in contrast to right-wing politics and right-wing nationalism .

[ 4 ] Overview [ edit ] Terms such as nationalist socialism , social nationalism and socialist nationalism are not to be confused with the German fascism espoused by the Nazi Party , which called itself National Socialism . This ideology advocated the supremacy and territorial expansion of the German nation, while opposing popular sovereignty , social equality and national self-determination for non-Germans. Left-wing nationalism does not promote the view that one nation is superior to others.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Some left-wing nationalist groups have historically used the term national socialism for themselves, but only before the rise of the Nazis or outside Europe. Since the Nazis' rise to prominence, national socialism has become associated almost exclusively with their ideas and it is rarely used in relation to left-wing nationalism in Europe, with nationalist socialism or socialist nationalism being preferred over national socialism .

Ideology [ edit ] Left-wing nationalists typically have a socialist (democratic or authoritarian), social democratic, progressive, or societally conservative background (the conservative left) combined with a preference for nation-state sovereignty. Left-wing nationalists therefore strive to reduce the wealth gap in the country, retain control or nationalize public services (such as health, energy and public transport). Left-wing nationalist movements do not tend to advocate supremacy, however, certain forms of left-wing nationalism have adopted racialist theses favorable to a homogeneous society, with opposition to immigration.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] It is important to emphasise that there is not just one type of left-wing nationalism: the nation can be framed in many different ways, which means that left-wing politics drawing on national identity can do so in different manners and with varying levels of inclusiveness.

[ 10 ] In this context, left nationalists completely or to a large extent reject neoliberalism and supranational interference. Left-wing nationalists want countries to decide for themselves on issues such as the economy, health and defense.

[ 11 ] Social democratic nationalism [ edit ] Social democratic nationalism is strongly diffused in certain developing nations but also in part of Europe .

As a European example, the Slovak party Direction – Social Democracy supported a moderate nationalist conception of social democracy in the 2020s which translated into a clear rejection of immigration.

[ 12 ] During the campaign for the 2023 Turkish presidential election , the Republican People's Party and its presidential candidate Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu openly adopted a stance against illegal immigration.

[ 13 ] The Australian Labor Party had also held a similar line in its history in the 20th century.

Social ethno-nationalism [ edit ] Social Ethno-nationalism is a doctrine aimed at promoting social progress while defending the ethnic interests of different peoples, both emancipation and supremacy.

For example, the Australian Labor Party had a strong white nationalist component and has openly supported the White Australia policy in the past.

[ 14 ] Secular Arab nationalism advocated by Baathism and previously by Nasserism defends Arab socialism , which emphasizes a secularist and progressive position seeking (at least in principle) to integrate Arab Christians , Alawites , Druze and others by eliminating tribal and sectarian divisions.

Some black nationalism in the United States aimed at defending the interests of African Americans was highly influential in the 1970s with groups like the Black Panthers Party .

South American indigenous groups also have as their basis the defense of the ethnic interests of Amerindians while promoting social progress and the sharing of wealth.

[ 15 ] Socialist nationalism [ edit ] Not to be confused with National Socialism .

Socialist nationalism is a concept that refers to the combination of socialism with nationalism or with some form of national sentiment or nationality. The term contrasts with the internationalism of Marxist socialism and is generally applied to certain non-Marxist variants of socialism such as Argentine Peronism , the Burmese Way to Socialism , Pan-Arab Nasserism and Ba'athism , [ 16 ] African socialism and neosocialism in France .

Forms influenced by Marxism while being independent of it such as Sandinismo [ 17 ] and Chavismo .

[ 18 ] Left-wing nationalisms that have not been influenced by Marxism are mostly hostile to Marxist principles of proletarian internationalism , class struggle and state atheism , particularly forms influenced by religious socialisms or defending moderate secularism .

[ 19 ] Marxist interpretation [ edit ] Marxism identifies the nation as a socioeconomic construction created after the collapse of the feudal system which was utilized to create the capitalist economic system.

[ 20 ] Classical Marxists have unanimously claimed that nationalism is a bourgeois phenomenon that is not associated with Marxism.

[ 21 ] In certain instances, Marxism has supported patriotic movements if they were in the interest of class struggle, but rejects other nationalist movements deemed to distract workers from their necessary goal of defeating the bourgeoisie.

[ 22 ] Marxists have evaluated certain nations to be progressive and other nations to be reactionary .

[ 20 ] Joseph Stalin supported interpretations of Marx tolerating the use of proletarian patriotism that promoted class struggle within an internationalist framework.

[ 20 ] [ 23 ] Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels interpreted issues concerning nationality on a social evolutionary basis. Marx and Engels claim that the creation of the modern nation state is the result of the replacement of feudalism with the capitalist mode of production .

[ 24 ] With the replacement of feudalism with capitalism, capitalists sought to unify and centralize populations' culture and language within states in order to create conditions conducive to a market economy in terms of having a common language to coordinate the economy, contain a large enough population in the state to insure an internal division of labor and contain a large enough territory for a state to maintain a viable economy.

[ 24 ] Although Marx and Engels saw the origins of the nation state and national identity as bourgeois in nature, both believed that the creation of the centralized state as a result of the collapse of feudalism and creation of capitalism had created positive social conditions to stimulate class struggle.

[ 25 ] Marx followed Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 's view that the creation of individual-centered civil society by states as a positive development in that it dismantled previous religious-based society and freed individual conscience.

[ 25 ] In The German Ideology , Marx claims that although civil society is a capitalist creation and represents bourgeois class rule, it is beneficial to the proletariat because it is unstable in that neither states nor the bourgeoisie can control a civil society.

[ 26 ] Marx described this in detail in The German Ideology , stating: Civil society embraces the whole material intercourse of individuals within a definite stage of development of productive forces. It embraces the whole commercial and industrial life of a given stage, and, insofar, transcends the state and the nation, though on the other hand, it must assert itself in its foreign relations as nationality and inwardly must organize itself as a state.

[ 25 ] Marx and Engels evaluated progressive nationalism as involving the destruction of feudalism and believed that it was a beneficial step, but they evaluated nationalism detrimental to the evolution of international class struggle as reactionary and necessary to be destroyed.

[ 27 ] Marx and Engels believed that certain nations that could not consolidate viable nation-states should be assimilated into other nations that were more viable and further in Marxian evolutionary economic progress.

[ 27 ] On the issue of nations and the proletariat, The Communist Manifesto says: The working men have no country. We cannot take from them what they have not got. Since the proletariat must first of all acquire political supremacy, must rise to be the leading class of the nation, must constitute itself the nation, it is so far, itself national, though not in the bourgeois sense of the word. National differences and antagonism between peoples are daily more and more vanishing, owing to the development of the bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce, to the world market, to uniformity in the mode of production and in the conditions of life corresponding thereto. The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still faster. United action, of the leading civilized countries at least, is one of the first conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat.

[ 28 ] In general, Marx preferred internationalism and interaction between nations in class struggle, saying in Preface to the Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy that "[o]ne nation can and should learn from others".

[ 29 ] Similarly, although Marx and Engels criticized Irish unrest for delaying a worker's revolution in England, they believed that Ireland was oppressed by Great Britain , but that the Irish people would better serve their own interests by joining proponents of class struggle in Europe as Marx and Engels claimed that the socialist workers of Europe were the natural allies of Ireland.

[ 30 ] Marx and Engels also believed that it was in Britain's best interest to let Ireland go as the Ireland issue was being used by elites to unite the British working class with the elites against the Irish.

[ 30 ] Stalinism and revolutionary patriotism [ edit ] Joseph Stalin promoted a civic patriotic concept called revolutionary patriotism in the Soviet Union .

[ 23 ] As a youth, Stalin had been active in the Georgian nationalist movement and was influenced by Ilia Chavchavadze , who promoted cultural nationalism , material development of the Georgian people , statist economy and education systems.

[ 31 ] When Stalin joined the Georgian Marxists, Marxism in Georgia was heavily influenced by Noe Zhordania , who evoked Georgian patriotic themes and opposition to Russian imperial control of Georgia.

[ 32 ] Zhordania claimed that communal bonds existed between peoples that created the plural sense of countries and went further to say that the Georgian sense of identity pre-existed capitalism and the capitalist conception of nationhood .

[ 32 ] After becoming a Bolshevik in the 20th century, he became fervently opposed to national culture, denouncing the concept of contemporary nationality as bourgeois in origin and accused nationality of causing retention of "harmful habits and institutions".

[ 33 ] However, Stalin believed that cultural communities did exist where people lived common lives and were united by holistic bonds, claiming that there were real nations while others that did not fit these traits were paper nations.

[ 34 ] Stalin defined the nation as being "neither racial nor tribal, but a historically formed community of people".

[ 34 ] Stalin believed that the assimilation of primitive nationalities like Abkhazians and Tartars into the Georgian and Russian nations was beneficial.

[ 33 ] Stalin claimed that all nations were assimilating foreign values and that the nationality as a community was diluting under the pressures of capitalism and with rising rational universality.

[ 35 ] In 1913, Stalin rejected the concept of national identity entirely and advocated in favor of a universal cosmopolitan modernity.

[ 35 ] Stalin identified Russian culture as having greater universalist identity than that of other nations.

[ 36 ] Stalin's view of vanguard and progressive nations such as Russia, Germany and Hungary in contrast to nations he deemed primitive is claimed to be related to Engels' views.

[ 36 ] Titoism [ edit ] The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia under the rule of Josip Broz Tito and the League of Communists of Yugoslavia promoted both Marxism–Leninism and Yugoslav nationalism ( Yugoslavism ), [ 37 ] i.e.

socialist patriotism . Tito's Yugoslavia was overtly nationalistic in its attempts to promote unity between the Yugoslav nations within Yugoslavia and asserting Yugoslavia's independence.

[ 37 ] To unify the Yugoslav nations, the government promoted the concept of brotherhood and unity in which the Yugoslav nations would overcome their cultural and linguistic differences through promoting fraternal relations between the nations.

[ 38 ] This nationalism was opposed to cultural assimilation as had been carried out by the previous Yugoslav monarchy , but it was instead based upon multiculturalism .

[ 39 ] While promoting a Yugoslav nationalism, the Yugoslav government was staunchly opposed to any factional ethnic nationalism or domination by the existing nationalities as Tito denounced ethnic nationalism in general as being based on hatred and was the cause of war.

[ 40 ] The League of Communists of Yugoslavia blamed the factional division and conflict between the Yugoslav nations on foreign imperialism .

[ 40 ] Tito built strong relations with states that had strong socialist and nationalist governments in power such as Egypt under Gamal Abdel Nasser and India under Jawaharlal Nehru .

[ 37 ] In spite of these attempts to create a left-wing Yugoslav national identity, factional divisions between Yugoslav nationalities remained strong and it was largely the power of the party and popularity of Tito that held the country together.

[ 41 ] By country [ edit ] Africa [ edit ] Mauritius [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Mauritian Militant Movement (MMM) is a political party in Mauritius formed by a group of students in the late 1960s, advocating independence from the United Kingdom, socialism and social unity. The MMM advocates what it sees as a fairer society, without discrimination on the basis of social class, race, community, caste, religion, gender or sexual orientation.

The MMM was founded in 1968 as a students' movement by Paul Bérenger , Dev Virahsawmy, Jooneed Jeeroburkhan, Chafeekh Jeeroburkhan, Sushil Kushiram, Tirat Ramkissoon, Krishen Mati, Ah-Ken Wong, Kriti Goburdhun, Allen Sew Kwan Kan, Vela Vengaroo and Amedee Darga amongst others. In 1969, it became the MMM. The party is a member of the Socialist International as well as the Progressive Alliance , an international grouping of socialist, social-democratic and labour parties.

Ethiopia [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF) ( Tigrinya : ህዝባዊ ወያነ ሓርነት ትግራይ, ḥəzbawi wäyanä ḥarənnät təgray , "Popular Struggle for the Freedom of Tigray"; widely known by pejorative names Woyane , Wayana (Amharic: ወያነ) or Wayane (ወያኔ) in older texts and Amharic publications) is a political party in Ethiopia , established on 18 February 1975 in Dedebit , northwestern Tigray , according to official records. As a strategy, TPLF used guerilla tactics as it saw those as befitting to a Marxist–Leninist political organization. Within 16 years, it had grown from about a dozen men into the most powerful armed liberation movement in Ethiopia. It led a coalition of movements named the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) from 1989 to 2018. With the help of its former ally, the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF), EPRDF overthrew the dictatorship of the People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (PDRE) and established a new government on 28 May 1991 that ruled Ethiopia.

Americas [ edit ] Latin America [ edit ] See also: Indigenismo This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Left-wing nationalism has inspired many Latin American military personnel, who are receptive to this doctrine because of the repeated interference of the United States in the political and economic affairs of their countries and the social misery in the continent. While some of the military regimes such as the Argentine dictatorship and the Augusto Pinochet 's regime in Chile were right-wing, left-wing soldiers seized power in Peru during the 1968 military coup and established a Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces headed by General Juan Velasco Alvarado . Although it was dictatorial in nature, it did not adopt a repressive character as the regimes mentioned above. Similarly and also in 1968, General Omar Torrijos seized power in Panama, allied himself with Cuba and the Sandinistas of Nicaragua and above all led a fierce battle against the United States for the nationalisation of the Panama Canal .

Cuba [ edit ] See also: Politics of Fidel Castro Venezuela [ edit ] See also: Chavismo North America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: Canadian nationalism and Quebec nationalism In Canada, nationalism is associated with the left in the context of both Quebec nationalism and pan- Canadian nationalism (mostly in English Canada , but also in Quebec ).

In Quebec, the term was used by S. H. Milner and H. Milner to describe political developments in 1960s and 1970s Quebec which they saw as unique in North America. While the Liberals of the Quiet Revolution in Quebec had opposed Quebec nationalism which had been right-wing and reactionary, nationalists in Quebec now found that they could only maintain their cultural identity by ridding themselves of foreign elites, which was achieved by adopting radicalism and socialism. This ideology was seen in contrast to historic socialism, which was internationalist and considered the working class to have no homeland.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] The 1960s in Canada saw the rise of a movement in favour of the independence of Quebec. Among the proponents of this constitutional option for Quebec were militants of an independent and socialist Quebec.

[ 44 ] Prior to the 1960s, nationalism in Quebec had taken various forms. First, a radical liberal nationalism emerged and was a dominant voice in the political discourse of Lower Canada from the early 19th century to the 1830s. The 1830s saw the more vocal expression of a liberal and republican nationalism which was silenced with the rebellions of 1837 and 1838.

[ 45 ] In a now annexed Lower Canada in the 1840s, a moderately liberal expression of nationalism succeeded the old one, which remained in existence but was confined to political marginality thereafter. In parallel to this, a new Catholic and ultramontane nationalism emerged. Antagonism between the two incompatible expressions of nationalism lasted until the 1950s.

According to political scientist Henry Milner [ fr ] , the manifestation of a third kind of nationalism became significant when intellectuals raised the issue of the economic colonization of Quebec, something the established nationalists elites had neglected to do.

[ 46 ] Milner identifies three distinct clusters of factors in the evolution of Quebec toward left-wing nationalism: the first cluster relates to the national consciousness of Quebecers ( Québécois ); the second to changes in technology, industrial organization and patterns of communication and education; and the third related to "the part played by the intellectuals in the face of changes in the first two factors".

[ 47 ] In English Canada, support for government intervention in the economy to defend the country from foreign (i.e. American) influences is one of Canada's oldest political traditions, going back at least to the National Policy (tariff protection) of Sir John A. Macdonald , can historically be seen on both the left and the right. However, calls for more extreme forms of government involvement to forestall a putative American takeover have been a staple of the Canadian left since the 1920s and possibly earlier. Right-wing nationalism has never supported such measures, which is one of the major differences between the two. Leftist nationalism has also been more eager to dispense with historical Canadian symbols associated with Canada's British colonial heritage, such as the Canadian Red Ensign or even the monarchy (see republicanism in Canada ). English Canadian leftist nationalism has historically been represented by most of Canada's socialist parties , factions with the social-democratic New Democratic Party (such as the Movement for an Independent Socialist Canada in the 1960s and 1970s) and in a more diluted form in some elements of the Liberal Party of Canada (such as Trudeauism to a certain extent), manifesting itself in pressure groups such as the Council of Canadians . This type of nationalism is associated with the slogan "It's either the state or the States ", coined by the Canadian Radio League in the 1930s during their campaign for a national public broadcaster to compete with the private American radio stations broadcasting into Canada, [ 48 ] representing a fear of annexation by the United States. Right-wing nationalism continues to exist in Canada, but it tends to be much less concerned with integration into North America , especially since the Conservative Party embraced free trade after 1988. Many far-right movements in Canada are nationalist, but not Canadian nationalist, instead advocating for Western separation or union with the United States .

United States [ edit ] See also: American Indian Movement and New Nationalism (Theodore Roosevelt) Theodore Roosevelt's 1912 Presidential campaign , which promoted his plaform of " New Nationalism ," combined his traditional progressive policies, such as anti-trust legislation , national health insurance , anti- corporatocracy policies, direct democracy , reductions on campaign finance , an eight-hour workday , and women's suffrage combined with American nationalist policies, such as his support for a naval buildup , as well as use of nationalist rhetoric, appealing to the legacy of Abraham Lincoln and the American Civil War .

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] The American Indian Movement (AIM) has been committed to improving conditions faced by native peoples . It founded institutions to address needs, including the Heart of The Earth School, the Little Earth Housing, the International Indian Treaty Council, the AIM StreetMedics, the American Indian Opportunities and the Industrialization Center (one of the largest Indian job training programs) as well as the KILI radio and the Indian Legal Rights Centers.

In 1971, several members of the AIM, including Dennis Banks and Russell Means , traveled to Mount Rushmore . They converged at the mountain in order to protest the illegal seizure of the Sioux Nation's sacred Black Hills in 1877 by the United States federal government which was in violation of its earlier 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie. The protest began to publicize the issues of the American Indian Movement.

[ 53 ] In 1980, the Supreme Court ruled that the federal government had illegally taken the Black Hills. The government offered financial compensation, but the Oglala Sioux have refused it, insisting on return of the land to their people. The settlement money is earning interest.

[ 54 ] East Asia [ edit ] Korea [ edit ] See also: Korean independence movement and Anti-Japanese sentiment in Korea Part of a series on Korean nationalism Korean Unification Flag Ideologies Conservative Ilminism Communist Juche Left-wing National Liberation Minjok Romantic State Three Principles of the Equality Principles Anti-imperialism Anti-Japanese sentiment Decolonization Han Korean mythology Minjok jeonggi Postcolonialism Reunification Self-determination Symbols Korean flags Blue and Red National Flag Taegeukgi Unification Paektu Mountain Taegeuk " White-clothed people " Disputes Bukjin Tongil Gando dispute Goguryeo controversies Ieodo dispute Japan–Korea disputes Dokdo Daemado Korean Eastern Sea Korean nationalist historiography Legitimacy Theory of the Provisional Government Noktundo dispute Parangcho dispute Propaganda North South North Korea portal South Korea portal v t e Many Koreans (both North and South) possess a strong sense of 'ethnic pride', driven in part by how more powerful neighbors ( Japan , China ) bullied Korea throughout its history.

[ 55 ] Many Koreans are wary of neighboring powers. A representative example of this sentiment is South Korean dramas , which are generally known to have negative portrayals of Americans, Chinese, and Japanese and positive depictions of North Koreans.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] In early November 2018, a popular Japanese music show cancelled BTS ' performance, citing a T-shirt a member wore the year before, bearing a photograph of a mushroom cloud following the bombing of Nagasaki . At that time, the T-shirt had phrases symbolizing Korean independence movement .

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Japanese people felt this aspect of BTS was "racist", but many South Korean people and mainstream South Korea politicians argued that it was an unfair attack by Japanese people. Many Koreans take this in a positive sense because the U.S. atomic bomb attack on Japan soon led to Korea's independence from Japan's colonial rule .

[ 57 ] In South Korea, there is an lingering perception that whites or Japanese are perpetrators of racism, and Koreans are victims of racism, [ 59 ] [ 60 ] and BTS actively supports Black Lives Matter .

[ 61 ] In modern politics, South Korean liberals and progressives put "independence" (독립) (autonomy) as their main value, while North Korea's far-left Juche also put forward a strong "independence" (주체) ideology based on Korean nationalism and anti-imperialism.

Korea under Japanese rule [ edit ] Shin Chae-ho is a representative left-wing nationalist during the Korea under Japanese rules . Most of the Korean independence activists of the period were Korean nationalists who resisted the Japanese Empire.

North Korea [ edit ] Main article: Juche Experts analyze that North Korea's radical anti- sadaejuui and anti-colonialism have been the main causes of North Korea's economic poverty. The North Korean government shows hostility to all for historical reasons against neighboring powers such as the United States , China , and Japan .

[ 62 ] Bruce Cumings analyzed that the reason why North Korea does not collapse is that it is a thoroughly anti-imperialist country. (Many North Korean people's distrust the surrounding powers.) [ 63 ] South Korea [ edit ] Main article: Left-wing nationalism in South Korea South Korea's left-wing nationalism supports anti-imperialism , anti-Japanese decolonialism , and Korean unification . They are usually viewed as ' ethnonationalist left' (좌파민족주의) in that they oppose state-aligned nationalism , foster hostility to Japan and sympathy for North Korea, [ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] but it's more like romantic nationalism (낭만적 민족주의, 낭만적 내셔널리즘) because left-wing nationalists often embrace diversity and multiculturalism .

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] Progressive nationalists see the elimination of hierarchical "pro- Japanese (partially pro- Chinese and pro- American ) [ 69 ] [ 70 ] colonialist" remnants through nationalism as a prerequisite for realizing social progressivism.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] For example, feminist movement in South Korea often has anti-Japanese sentiment. This was naturally formed by war crimes committed by the Japanese Empire during the past World War II, such as Korean Women's Volunteer Labour Corps , Comfort Women , etc.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] No Japan Movement 's Poster in Seoul Metro by the Seoul Transit Corporation Labor Union in 2019 Historically, Korea's classical liberals have hated and resisted Qing dynasty (China) and Empire of Japan rather than the classical conservatives who conform to the powers. Due to the history of the division of Korea led by the United States and the Soviet Union , where Koreans' self-determination was ignored, Korean nationalism became more prominent in the liberal and progressive camp than in the conservative camp in South Korea.

[ 76 ] South Korea's "progressive-nationalists" criticize conservative " New Rightists " for having a romanticized perception of the United States , anti-communist hatred of North Korea , and supporting pro- Japanese colonialist view.

[ 77 ] The Korean nationalist sentiment of South Korean progressives also has other factors, which stem from the historical fact that some Korean conservative elites were pro-Japanese fascists .

[ 78 ] Progressive nationalists support the punishment of Nazi collaborators and redress by Israel.

[ 71 ] (However, Progressive nationalists have no unified view of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict .) Progressive nationalists are very positive about the liquidation of Chindokpa (친독파, "pro-German faction" or "Nazi collaborators") during France's Gaullist politics and criticize South Korea for failing to liquidate Chinilpa (친일파, "pro-Japan faction"). They argue that the liquidation of Chinilpa helps the development of democracy and transitional justice . Progressive nationalists advocate the 'anti-German based nationalism' of French and Israeli right-wing, criticizing South Korean conservatives for not having 'anti-Japanese based nationalism' because they are 'pro-Japanese based colonialists'.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Progressive nationalists in South Korea analyze that the remnants of authoritarianism created by Chinilpa , including Park Chung-hee , are the cause of many unreasonable social hierarchies in Korean society.

The negative stance against Japan in South Korea is also closely related to the intense lobbying by human rights groups for the redress of Korean victims of Japanese war crimes. South Korea has demanded a level of contrition from Japan that few colonial powers have ever shown to their former possessions. South Korean liberals/progressives refer to it as a 'victim-centered idea'(피해자 중심주의). According to them, the perpetrator's position should not be considered, some of the assets of Japanese companies should be confiscated to compensate the victims, and the Japanese right-wing LDP government is absolutely " far-right " even " fascist ". On the other hand, some South Korean conservatives tend to oppose such a demand for compensation for Japan, which liberals/progressives accuse of being " pro-Japanese colonialists ". This 'victim-centered idea' has little room for compromise with right-wing Japanese nationalists , including the Japan's LDP government.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Modern left-wing nationalism was formed in the 1980s. At that time, South Korean activist groups showed anti-American tendencies because the United States supported Chun Doo-hwan dictatorship, citing anti-communism as the main reason, and was silent on the massacre in Gwangju . As a result, many South Korean liberal activists, who had pursued a somewhat pro-American and moderate democratic path until the 1970s, turn into leftist activists due to their betrayal they felt from the United States. South Korea's left-wing activists were divided into two factions, ' PD ' ( Korean : 민중민주파 ; lit.

People's Democracy-faction) and ' NL ' ( Korean : 민족해방파 ; lit.

National Liberation-faction). In the case of 'PD', it opposes nationalism by advocating European socialism or Soviet communism , but 'NL' takes a leftist Korean nationalist and anti-imperialist line based on strong opposition to American and Japanese imperialism.

[ 81 ] Leftist nationalists in South Korea oppose perceived Japanese imperialist attitudes towards South Korea, support friendly relations with Russia, China and the Sunshine Policy toward North Korea, but liberal nationalists and the National Liberation nationalists differ significantly in their attitudes toward United States in the 21st century. Far-left nationalists and Centre-left nationalists differed in terms of their policies.

[ 82 ] Liberal nationalists (mainly the Democratic Party of Korea , Justice Party , etc.) believed in the necessity of the presence of American troops to protect South Korea's sovereignty and believe it can achieve unification through dialogue with North Korea.

[ 83 ] They are diplomatically pro-American, but at the same time somewhat pro-Russian (친러), and tend to distrust China and Japan .

[ 84 ] National Liberation nationalists (mainly the Progressive Party , etc.) are "anti-American" (반미) and supported the "withdrawal of U.S. troops from the peninsula " (미군 철수) and "Dissolution of the U.S.-South Korea alliance " (한미동맹 파기) [ 85 ] because they believed Korea is a puppet of the United States and lack true sovereignty.

[ 86 ] Taiwan (Republic of China) [ edit ] Taiwan Statebuilding Party welcoming U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi 's delegation outside Grand Hyatt Taipei Main article: Taiwan independence Left See also: Cross-Strait relations , Taiwanese nationalism , Taiwanese independence movement , and Anti-Chinese sentiment § Taiwan Taiwan 's left-wing nationalist movement tends to emphasize the "Taiwanese identity" separated from China . As a result, Taiwan's left-wing nationalism takes a pro-American stand to counter " Chinese imperialism ", even though it has initially been influenced by Western socialist movements, including Leninism .

[ 87 ] Europe [ edit ] Historically, left-wing nationalists have often emerged in opposition to European states whose borders had been formed by medieval dynastic unity, bringing together multiple linguistic and ethnic groups into one single state . During the 18th and 19th centuries, those centralised states began to promote cultural homogenisation . In reaction, some regions developed their own progressive nationalism. This often occurred in regions whose cultural, economic or sociological distinctiveness from the dominant culture had produced historical grievances (political discrimination such as the Irish Penal Laws , economic crisis such as the Irish Great Famine , or traumatic war deaths). The idea could gain ground that government by distant economic or aristocratic elites was responsible for current misfortune, but that self-rule could remedy the situation by allowing a more egalitarian or state-interventionist approach, better suited to local tastes or needs, than the royal or imperial state.

Left-wing nationalists have been prominent in leading the autonomist and separatist movements in the Basque Country ( Basque nationalism ); Catalonia ( Catalan independence ); Corsica ( Corsican nationalism ); Galicia ( Galician nationalism ); [ 88 ] [ 89 ] the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland ( Irish republicanism and Irish nationalism ); Sardinia ( Sardinian nationalism ); [ 90 ] Scotland ( Scottish nationalism ); Székely Land ( Székely autonomy movement ) and Wales ( Welsh nationalism ).

France [ edit ] See also: Brest Charter and Native nationalism In Europe, a number of left-wing nationalist movements exist and have a long and well-established tradition.

[ 91 ] Nationalism originated as a left-wing position during the French Revolution and the French Revolutionary Wars . The original left-wing nationalists endorsed civic nationalism [ 92 ] which defined the nation as a daily plebiscite and as formed by the subjective will to live together. Related to revanchism , the belligerent will to take revenge against Germany and retake control of Alsace-Lorraine , nationalism could then be sometimes opposed to imperialism . In practice, motivated by the dual idea of liberating areas from conservative rule and that those liberated peoples could be absorbed into the civic nation, French left-wing nationalism often ended up justifying or rationalising imperialism , notably in the case of Algeria.

France's centralist left-wing nationalism was at times resisted by provincial left-wing groups who saw its Paris-focussed cultural and administrative centralism as little different in practice to right-wing French nationalism. From the late 19th century, several of the many ethnic groups that made up France developed a movement for separatism and regionalism, becoming a significant political factor in Alsace , Brittany , Corsica , French Flanders and the French portions of the Basque and Catalan countries, with smaller movements in other parts of the country and eventually equivalent movements in overseas territories ( Algeria and New Caledonia , among others). These regional nationalisms could be either left-wing or right-wing. For instance, Occitan nationalism in the early 20th century was expressed by the far-right leaders Maurice Barrès and Charles Maurras (who imagined a right-wing Occitan regionalist identity within a multiethnic French state as a bulwark to protect conservative zones against left-wing Parisian governments) whereas a portion of the Félibrige cultural movement represented a more progressive Occitan nationalism and looked for inspiration to the federalist republicanism of Catalonia . It was a similar situation in each of the traditionally regionalist zones, including the left-wing Breton Federalist League against the right-wing Breton National Party and the left-wing Alsatian Progress Party against the right-wing Heimatsbund , among others. Since the 1970s, a cultural revival and left-wing nationalism has grown in strength in several regions. For instance, the Pè a Corsica party has close links with both social democracy and the green movement and is currently the dominant political force in Corsica . After the 2017 legislative election , the party obtained three-quarters of Corsican seats in the National Assembly and two-thirds in the Corsican Assembly .

Ireland [ edit ] Part of a series on Irish republicanism Concepts Abstentionism Anti-imperialism Armalite and ballot box strategy Dissident republican Éire Nua Fenian Irish nationalism Irish republican legitimism New Departure Radicalism Republicanism United Ireland History Irish Rebellion of 1798 Acts of Union 1800 Irish rebellion of 1803 Young Ireland rebellion Fenian Rising Fenian raids Fenian dynamite campaign Easter Rising 1918 general election Irish revolutionary period Irish War of Independence Irish Civil War 1932 general election S-Plan Border Campaign The Troubles Arms Crisis 1981 Irish hunger strike Good Friday Agreement Dissident Irish republican campaign People Gerry Adams Cathal Brugha Neil Blaney Tom Clarke James Connolly Seamus Costello Éamon de Valera Robert Emmet Cathal Goulding Thomas J. Kelly Seán Mac Stíofáin Seán MacBride Terence MacSwiney Constance Markievicz Bernadette Devlin Martin McGuinness John Mitchel Ruairí Ó Brádaigh Dáithí Ó Conaill Peadar O'Donnell John O'Mahony Patrick Pearse Seán Russell Bobby Sands Seán South James Stephens Wolfe Tone Moss Twomey Active parties Aontú Éirígí Fianna Fáil Irish Republican Socialist Party Republican Network for Unity Republican Sinn Féin Saoradh Sinn Féin Defunct parties All Ireland Anti-Partition League Anti H-Block Aontacht Éireann Clann na Poblachta Clann Éireann Communist Party of Ireland (Marxist–Leninist) Córas na Poblachta Cumann na Poblachta Cumann Poblachta na hÉireann Fianna Uladh Independent Fianna Fáil Irish Anti-Partition League Irish Independence Party Irish Socialist Republican Party Irish Workers' Group (1976) National Corporate Party Northern Council for Unity Republican Congress Republican Labour Party Republican Socialist Collective Saor Éire SLISO Socialist Republican Party Militant groups Active Arm na Poblachta Continuity IRA Cumann na mBan‎ Fianna Éireann Irish Republican Liberation Army Irish Republican Movement New IRA Inactive Irish National Liberation Army Óglaigh na hÉireann (Real IRA splinter group) Defunct Connolly Column Irish Brigade Irish Citizen Army Irish National Invincibles Irish People's Liberation Organisation Irish Republican Army (1919–1922) Irish Republican Army (1922–1969) Irish Republican Brotherhood Irish Revolutionary Forces Irish Volunteers Official IRA Provisional IRA Real IRA Republican Action Against Drugs Republican Defence Army Saor Éire (1967–1975) Saor Uladh Society of United Irishmen South Armagh Republican Action Force Young Ireland Active organisations 32 County Sovereignty Movement Anti-Imperialist Action Ireland Cabhair Connolly Association Connolly Youth Movement IRPWA Irish National Congress IRSCNA NORAID National Graves Association National Graves Association, Belfast Ógra Fianna Fáil Ógra Shinn Féin Revolutionary Housing League Wolfe Tone Societies Defunct organisations Clan na Gael Clann na hÉireann Comhairle na Poblachta Dungannon Clubs Emmet Monument Association Fenian Brotherhood Friends of Irish Freedom Irish Republican Brotherhood Irish Republican Voice Irish Socialist Federation League of Communist Republicans Northern Resistance Movement People's Democracy Phoenix National and Literary Society Troops Out Movement Media An Phoblacht Daily Ireland Evening Press Guerrilla Days in Ireland IRIS Magazine Irish Freedom Republican News Saoirse Irish Freedom Sinn Féin The Gaelic American The Hibernia Magazine The Irish Felon The Irish People The Irish Press The Nation The Phoenix The Starry Plough The Sunday Press United Irishman (1848 newspaper) United Irishman (1948 newspaper) Culture Celtic F.C.

Christy Moore Black 47 The Dubliners Easter Lily Flying Column (music group) Irish rebel songs Marxman Kneecap The Wolfe Tones Politics portal Ireland portal v t e See also: Irish republicanism Irish nationalism has had left-wing nationalist elements since its mainstream inception. Early nationalists during the 19th century such as the United Irishmen in the 1790s, Young Irelanders in the 1840s, Fenian Brotherhood in the 1880s, as well as Sinn Féin , and Fianna Fáil in the 1920s all styled themselves in various ways after French left-wing radicalism and republicanism . This combination of nationalism with left-wing positions was possible as the nation state they sought was envisaged against the backdrop of the more socially conservative and pluri-national state of the United Kingdom.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Today, parties such as Sinn Féin and the Social Democratic and Labour Party in Northern Ireland are left-wing nationalist parties. Earlier nationalist republican parties that were once rather more left-leaning for the time, notably Fianna Fáil in the Republic of Ireland, have over time grown more conservative (" sinistrism "), today representing a centrist or centre-right republican nationalism.

Right-wing nationalist outlooks and far-right parties in general are few in Irish history. When they did emerge, it was usually short-lived and contextual (the Blueshirts during the Great Depression ) or took the form of Anglo-British nationalism (as with Orangism and other tendencies within Ulster unionism ). Since World War II, right-wing Irish nationalism has been a rare force in the Republic of Ireland, espoused primarily by small, often short-lived organisations. As such, left-wing nationalism with a republican, egalitarian, anti-colonial tendency has historically been the dominant form of nationalism in Irish politics.

Poland [ edit ] In the late 19th century, Polish labour movement split into two factions, with one proposing communist revolution and Polish autonomy within the Russian Empire which established the Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania , renamed later as the Communist Party of Poland . However, most activists have seen Polish independence as a requirement to realize socialist political program as after Poland partitions Austria-Hungary , Prussia and Russia repressed their ethnically Polish citizens of all social classes. Those activists established Polish Socialist Party (PPS). During World War I , PPS' leader Józef Piłsudski became a leader of German dominated puppet Poland and then broke an alliance with Central Powers , claiming an independent Second Polish Republic . As a Chief of State , Piłsudski signed in very first weeks decrees about the eight hour work day, equal rights for women, free and compulsory education, free healthcare and social insurance, making Poland one of the most progressive countries of interwar period.

In Poland itself, the PPS is considered pro-independence and patriotic left-wing (in contrast with the internationalist left-wing) rather than left-wing nationalist. The term nationalism is used nearly exclusively for the right-wing national democracy of Roman Dmowski and other officially far-right movements such as National Radical Camp and National Revival of Poland . Nowadays, notable parties and organizations that come the closest to the idea of a left-wing nationalism are Self-Defence of the Republic of Poland under the leadership of Andrzej Lepper and Zmiana led by Mateusz Piskorski . Both advocate patriotism , social conservatism , Euroscepticism , anti-imperialism (strong criticism of a NATO and American foreign policies ) and economic nationalism . The Self-Defence won 53 seats out of 460 in 2001 elections and 56 in 2005. From 2005 to 2007, it was in the coalition government with two other parties (one right-wing and the other nationalist). Since then, it has no representatives in the Polish Sejm .

It could be argued that the ruling Law and Justice party exhibits forms of left-wing nationalism. (However, the party is more defined as either a right-wing nationalist.) On economic issues, the party takes partial stance against privatization and pushes for a strong state role in the market. On social issues, the party is very conservative and often alludes to the policies of the interwar sanation movement which was led by Józef Piłsudski .

[ 95 ] Scotland [ edit ] The Scottish independence movement is mainly left-wing and is spearheaded by the Scottish National Party , who have been on the centre-left since the 1970s.

[ 96 ] There are other political parties from the political left in favour of Scottish independence, namely the Scottish Greens , the Scottish Socialist Party and Solidarity .

Spain [ edit ] EH Bildu is the political coalition that represents leftist Basque nationalism , formed by Sortu , Eusko Alkartasuna , Aralar and Alternatiba political parties. In Catalonia , there are two main political parties which defend the Catalan left-wing independentist movement, both with institutional representation, which are the Republican Left of Catalonia and Popular Unity Candidacy . In Galicia the main opposition party in the autonomous parliament Galician Nationalist Bloc , BNG advocates for Galicia to exert its national self-determination and conquer national sovereignty, always with a social and left-wing approach.

Turkey [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: Kurdish Political Movement in Turkey . You can help by adding to it .

( talk ) ( April 2024 ) Main article: Ulusalcılık In Turkey , the Republican People's Party [ 97 ] [ 98 ] and the Enlightenment Movement ( Aydınlık Hareketi ) have been synonymous with left-wing nationalism. The Enlightenment Movement has been advocated by the Patriotic Party .

Ukraine [ edit ] In Ukraine , the national question and the agrarian question especially before the Russian Revolution were highly entangled. This led to the Borotbists .

[ 99 ] Wales [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Similarly to Scotland, there is a left-wing movement in Wales led by Plaid Cymru for Welsh independence . Previously in favour of a revolutionary form of independence, Plaid now considers itself to be evolutionary in its approach to independence through continued devolution and ultimate sovereignty. This is also the view of the Wales Green Party .

Oceania [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] During the 1890s, Australian-born novelists and poets such as Henry Lawson , Joseph Furphy and Banjo Paterson drew on the archetype of the Australian bushman. These and other writers formulated the bush legend which included broadly left-wing notions that working class Outback Australians were democratic, egalitarian , anti-authoritarian and cultivated mateship . However, terms like nationalist and patriotic were also utilised by pro- British Empire political conservatives, culminating with the formation in 1917 of the Nationalist Party of Australia which remained the main centre-right party until the late 1920s.

During the 1940s and 1950s, radical intellectuals, many of whom joined the Communist Party of Australia (CPA), combined philosophical internationalism with a radical nationalist commitment to Australian culture . This type of cultural nationalism was possible among radicals in Australia at the time because of the patriotic turn in Comintern policy from 1941; the most common understanding of what it meant to be patriotic at the time was a kind of pro-imperial race patriotism and anti-British sentiment was until the late 1960s regarded as subversive; and radical nationalism dovetailed with a growing respect for Australian cultural output among intellectuals which was itself a product of the break in cultural supply chains—lead actors and scripts had always come from Britain and the United States—occasioned by the war.

[ 100 ] Post-war radical nationalists consequently sought to canonise the bush culture which had emerged during the 1890s. The post-war radical nationalists interpreted this tradition as having implicitly or inherently radical qualities since they believed it meant that working-class Australians were naturally democratic and/or socialist. This view combined the CPA's commitment to the working class with the post-war intellectuals' own nationalist sentiments. The apotheosis of this line of thought was perhaps Russel Ward 's book The Australian Legend (1958) which sought to trace the development of the radical nationalist ethos from its convict origins through bushranging, the Victorian gold rush, the spread of agriculture, the industrial strife of the early 1890s and its literary canonisation. Other significant radical nationalists included the historians Ian Turner , Lloyd Churchward, Robin Gollan , Geoffrey Serle and Brian Fitzpatrick , whom Ward described as the "spiritual father of all the radical nationalist historians in Australia"; [ 101 ] and the writers Stephen Murray-Smith , Judah Waten , Dorothy Hewett and Frank Hardy .

The Barton government which came to power following the first elections to the Commonwealth parliament in 1901 was formed by the Protectionist Party with the support of the Australian Labor Party . The support of the Labor Party was contingent upon restricting non-white immigration, reflecting the attitudes of the Australian Workers Union and other labour organisations at the time, upon whose support the Labor Party was founded.

At the start of World War II , Labor Prime Minister John Curtin reinforced the message of the White Australia policy by saying: "This country shall remain forever the home of the descendants of those people who came here in peace in order to establish in the South Seas an outpost of the British race".

[ 102 ] Labor Party leader Arthur Calwell supported the White European Australia policy. This is reflected by Calwell's comments in his 1972 memoirs Be Just and Fear Not in which he made it clear that he maintained his view that non-European people should not be allowed to settle in Australia, writing: I am proud of my white skin, just as a Chinese is proud of his yellow skin, a Japanese of his brown skin, and the Indians of their various hues from black to coffee-coloured. Anybody who is not proud of his race is not a man at all. And any man who tries to stigmatize the Australian community as racist because they want to preserve this country for the white race is doing our nation great harm. [...] I reject, in conscience, the idea that Australia should or ever can become a multi-racial society and survive.

[ 103 ] The radical-nationalist tradition was challenged during the 1960s, during which New Left scholars interpreted much of Australian history—including labour history —as dominated by racism, sexism, homophobia and militarism.

[ 104 ] Since the 1960s, it has been uncommon for those on the political left to claim Australian nationalism for themselves. The bush legend has survived the above changes in Australian culture as it informed much cultural output during the period of the new nationalism in the 1970s and 1980s, the language of Australian nationalism was adopted by centre-right politicians such as Prime Minister John Howard for the political right during the 1990s.

[ 105 ] In the 21st century, attempts by left-leaning intellectuals to reclaim nationalism for the left are few and far between.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] South Asia [ edit ] Bangladesh [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) After its 1971 liberation war , Bangladesh wrote its binding beliefs to be for "Secularism, Nationalism and Socialism". For a long time, Bengali nationalism was promoted in Bangladesh while excluding other minorities which led to President Ziaur Rahman of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) to change Bengali nationalism to Bangladeshi nationalism where all citizens of the country is equal under the law. This new nationalism in Bangladesh has been promoted by the BNP and the Awami League calling for national unity and cultural promotion. However, the BNP would later promote Islamic unity as well and has excluded Hindus from the national unity while bringing together Bihari Muslims and Chakma Buddhists. This is different from Awami League's staunch secularist stance of the national identity uniting all religious minorities.

List of left-wing nationalist political parties [ edit ] See also: Category:Left-wing nationalist parties Current parties [ edit ] Angola : People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola Armenia : Armenian Revolutionary Federation Argentina : Union for the Homeland Brazil : Democratic Labour Party [ 109 ] Cuba : Communist Party of Cuba [ 110 ] Czech Republic : Enough!

France : La France Insoumise [ 111 ] Germany : Sahra Wagenknecht Alliance – Reason and Justice Greece : Course of Freedom , Democratic Social Movement , Panhellenic Socialist Movement (1974–1996) Hungary : Hungarian Workers' Party India : Forward Bloc Indonesia : Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle Ireland : Sinn Féin , [ 112 ] Éirígí , Irish Republican Socialist Party , Republican Sinn Féin , Workers' Party Israel : Israeli Labor Party , Meretz , Balad Kosovo : Vetëvendosje Libya : Popular Front for the Liberation of Libya Mexico : National Regeneration Movement [ 113 ] Moldova : Party of Socialists of the Republic of Moldova North Korea : Workers' Party of Korea North Macedonia : The Left Palestine : Fatah , PFLP Peru : Peruvian Nationalist Party Philippines : Bagong Alyansang Makabayan , Makabayan , Akbayan , Communist Party of the Philippines Poland : Self-Defence of the Republic of Poland Romania : Social Democratic Party [ 114 ] Russia : Communist Party of Russian Federation , Just Russia Serbia : Socialist Party of Serbia Slovakia : Direction – Social Democracy [ 115 ] South Africa : African National Congress , Economic Freedom Fighters South Korea : Progressive Party , People's Democracy Party Spain : EH Bildu , Popular Unity Candidacy , Galician Nationalist Bloc , Republican Left of Catalonia [ 116 ] [ 117 ] Taiwan : Taiwan Statebuilding Party , [ a ] Social Democratic Party , New Power Party Turkey : Patriotic Party , Republican People's Party [ 97 ] [ 98 ] United Kingdom : Social Democratic Party , Plaid Cymru , Sinn Féin in Northern Ireland , Social Democratic and Labour Party , Scottish Socialist Party , Workers Party of Britain , Scottish National Party Venezuela : United Socialist Party of Venezuela Historical parties [ edit ] Democratic Republic of the Congo : Congolese National Movement , Unified Lumumbist Party Georgia : Social Democratic Party of Georgia , Georgian Socialist-Federalist Revolutionary Party Germany : National-Social Association , Old Social Democratic Party of Germany Iraq : Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party – Iraq Region Israel : Mapam , Mapai , Ahdut HaAvoda , Rafi , Ratz Italy : Young Italy , Historical Far Left Syria : Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party – Syria Region See also [ edit ] Ba'athism Bolivarian Revolution Burmese Way to Socialism Classical radicalism Egalitarianism Epochalism Ethnocacerism (element) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Three Principles of the People Indigenism Indigenismo Internationalism Juche Kirchnerism Labor mobility Labor Zionism Localist camp (element) Left-wing populism Maoism Nasserism National liberation (Marxism) National Question New Nationalism (Theodore Roosevelt) Peronism Progressivism in Taiwan Pan-Green Coalition Proletarian internationalism Socialist patriotism Structural fix Wars of national liberation Notes [ edit ] ^ TSP was once described as a left-wing , [ 118 ] progressive [ 119 ] and pro-independence party.

[ 120 ] The TSP advocates the Taiwan independence left-wing [ 121 ] [ 122 ] and has a strong anti-Chinese sentiment ; [ 123 ] it has been described as " far-right " by some media.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] References [ edit ] ^ Chazel, Laura; Dain, Vincent (2021).

"Left-Wing Populism and Nationalism: A Comparative Analysis of the Patriotic Narratives of Podemos and France insoumise" .

Journal for the Study of Radicalism .

15 (2): 73– 94.

ISSN 1930-1189 .

JSTOR 48642382 .

Archived from the original on 20 May 2022 . Retrieved 20 May 2022 .

^ Smith 1999, 30.

^ Delanty, Gerard; Kumar, Krishan.

The SAGE handbook of nations and nationalism . London, England, UK; Thousand Oaks, California, USA; New Delhi, India: Sage Publications, Ltd, 2006, 542.

^ Custodi J (2020).

"Nationalism and populism on the left: The case of Podemos" .

Nations and Nationalism .

27 (3): 705– 720.

doi : 10.1111/nana.12663 .

hdl : 11384/136975 .

S2CID 225127425 .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2020 . Retrieved 16 April 2021 .

^ Nairn, Tom.

Faces of Nationalism: Janus Revisited.

London, UK: Verso Books, 1997.

^ Fetzer, T. (2022). "Chapter 5: Nationalism in left-wing ideologies of political economy". In Handbook of Economic Nationalism.

Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.

^ "Arthur Calwell, Leader of the Labor Party, Defender of White Australia." ^ “ Fact Sheet – Abolition of the 'White Australia' Policy Archived 9 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine , homeaffairs.gov.au ^ “'How Sweden Became Multicultural'.” ^ Custodi, Jacopo (2023).

Radical Left Parties and National Identity in Spain, Italy and Portugal . Palgrave Studies in European Political Sociology.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-48926-6 .

ISBN 978-3-031-48925-9 .

^ "Nationalisme is niet per definitie fout, is ook progressieve, democratische kracht" . 21 August 2017.

Archived from the original on 9 September 2019 . Retrieved 24 November 2023 .

^ Iordachi, Constantin; Apor, Péter (29 July 2021). Bloomsbury Publishing (ed.).

Occupation and Communism in Eastern European Museums: Re-Visualizing the Recent Past . Bloomsbury. p. 76.

ISBN 978-1-350-10371-9 . Retrieved 22 November 2023 .

^ "Kılıçdaroğlu raises tone, vows to deport 10 million refugees" . 18 May 2023.

^ "Abolition of the 'White Australia' Policy" . Australian Department of Immigration. Archived from the original on 1 September 2006.

^ Antonio Carlos de Souza Lima, « L'indigénisme au Brésil : migration et réappropriation d’un savoir administratif », Revue de synthèse , semestre, No. 3-4, juillet-décembre 2000, p. 381-410.

^ Devlin 1975 , p. 32.

^ Nolan, David (1984). The Institute of InterAmerican Studies (ed.).

The Ideology of the Sandinistas and the Nicaraguan Revolution .

^ Langue, Frédérique (14 February 2005).

"Antécédents historiques du chavisme" .

Nuevo Mundo Mundos Nuevos - New World New Worlds (in French).

doi : 10.4000/nuevomundo.628 .

ISSN 1626-0252 .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2017 . Retrieved 22 November 2023 .

^ Ihsan al-Djabri (July–September 1932).

"Nationalisme arabe et nationalisme occidental" .

La Nation Arabe (in French). Archived from the original on 22 April 2017 . Retrieved 22 November 2023 .

^ a b c Nimni 1991, 14.

^ Nimni 1991, 16.

^ Nimni 1991, 4.

^ a b van Ree 2002, 49.

^ a b Nimni 1991, 18.

^ a b c Nimni 1991, 21.

^ Nimni 1991, 21–22.

^ a b Nimni 1991, 22.

^ Marx, Karl (1848).

"The Communist Manifesto" .

Archived from the original on 2 January 2018 . Retrieved 11 September 2013 .

^ Nimni 1991, 7.

^ a b Schmitt 1997 [1987], 169.

^ van Ree 2002, 58–59.

^ a b van Ree 2002, 60.

^ a b van Ree 2002, 64.

^ a b van Ree 2002, 67.

^ a b van Ree 2002, 65.

^ a b van Ree 2002, 66.

^ a b c Perica 2002, 98.

^ Perica 2002, 99-100.

^ Perica 2002, 100.

^ a b Perica 2002, 98, 100.

Balkan Idols. Religion and Nationalism in Yugoslav States . New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-517429-1 .

^ Perica 2002, 98, 101.

^ Milner 1973.

^ Milner 1989, vii.

^ Milner 1973, 9.

^ Pask 2001.

^ Milner 1973, 188.

^ Milner 1973, 191.

^ "States Readings" . University of Toronto.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 1 April 2018 .

^ Sands, Eric C.

"The New Nationalism" .

Teaching American History .

^ "The New Nationalism - Theodore Roosevelt Association" .

www.theodoreroosevelt.org .

^ "Theodore Roosevelt: Impact and Legacy | Miller Center" .

millercenter.org . 4 October 2016.

^ "The Square Deal: Theodore Roosevelt and the Themes of Progressive Reform | Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History" .

www.gilderlehrman.org .

^ Miner, Marlyce. "The American Indian Movement". Archived 10 January 2014, at the Wayback Machine.

^ Ostler, Jeffrey (2010). The Lakotas and the Black Hills, The Struggle for Sacred Ground. New York, NY: Viking Penguin. p. 188.

ISBN 978-0-670-02195-6 .

^ a b "Why Don't Korean Dramas and Movies Like Americans?" . 8 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 19 March 2023 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 .

^ Oh In-gyu ed. (2016).

Hallyu Consumption through Overcoming Nationalism - Japanese and Chinese Reaction to Anti - Japanese and Anti - Chinese Content within Hallyu TV Dramas Archived 4 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine .

Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information .

^ a b " "일본 몰염치 끝이 없다" 여야, 일본 방송 BTS 출연취소에 일제히 우려" .

Kyunghyang Shinmun . 10 November 2018.

Archived from the original on 20 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 March 2023 .

^ Qin, Amy (9 November 2018).

"K-Pop Band BTS Is Dropped From Japanese TV Show Over T-Shirt" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2021 . Retrieved 23 November 2018 .

^ "일본의 혐한, 한국의 반일" (in Korean). The Hankyoreh. 7 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 .

^ "하인스 워드를 보며 든 몇가지 생각" . 오마이뉴스. 2 June 2006.

Archived from the original on 28 February 2023 . Retrieved 28 February 2023 .

요컨대 한국인들은 피부색이 다르다고 무조건 거부하지 않는다는 것이다. 따라서 민족의 순혈주의니 피부색 배타성은 맞지 않는다. 코를 세우고 머리를 금발로 물들이고 피부를 하얗게 하는 것은 어제 오늘의 일이 아니다. 한국인들은 백인을 닮았다고 하면 좋아하지만 흑인을 닮았다고 하면 분노한다. ... 하인스 워드 신드롬에서 많이 지적되는 말이 있다. "하인스가 한국에 있었으면 그렇게 성공할 수 있었겠는가." [South Koreans do not unconditionally reject the difference in skin color. Therefore, it is not right to talk about 'Korean ethnic nationalism' or 'exclusivity to (all races, including whites) skin colors'. It is not new for South Koreans to raise their noses, dye their hair blonde and whiten their skin. South Koreans like to hear that they look like white people, but they get angry when they hear that they look like black people. ... There is a saying that is pointed out a lot in Hines Ward Syndrome: "Would Hines have succeeded if he was born in South Korea?"] ^ "방탄소년단, 흑인 인권 'BLM' 캠페인 100만 달러 기부 "우리도 편견 시달려" " (in Korean).

조선일보 . 4 October 2020.

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 22 March 2022 .

^ "북한이해 (2014)" . 통일부 북한자료센터 ( Ministry of Unification : Data center on North Korea).

Archived from the original on 19 March 2023 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 .

^ "브루스 커밍스 "미국이 한반도 전쟁 못 끝낸 게 '북한 핵보유' 촉발" " .

Pressian . 25 June 2021.

Archived from the original on 19 March 2023 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 .

북한 정권은 왜 붕괴하지 않나? 북한은 철저한 반제국주의 국가다. 북한 정권이 수립될 때 만들어진 헌법에도 명시돼 있다.

(in Korean) ^ 박노자의 한국, 안과 밖 노래를 불렀다가 '죄인'이 되는 나라, 대한민국 Archived 12 February 2023 at the Wayback Machine .

The Hankyoreh . 26 May 2020. Retrieved 14 June 2022. "민중당은 조직 노동자, 비정규직 노동자들의 지지를 받으며 좌파민족주의 적 입장에서 신자유주의를 비판하는 정당이다." ^ North Korea’s “selective détente” Archived 31 October 2023 at the Wayback Machine East Asia Forum (2019. 01. 11). "The South Korean left prioritises the Korean race (minjok) over ideological disparity. This opens a pathway for Kim to stoke ethnonationalism and break South Korea away from the US." ^ Cloudy forecast for Moon’s ‘Sunshine Policy 2.0’ Archived 31 October 2023 at the Wayback Machine East Asia Forum (2017. 07. 20). "In South Korean politics, liberal political parties often support a policy of engagement with North Korea. This is because left-wing politicians tend to value miunjok (the Korean race) over the North–South ideological and political divide. In a broader sense, liberals embrace ethno-nationalism — the notion that sharing the same bloodline is superior to temporary national partition. Conservatives on the other hand support regime-based nationalism, which puts emphasis on being South Korean and stresses the differences in social and political values between the two Koreas." ^ "이재명 "포용적 다문화 정책 펴겠다…이민자 컨트롤타워 설치" " [Lee Jae-myung said, "I will implement an inclusive multiculturalism policy. ... I will install an pro-immigration control tower."].

연합뉴스 . 7 March 2022.

Archived from the original on 30 January 2023 . Retrieved 5 March 2023 .

^ "사회적 다양성" [Social diversity].

경향신문 . 29 December 2022.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 5 March 2023 .

^ [Opinion] Where the Cold War Never Ended Archived 9 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

New York Times . Aug. 12, 2019 ^ "광화문에서 성조기와 이스라엘기를 흔드는 이들에게" . 프레시안. 10 May 2019 . Retrieved 1 March 2023 .

속된 말로 일본인·중국인·미국인을 부를 때 우리는 쪽바리, 짱깨, 양키라고 한다. 일본인·중국인·미국인이라고 정명을 부른 기억은 별로 없다. 특별히 악의가 있거나 저의가 있어서 그런 것은 아니다. 생각 없이 부르지만, 그 말 속에는 민중들의 외세에 대한 거부 정서가 담겨있는 것이다. ... 이러한 멸칭들이 인종차별적인 태도에서 나왔으리라고 보지 않는다. 외세에 대한 국민정서적 거부감과 두려움, 그리고 일게 모르게 쌓인 적대감에서 나온 별칭이다.

^ a b c "조정래 "이영훈 '반일종족주의', 이스라엘이라면 사형" " .

폴리뉴스 . 29 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2023 . Retrieved 3 March 2023 .

^ a b "권력에 부역한 역사 드러내야 민주주의 전진" .

한겨레 . 24 November 2016.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2023 . Retrieved 3 March 2023 .

^ a b "반민특위에서 풀려난 친일 헌병, 김주열을 쐈다" .

미디어오늘 . 11 September 2016.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 3 March 2023 .

^ "일제 식민지만행 규탄운동을 벌이는 여성단체 들" .

Korea Democracy Foundation .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 3 March 2023 .

^ "베를린 소녀상 철거하라고? 더 배워!… 베를린 시민이 지킨다" .

여성신문 . 29 June 2022.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2023 . Retrieved 4 March 2023 .

^ "The Foreign Policy Outlook of South Korean Progressives: Part II" . 22 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

^ Jung In Kang, ed. (2017).

Contemporary Korean Political Thought and Park Chung-hee . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 223.

ISBN 9781786602503 .

Since 2005, conservative New Right scholars and progressive-nationalist historians have been engaged in a fierce debate over the writing of modern and contemporary Korean history in high school textbooks.

^ " 'South Korea: The Politics Behind the History Wars" .

The Diplomat . 29 October 2015.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 27 February 2023 .

The president's main ally in pushing through the textbook revision has been the Saenuri party chairperson Kim Moo-sung, whose own father was a prominent businessman during the Japanese occupation and actively encouraged Korean youths to enlist in the Imperial Army to fight in the Pacific war.

Kim has been struggling to whitewash his family's history and downplay his intimate connections to the nation's corporate and media elite, and thus has been a passionate leader in the New Right movement, the ideological network behind the right wing revisionism.

^ "Japan and South Korea: A logical but uneasy alignment | Lowy Institute" .

Archived from the original on 20 July 2023 . Retrieved 20 July 2023 .

^ "강제징용 피해자소송 맡았던 文 "피해자 중심주의, 국제사회 대원칙" " . 11 February 2020.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 July 2023 .

^ 강만길 (Kang Man-gil), ed. (1989).

80년대 사회 운동 논쟁: 월간 사회 와 사상 창간 1주년 기념 전권 특별 기획 . 한길사.

^ "무엇이 진보당을 '민주당 텃밭' 전주에 뿌리내리게 했나" .

한겨레 . 6 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 11 April 2023 .

그는 선거기간에 "전주시를 반미투쟁기지로 만들 수 없다"고 공격한 상대 후보들의 색깔론과 관련해 "선거운동 과정에서 가장 힘들었던 부분이었다. 민주당 소속이나 다름없는 후보가 윤석열 정권의 실정을 비판하기보다 색깔론 공격에 집중하는 게 말이 되느냐"고 꼬집었다. 실제 지역에선 친민주당 후보의 강 당선자에 대한 막판 색깔론 공세가 역풍을 불러왔다는 분석도 나온다.

^ "송영길 "북, 제2의 베트남 친미국가로...미국에 의견 전달" " . YTN. 24 November 2021.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "문 대통령 "한-V4 정상회의로 '신 유라시아 루트' 열려" " .

korea.kr . 5 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2022 . Retrieved 4 December 2022 .

^ "[민중당 결의문] 한미동맹 파기하고 자주국가 건설하자" .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2022 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ "트럼프 방문에 '국회 철통경호'…지하철역 출구·지하주차장도 폐쇄" . 20 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2022 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ "Viewing Taiwan From the Left" .

Jacobin magazine . 10 January 2020.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2020 . Retrieved 6 May 2020 .

Broadly speaking, the political left has been pro-independence; their notion of independence was historically shaped, particularly in the postwar period, by the wave of anticolonial uprisings across the world, as well as elements of Leninist conceptions of self-determination. ... ... and the DPP and other more pro-independence Taiwanese political parties bank on US imperialism as a way to ward off China.

^ González, Justo Beramendi; Núñez Seijas, X. M. (1995).

O Nacionalismo Galego (in Galician). A Nosa Terra.

^ González, Justo Beramendi (2007).

De provincia a nación (in Galician). Edicións Xerais de Galicia.

^ "Entrevista a Marcel Farinelli (1): "Córcega y Cerdeña forman un archipélago invisibile al tener sus islas nacionalismos de signo opuesto" .

WordPress (in Spanish). 9 April 2014.

Archived from the original on 12 March 2016 . Retrieved 1 April 2018 .

^ Frankel 1984 [1981].

^ Andrew Knapp and Vincent Wright (2006).

The Government and Politics of France . Routledge.

^ Stephen John Small, ed. (1998).

Republicanism, Patriotism and Radicalism: Political Thought in Ireland, 1776-98 . University of Oxford.

^ David Dickson; Dáire Keogh; Kevin Whelan, eds. (1993).

The United Irishmen: Republicanism, Radicalism, and Rebellion .

Lilliput Press . p. 125.

ISBN 9780946640959 .

^ "Mateusz Morawiecki: robotnicza myśl socjalistyczna jest głęboko obecna w filozofii Prawa i Sprawiedliwości" .

Andrzej Turczyn . 22 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2020 . Retrieved 7 August 2020 .

^ James Mitchell, Lynn Bennie and Rob Johns (2012).

The Scottish National Party: Transition To Power . Oxford University Press.

^ a b "History of the Republican People's Party" .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2023 .

^ a b "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 May 2019 . Retrieved 20 January 2023 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Maĭstrenko, Ivan; Ford, Christopher (2019).

Luckyj, George S. N.

(ed.).

Borot'bism : a chapter in the history of the Ukrainian revolution . Translated by Rudnytsky, Ivan L.

Stuttgart, Germany: Ibidem Press. p. 32.

ISBN 978-3-8382-7097-5 .

OCLC 1083467361 .

^ Stephen Alomes, A Nation at Last?

(Sydney, 1988).

^ Russel Ward, A Radical Life (South Melbourne, 1988), 222.

^ "Abolition of the 'White Australia' Policy" . Australian Department of Immigration. Archived from the original on 1 September 2006 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 .

^ Calwell, Be Just and Fear Not , 117.

^ Humphrey McQueen, A New Britannia (Melbourne, 1970).

^ Judith Brett, Australian Liberals and the Moral Middle Class (Cambridge, 2003), 203–206.

^ David McKnight, Beyond Right and Left: New Politics and the Culture Wars (2005).

^ Tim Soutphommasane, Reclaiming Patriotism (2009).

^ Russell Marks, 'Labor No Longer Party of Progressive Nationalism', National Times , 19 August 2010.

^ Cruz, André Kaysel Velasco e (2014).

Entre a nação e a revolução: o marxismo de matriz comunista e o nacionalismo popular no Peru e no Brasil .

doi : 10.11606/T.8.2014.tde-21052015-122325 .

^ "Cuban Communists Warped Sense of Nationalism" . 6 September 2015.

Archived from the original on 5 November 2020 . Retrieved 18 March 2021 .

^ Adler, David (10 January 2019).

"Meet Europe's Left Nationalists" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2022 . Retrieved 10 September 2020 .

^ Suiter, Jane (2016).

"Ireland: The Rise of Populism on the Left and among Independents" . In Toril Aalberg; Frank Esser; Carsten Reinemann; Jesper Stromback; Claes De Vreese (eds.).

Populist Political Communication in Europe . Routledge. p. 134.

ISBN 978-1-317-22474-7 .

^ Jones, James R. (2 July 2018).

"Mexico's new president is a nationalist, but he's not anti-American" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 20 August 2021 . Retrieved 10 September 2020 .

^ Leiße, Olaf; Leiße, Utta-Kristin; Richter, Alexander (2013) [2004].

"Parteien und politische Entwicklung" .

Beitrittsbarometer Rumänien. Grundprobleme des Landes und Einstellungen rumänischer Jugendlicher auf dem Weg in die Europäische Union (in German). Wiesbaden: Deutscher UniversitätsVerlag. p. 51.

ISBN 978-3322813206 .

Archived from the original on 23 February 2024 . Retrieved 13 November 2020 .

^ Želinský, Dominik.

"Great ExpectionsÑ Slovak Nationalist initiatives in the light of Communal Elections 2014" (PDF) .

Bratislava , Slovakia: CEEIdentity. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 January 2021 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ Alonso, Sonia (2012).

Challenging the State: Devolution and the Battle for Partisan Credibility: A Comparison of Belgium, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom . Oxford University Press. p. 77.

ISBN 9780199691579 .

^ Ramiro, Luis; Morales, Laura (2007). "European Integration and Spanish Parties: Elite Empowerment Amidst Limited Adaptation".

The Europeanization of National Political Parties: Power and Organizational Adaptation . Routledge. p. 146.

ISBN 9781134143542 .

^ "Taiwan Activist's Wife Calls on China to Allow Him Home For Funeral" . Radio Free Asia. Archived from the original on 21 October 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

Lin Yu-ming of the left-wing, pro-independence Taiwan State Building Party said that China is increasingly seeking to inflence  [ sic ] the democratic island's 23 million residents ahead of presidential elections in 2020, at which Tsai is seeking re-election.

^ " 'The loss of language is the loss of heritage:' the push to revive Taiwanese in Taiwan" . Hong Kong Free Press. 31 October 2021 . Retrieved 16 December 2021 .

But the implementation of 18 national languages in official settings has not gone smoothly. In late September, a conversation between Defense Minister Chiu Kuo-cheng and the progressive Taiwan Statebuilding Party' s only elected lawmaker, Chen Po-wei, became heated after Chen requested the use of an interpreter so he could speak in Taigí, his mother tongue.

^ "Not Just a Two-party System" . Taiwan Business TOPICS. 25 March 2020. Archived from the original on 18 February 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2020 .

Besides supporting Taiwan independence, the TSP regards itself as a left-wing party that promotes social equality and admires the social welfare systems of northern European countries.

^ 高忠義 (22 June 2018).

"民進黨小弟連線" .

The Storm Media (in Chinese (Taiwan)).

基進黨標榜台獨左派[...] ^ "Where Do Trans Rights Stand in Taiwan After Same-Sex Marriage Legalization?" . The Diplomat. 1 November 2023 . Retrieved 22 May 2024 .

The TSP is another pro-independence party, but also promotes itself as a progressive, left-wing party.

^ a b "陳柏惟被罷免…意味著什麼？" .

火花 (in Chinese (Taiwan)). 26 October 2021. Archived from the original on 24 October 2022 . Retrieved 30 August 2022 .

如今，只要看看台灣基進網站的「關於我們」頁面，「左」這個字也不存在了，取而代之的是五花八門的「抗中」口號。這當然是一種誠實的表現：他們從一開始就從來不是什麼「左派」，而是用各種冠冕堂皇的詞彙重新包裝極端福佬沙文主義的極右翼。 ^ 孫偉倫 (20 June 2018).

"第三勢力小黨組策略聯盟 只是形式大於實質？" .

CredereMedia (in Chinese (Taiwan)).

而基進黨在光譜上常被時為極右派政黨[...] ^ 高忠義 (22 June 2018).

"民進黨小弟連線" .

風傳媒 (in Chinese (Taiwan)). Archived from the original on 13 April 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2018 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Borkenau, Franz (2013).

Socialism: National or International (reprinted ed.). Milton: Routledge.

ISBN 9781135025823 .

Devlin, John F. (1975).

The Ba'th Party: A History from its origins to 1966 (2nd ed.). Hoover Institution Press.

ISBN 978-0-8179-6561-7 .

Frankel, Jonathan. 1981 [1984].

Prophecy and Politics: Socialism, Nationalism, and the Russian Jews, 1862-1917 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Milner, Henry and Sheilagh Hodgins. 1973.

The Decolonization of Quebec: An Analysis of Left-Wing Nationalism . Toronto: McClelland and Stewart.

p. 257 Archived 17 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

Milner, Henry. 1989.

Sweden: Social Democracy in Practice . New York: Oxford University Press.

Nimni, Ephraim. 1991.

Marxism and Nationalism: Theoretical Origins of a Political Crisis . London: Pluto Press.

Pask, Kevin. "Late Nationalism: The Case of Quebec", New Left Review , 11, September–October 2001 ( preview Archived 5 October 2023 at the Wayback Machine ) Perica, Vjekoslav. 2002.

Balkan Idols: Religion and Nationalism in Yugoslav States . New York: Oxford University Press.

Ramet, Sabrina P. 2006.

The Three Yugoslavias: State-building and Legitimation, 1918-2005 . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Sa'adah, Anne. 1987 [2003].

Contemporary France: a democratic education . Lanham: Rowman Littlefield & Publishers.

Schmitt, Richard. 1997, "Introduction to Marx and Engels: A Critical Reconstruction." Dimensions of Philosophy Series . Boulder and Oxford: Westview Press.

Smith, Angel; Berger, Stefan. 1999.

Nationalism, Labour and Ethnicity 1870-1939 . Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press.

Taras, Ray (ed.). 1992.

The Road to Disillusion: From Critical Marxism to Post-communism in Eastern Europe . Armonk: M. E. Sharpe.

van Ree, Erik. 2002.

The Political Thought of Joseph Stalin: A Study in twentieth-century Revolutionary Patriotism . London and New York: RoutledgeCurzon.

Wachtel, Andrew. 2006.

Remaining Relevant after Communism: The Role of the Writer in Eastern Europe . Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.

v t e Nationalism Development Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Colours Flag Epic God Identity Language Music Myth Religion Sport Symbol Animal Emblem Flower Treasure By type African Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Constitutional patriotism Corporate- Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic European Expansionist Palingenetic ultranationalism Homo- Integral Left-wing Communist Linguistic Mystic Neo-/New Pan- Queer Right-wing Racial Arab Berber Black Korean White Zionism Religious Christian Catholic Clerico- Mormon Hindu Hindutva Islamic Resource Revolutionary Ethnocacerism National syndicalist Falangism Fascism List of fascist movements Romantic Technological Territorial Terrorism Trans- Ultra- Japan Organizations List of nationalist organizations Nationalist Clubs Related concepts Anarchism and nationalism Anationalism Anti-nationalism Banal nationalism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Eliminationism Exceptionalism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Historiography and nationalism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Nation-building National indifference National question National revival Nation state Nationalism studies Natural border Plurinationalism Principle of nationalities [ fr ] Revanchism State-building Wars of national liberation v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Left-wing_nationalism&oldid=1305974731 " Categories : Left-wing nationalism Nationalism Anti-imperialism Left-wing politics Political movements Progressivism Radicalism (historical) Socialism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Galician-language sources (gl) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Chinese (Taiwan)-language sources (zh-tw) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from November 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from November 2023 Articles needing additional references from May 2016 Articles needing additional references from April 2019 Articles that may contain original research from January 2012 Articles with hatnote templates targeting a nonexistent page Articles containing Korean-language text Articles to be expanded from April 2024 All articles to be expanded Articles containing Spanish-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 05:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Left-wing nationalism 30 languages Add topic

