Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Deltaic and net-depositional settings 2 Erosional avulsions 3 Meander cutoffs 4 Occurrence 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Avulsion (river) 7 languages العربية বাংলা Español فارسی Français Nederlands 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rapid abandonment of a river channel and formation of a new channel Plumes of sediment enter the ocean from several mouths of the Mississippi River bird's-foot delta . This sediment is responsible for building the delta and allowing it to advance into the sea. As it extends further offshore, the channel slope will decrease and its bed will aggrade , promoting an avulsion.

In sedimentary geology and fluvial geomorphology , avulsion is the rapid abandonment of a river channel and the formation of a new river channel. Avulsions occur as a result of channel slopes that are much less steep than the slope that the river could travel if it took a new course.

[ 1 ] Deltaic and net-depositional settings [ edit ] Avulsions are common in river deltas , where sediment deposits as the river enters the ocean and channel gradients are typically very small.

[ 2 ] This process is also known as delta switching .

Deposition from the river results in the formation of an individual deltaic lobe that pushes out into the sea. An example of a deltaic lobe is the bird's-foot delta of the Mississippi River with its sediment plumes. As the deltaic lobe advances, the slope of the river channel becomes lower, as the river channel is longer but has the same change in elevation. As the slope of the river channel decreases, it becomes unstable for two reasons. First, water under the force of gravity will tend to flow in the most direct course downslope. If the river could breach its natural levees (i.e., during a flood ), it would spill out onto a new course with a shorter route to the ocean, thereby obtaining a more stable steeper slope.

[ 1 ] Second, as its slope is reduced, the amount of shear stress on the bed will decrease, resulting in deposition of more sediment within the channel and thus raising of the channel bed relative to the floodplain . This will make it easier for the river to breach its levees and cut a new channel that enters the ocean at a steeper slope.

When this avulsion occurs, the new channel carries sediment out to the ocean, building a new deltaic lobe.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The abandoned delta eventually subsides.

[ 5 ] This process is also related to the distributary network of river channels that can be observed within a river delta. When the channel does this, some of its flow can remain in the abandoned channel. When these channel switching events happen repeatedly over time, a mature delta will gain a distributary network.

[ 6 ] Subsidence of the delta and/or sea-level rise can further cause backwater and deposition in the delta. This deposition fills the channels and leaves a geologic record of channel avulsion in sedimentary basins . On average, an avulsion will occur every time the bed of a river channel aggrades enough that the river channel is superelevated above the floodplain by one channel-depth. In this situation, enough hydraulic head is available that any breach of the natural levees will result in an avulsion.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Erosional avulsions [ edit ] Rivers can also avulse due to the erosion of a new channel that creates a straighter path through the landscape. This can happen during large floods in situations in which the slope of the new channel is significantly greater than that of the old channel. Where the new channel's slope is about the same as the old channel's slope, a partial avulsion will occur in which both channels are occupied by flow.

[ 9 ] An example of an erosional avulsion is the 2006 avulsion of the Suncook River in New Hampshire , in which heavy rains caused flow levels to rise. The river level backed up behind an old mill dam, which produced a shallowly-sloping pool that overtopped a sand and gravel quarry, connected with a downstream section of channel, and cut a new shorter channel at 25–50 meters per hour.

[ 10 ] Sediment mobilised by this erosional avulsion produced a depositionally-forced meander cutoff further downstream by superelevating the bed around the meander bend to nearly the level of the floodplain.

[ 11 ] Another example is the Cheslatta River , once a small tributary of the Nechako River in British Columbia . In the 1950s the Cheslatta River was made to be the spillway of the then new Nechako Reservoir . The discharge of the spills far exceeds the original flow of the Cheslatta River, which has resulted in major erosion in the upper Cheslatta valley, with the scoured sediment being deposited in the lower valley. Large reservoir spills caused the lower Cheslatta River to avulse in 1961 and again in 1972, carving a new route to the Nechako River and depositing a fan of sediment called the Cheslatta Fan in the Nechako River. After 1972 a cofferdam was built to restore the river to its original course.

[ 12 ] Meander cutoffs [ edit ] An example of a minor avulsion is known as a meander cutoff , when a pronounced meander (hook) in a river is breached by a flow that connects the two closest parts of the hook to form a new channel. This occurs when the ratio between the channel slope and the potential slope after an avulsion is less than about 1/5.

[ 1 ] Occurrence [ edit ] Avulsion typically occurs during large floods which carry the power necessary to rapidly change the landscape. Dam removal could also lead to avulsion.

Avulsions usually occur as a downstream to upstream process via head cutting erosion . If a bank of a current stream is breached a new trench will be cut into the existing floodplain. It either cuts through floodplain deposits or reoccupies an old channel.

[ 13 ] Avulsions have been investigated in deltas or coastal plain channels as a result of obstructions such as log-jams and possible tectonic influences.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Aggradation – Increase in land elevation due to the deposition of sediment Alluvial fan – Fan-shaped deposit of sediment Lake Ragunda – Former whitewater rapid on the river Indalsälven, Sweden Meander – One of a series of curves in a channel of a matured stream Megafan – Large fan-shaped deposit River delta – Silt deposition landform at the mouth of a river River plume – Mix of fresh river water and seawater Stream capture – Geomorphological phenomenon References [ edit ] ^ a b c Slingerland, Rudy; Smith, Norman D. (1998). "Necessary conditions for a meandering-river avulsion".

Geology .

26 (5): 435– 438.

Bibcode : 1998Geo....26..435S .

doi : 10.1130/0091-7613(1998)026<0435:NCFAMR>2.3.CO;2 .

^ Marshak, Stephen (2001), Earth: Portrait of a Planet, New York: W.W. Norton & Company, ISBN 0-393-97423-5 pp. 528–9 ^ Stanley, Steven M. (1999) Earth System History. New York: W.H. Freeman and Company, ISBN 0-7167-2882-6 p. 136 ^ Marshak, pp. 528–9 ^ Stanley, p. 136 ^ Easterbrook, Don J.

Surface Processes and Landforms Second Edition Prentice Hall, New Jersey: 1999.

^ Bryant, M.; Falk, P.; Paola, C. (1995). "Experimental study of avulsion frequency and rate of deposition".

Geology .

23 (4): 365– 368.

Bibcode : 1995Geo....23..365B .

doi : 10.1130/0091-7613(1995)023<0365:ESOAFA>2.3.CO;2 .

^ Mohrig, D.; Heller, P. L.; Paola, C.; Lyons, W. J. (2000). "Interpreting avulsion process from ancient alluvial sequences: Guadalope-Matarranya system (northern Spain) and Wasatch Formation (western Colorado)".

Geological Society of America Bulletin .

112 (12): 1787– 1803.

Bibcode : 2000GSAB..112.1787M .

doi : 10.1130/0016-7606(2000)112<1787:IAPFAA>2.0.CO;2 .

^ Slingerland, Rudy; Smith, Norman D. (2004). "River Avulsions and Their Deposits".

Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences .

32 : 257– 285.

Bibcode : 2004AREPS..32..257S .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.earth.32.101802.120201 .

^ Perignon, M. C. (2007).

Mechanisms governing avulsions in transient landscapes: Analysis of the May 2006 Suncook River Avulsion in Epsom, New Hampshire (S.B. Thesis).

Massachusetts Institute of Technology .

^ Perignon, M. C. (2008).

Sediment wave-induced channel evolution following the 2006 avulsion of the Suncook River in Epsom, New Hampshire (Thesis). Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

hdl : 1721.1/45792 .

^ "Nechako River Geomorphic Assessment, Phase I" (PDF) . BC Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection. pp. 3, 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 4 August 2013 .

^ Nanson, G.C.; Knighton, A.D. (1996). "Anabranching rivers: Their cause, character, and classification".

Earth Surface Processes and Landforms .

21 (3): 217– 39.

Bibcode : 1996ESPL...21..217N .

doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1096-9837(199603)21:3<217::AID-ESP611>3.0.CO;2-U .

^ Phillips, J. D. (2012). "Log-jams and avulsions in the San Antonio River Delta, Texas".

Earth Surface Processes and Landforms .

37 (9): 936– 950.

Bibcode : 2012ESPL...37..936P .

doi : 10.1002/esp.3209 .

S2CID 128660882 .

v t e Coastal geography Landforms Anchialine pool Archipelago Atoll Avulsion Ayre Barrier island Bay Bight Bodden Brackish marsh Cape Channel Cliff Coast Coastal plain Coastal waterfall Continental margin Continental shelf Coral reef Cove Dune cliff-top Estuary Firth Fjard Fjord Freshwater marsh Fundus Gat Geo Gulf Gut Hapua Headland Inlet Intertidal wetland Island Islet Isthmus Liman Lagoon Machair Mudflat Natural arch Peninsula Reef Ria Salt marsh Shoal Skerry Sound Spit Stack Strait Strand plain Submarine canyon Tidal island Tidal marsh Tide pool Tied island Tombolo Waituna Windwatt Beaches Beach cusps Beach evolution Beach ridge Beach wrack Beaches in estuaries and bays Beachrock Coastal morphodynamics Pocket beach Raised beach Recession Shell beach Shingle beach Storm beach Wash margin River mouths Debouch Mouth bar River delta mega regressive Processes Blowhole Cliffed coast Coastal biogeomorphology Coastal erosion Concordant coastline Current Cuspate foreland Discordant coastline Emergent coastline Feeder bluff Flat coast Graded shoreline Ingression coast Large-scale coastal behaviour Longshore drift Marine regression Marine transgression Raised shoreline Rip current Rocky shore Sea cave Sea foam Shoal peresyp Steep coast Submergent coastline Surf break Surf zone Surge channel Swash Undertow Volcanic arc Wave-cut platform Wave shoaling Wind fetch Wind wave Management Accretion Coastal management Integrated coastal zone management Submersion Related Bulkhead line Coastal engineering Grain size boulder clay cobble granule gravel pebble sand shingle silt Intertidal zone Littoral zone Physical oceanography Region of freshwater influence River plume Category v t e River morphology Large-scale features Alluvial plain Drainage basin Drainage system (geomorphology) Estuary Strahler number (stream order) River valley River delta River sinuosity Alluvial rivers Anabranch Avulsion (river) Bar (river morphology) Braided river Channel pattern Cut bank Floodplain Meander Meander cutoff Mouth bar Oxbow lake Point bar Riffle Rapids Riparian zone River bifurcation River channel migration River mouth Slip-off slope Stream pool Thalweg Bedrock river Canyon Knickpoint Plunge pool Bedforms Ait Antidune Dune Current ripple Regional processes Aggradation Base level Degradation (geology) Erosion and tectonics River rejuvenation Mechanics Deposition (geology) Water erosion Exner equation Hack's law Helicoidal flow Playfair's law Sediment transport List of rivers that have reversed direction Category v t e Rivers , streams and springs Rivers ( lists ) Alluvial river Braided river Blackwater river Channel Channel pattern Channel types Confluence Distributary Drainage basin Mountain river Subterranean river River bifurcation River ecosystem River source Tributary Streams Arroyo Beck Bourne Burn Chalk stream Coulee Current Stream bed Stream channel Streamflow Stream gradient Stream pool Perennial stream Winterbourne Springs ( list ) Estavelle/Inversac Geyser Holy well Hot spring list list in the US Karst spring list Mineral spring Ponor Rhythmic spring Spring horizon Sedimentary processes and erosion Abrasion Anabranch Aggradation Armor Bed load Bed material load Granular flow Debris flow Deposition Dissolved load Downcutting Erosion Headward erosion Knickpoint Palaeochannel Progradation Retrogradation Saltation Secondary flow Sediment transport Suspended load Wash load Water gap Fluvial landforms Ait Alluvial fan Antecedent drainage stream Avulsion Bank Bar Bayou Billabong Canyon Chine Cut bank Estuary Floating island Fluvial terrace Gill Gulch Gully Glen Meander scar Mouth bar Oxbow lake Riffle-pool sequence Point bar Ravine Rill River island Rock-cut basin Sedimentary basin Sedimentary structures Strath Thalweg River valley Wadi Fluvial flow Helicoidal flow International scale of river difficulty Log jam Meander Plunge pool Rapids Riffle Shoal Stream capture Waterfall list of waterfalls Whitewater Surface runoff Agricultural wastewater First flush Urban runoff Floods and stormwater 100-year flood Crevasse splay Flash flood Flood Urban flooding Non-water flood Flood barrier Flood control Flood forecasting Flood-meadow Floodplain Flood pulse concept Flooded grasslands and savannas Inundation Storm Water Management Model Return period Point source pollution Effluent Industrial wastewater Sewage River measurement and modelling Baer's law Baseflow Bradshaw model Discharge (hydrology) Drainage density Exner equation Groundwater model Hack's law Hjulström curve Hydrograph Hydrological model Hydrological transport model Infiltration (hydrology) Main stem Playfair's law Relief ratio River Continuum Concept Rouse number Runoff curve number Runoff model (reservoir) Stream gauge Universal Soil Loss Equation WAFLEX Wetted perimeter Volumetric flow rate River engineering Aqueduct Balancing lake Canal Check dam Dam Drop structure Daylighting Detention basin Erosion control Fish ladder Floodplain restoration Flume Infiltration basin Leat Levee River morphology Retention basin Revetment Riparian-zone restoration Stream restoration Weir River sports Canyoning Fly fishing Rafting River surfing Riverboarding Stone skipping Triathlon Whitewater canoeing Whitewater kayaking Whitewater slalom Related Aquifer Aquatic toxicology Body of water Hydraulic civilization Limnology Riparian zone River valley civilization River cruise Sacred waters Surface water Wild river Rivers by length Rivers by discharge rate Drainage basins Whitewater rivers Flash floods River name etymologies Countries without rivers Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Avulsion_(river)&oldid=1300641063 " Categories : Geomorphology Sedimentology Hydraulic engineering Rivers Coastal geography Water streams Geological processes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 15:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Avulsion (river) 7 languages Add topic

