Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Livestock and crop production systems 2 Weeds, diseases, pests and pollinators 3 Soil and water impacts 4 Extreme weather 5 Human actions on agricultural vulnerability 6 Role of the US Department of Agriculture 7 Role of the Intertribal Agricultural Council 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Climate change and agriculture in the United States 3 languages العربية Hausa Igbo Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Climate change's effects on agriculture in the United States Climate change and agriculture are complexly related processes. In the United States , agriculture is the second largest emitter of greenhouse gases (GHG), behind the energy sector.

[ 1 ] Direct GHG emissions from the agricultural sector account for 8.4% of total U.S. emissions, but the loss of soil organic carbon through soil erosion indirectly contributes to emissions as well.

[ 2 ] While agriculture plays a role in propelling climate change, it is also affected by the direct (increase in temperature, change in rainfall, flooding, drought) and secondary (weed, pest, disease pressure, infrastructure damage) consequences of climate change.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) is a regulatory, research, and support body in American agriculture .

[ 4 ] They work to understanding the impact of climate change on farming and to helping American farmers adapt.

[ 4 ] USDA research indicates that these climatic changes will lead to a decline in yield and nutrient density in key crops, as well as decreased livestock productivity.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Climate change poses unprecedented challenges to U.S. agriculture due to the sensitivity of agricultural productivity and costs to changing climate conditions.

[ 7 ] Rural communities dependent on agriculture are particularly vulnerable to climate change threats.

[ 3 ] Native communities are also vulnerable, and the Intertribal Agricultural Council (IAC) documents, supports, and advocates for the reintegrative practices of Native American and Alaskan agricultural producers.

[ 8 ] The IAC is particularly focused on the economic impact and potential of regenerative farming practices for native people.

[ 8 ] The US Global Change Research Program (2017) identified four key areas of concern in the agriculture sector: reduced productivity, degradation of resources, health challenges for people and livestock, and the adaptive capacity of agriculture communities.

[ 3 ] Large-scale adaptation and mitigation of these threats relies on changes in farming policy.

[ 2 ] [ 9 ] Livestock and crop production systems [ edit ] Projections for crops and livestock production systems reveal that climate change effects over the next 25 years will be mixed. The continued degree of change in the climate by midcentury and beyond is expected to have overall detrimental effects on most crops and livestock. Climate change will exacerbate current biotic stresses on agricultural plants and animals.

[ 7 ] Increases of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), rising temperatures, and altered precipitation patterns will affect agricultural productivity. Increases in temperature coupled with more variable precipitation will reduce productivity of crops, and these effects will outweigh the benefits of increasing carbon dioxide. Effects will vary among annual and perennial crops, and regions of the United States; however, all production systems will be affected to some degree by climate change.

[ 7 ] Livestock production systems are vulnerable to temperature stresses. An animal's ability to adjust its metabolic rate to cope with temperature extremes can lead to reduced productivity and in extreme cases death. Prolonged exposure to extreme temperatures will also further increase production costs and productivity losses associated with all animal products, e.g., meat, eggs, and milk.

[ 7 ] Grazing lands used for rearing livestock are under increased threats of wildfire.

[ 3 ] Soil carbon will be depleted during droughts, depriving crops of an essential element of productivity.

[ 3 ] In 2012, the US experienced a drought that greatly reduced yield of key crops and livestock in the Great Plans and Midwest region.

[ 3 ] Average yields of commodity crops (corn, soybean, rice) will decline due to the increased temperature whereas other crops (wheat, hay) could potentially increase yield due to anticipated rainfall in certain regions.

[ 3 ] Effects on horticulture crops will be variable.

[ 3 ] The Southwest region of the United States is one of the hottest and driest regions in the country.

[ 10 ] Farmers have identified surface and groundwater shortages as being the cause of diminished crop yields.

[ 10 ] Climate models indicate the likelihood of a decade-scale drought is incredibly high, posing unprecedented stress to the agro-ecosystem.

[ 10 ] Weeds, diseases, pests and pollinators [ edit ] Changing pressures associated with weeds, diseases, and insect pests, together with potential changes in timing and coincidence of pollinator lifecycles, will affect growth and yields. The potential magnitude of these effects is not yet well understood. For example, while some pest insects will thrive under increasing air temperatures, warming temperatures may force others out of their current geographical ranges. Increased global temperature in similar landscapes restricts agricultural opportunities for sustainable pollination patterns, decreases agricultural movement into habitable areas, and reduces climate buffering during environmental threats.

[ 11 ] Several weeds have shown a greater response to carbon dioxide relative to crops; understanding these physiological and genetic responses may help guide future enhancements to weed management.

[ 7 ] Soil and water impacts [ edit ] Agriculture is dependent on a wide range of ecosystem processes that support productivity including maintenance of soil quality and regulation of water quality and quantity. Multiple stressors, including climate change, increasingly compromise the ability of ecosystems to provide these services.

[ 7 ] Key near-term climate change effects on agricultural soil and water resources include the potential for increased soil erosion through extreme precipitation events, as well as regional and seasonal changes in the availability of water resources for both rain-fed and irrigated agriculture.

[ 7 ] Agricultural systems depend upon reliable water sources, and the pattern and potential magnitude of precipitation changes is not well understood, thus adding considerable uncertainty to assessment efforts.

[ 7 ] A regional climate model estimated that California will experience increased heavy precipitation events and change in the form of precipitation (predominantly rain as opposed to snow).

[ 12 ] Changes in the water management system will be essential for preventing water scarcity and reducing stress on the agricultural system.

[ 12 ] Extreme weather [ edit ] Smoke from wildfires in Canada resulted in lowered air quality and visibility in Cicero, Indiana in June of 2023.

The predicted higher incidence of extreme weather events will have an increasing influence on agricultural productivity . Extremes matter because agricultural productivity is driven largely by environmental conditions during critical threshold periods of crop and livestock development. Improved assessment of climate change effects on agricultural productivity requires greater integration of extreme events into crop and economic models.

[ 7 ] Changes in precipitation patterns can cause dry periods to lengthen and rain to become heavier, even in the same area. On one hand, there is an increase in flooding, which can destroy crops and livestock, pollute water, and damage infrastructure. On the other hand, drought can impact the water supply and increase the risk of wildfires.

[ 13 ] Human actions on agricultural vulnerability [ edit ] Comprehensive, preventative measures and the implementation of regenerative practices by farmers and producers can greatly reduce the vulnerability of agriculture to climatic change.

[ 7 ] As certain crops and breeds of livestock become less productive and viable due to climate change induced shifts in weather patterns and nutrient availability, farmers must find more resilient alternatives, capable of adaption to temperature changes and water availability. This means farmers are obliged to make new investments and learn new practices to ensure their properties and operations remain profitable and productive. And as the farmers are coping with the new transformations, they are also facing new threats in the form of new and more dangerous diseases, pets, insects.

[ 13 ] Role of the US Department of Agriculture [ edit ] The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) is the federal office that regulates, monitors, and supports agricultural activity in the United States and manages food stamp and child nutrition programs.

[ 4 ] [ 14 ] They have offices across the U.S. and aim to promote American agrarian activity, rural development, and natural resource conservation.

[ 4 ] Climate change is one of their areas of interest.

[ 15 ] They try to find innovative solutions to climate-change induced problems in the agricultural industry and rural communities.

[ 15 ] The USDA is also responsible for implementing many of the programs outlined within the Farm Bill .

[ 16 ] The Farm Bill designates spending in key areas of agriculture. It has been reviewed and renewed in some form approximately every five years since 1933.

[ 17 ] Sustainability and conservation are often two key categories of the bill.

[ 17 ] The current farm bill funds programs like the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), Regional Conservation Partnership Program (RCPP), Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP), and Conservation Innovation Grants (CIG).

[ 16 ] These programs assist farmers looking to switch to more sustainable production methods. The current bill in effect was signed in 2018, and a new version was delayed until 2025 due to disagreements on overall spending, SNAP cuts, crop subsidies, and Federal crop insurance.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The USDA lists land conservation as one of their key focuses for sustainability. As of early 2025, their programs particularly target the preservation of privately owned lands to decrease their environmental impacts while increasing the land's productivity.

[ 19 ] One prominent program on this topic is the Conservation Innovation Grants (CIG) program.

[ 20 ] The CIG program awards yearly funds to organizations around the country for the development of new solutions that advance the conservation of private lands.

[ 20 ] The USDA also directs much of the federally funded agricultural research in the US. The  "USDA Science Blueprint", released in February 2020, is a road map for the research that the USDA believes is needed to help the agricultural industry adapt to climate change.

[ 21 ] Cuts to USDA's scientific funding and the loss of research capacity due to the Economic Research Service (ERS)  and the National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) being moved away from the Washington D.C . region during the first Trump Administration , raised some concerns regarding the USDA's continued ability to conduct this proposed research.

[ 21 ] Role of the Intertribal Agricultural Council [ edit ] The Intertribal Agricultural Council (IAC) has worked since 1987 to conserve and develop Indigenous agricultural resources and practices.

[ 22 ] They work with and represent 574 tribes in the continental US and Alaska.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The IAC has numerous programs to improve the lives and farming endeavors of Native Americans on and off reservations, and they collaborate with the USDA to represent native farmers and assist native farmers in accessing USDA resources.

[ 22 ] [ 24 ] One of their main focuses is improving and expanding regenerative agriculture and conservation efforts while respecting traditional Native American farming practices through programs like the "574+ Strong" program.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The IAC runs several programs that study regenerative agriculture practices and the financial implications of sustainable agriculture practices for Native Americans on native lands.

[ 25 ] One such program was a three-year project with the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) to study regenerative farming practices of Indigenous farmers and their economic viability and impacts.

[ 8 ] [ 26 ] This large-scale project included staff from the IAC and the EDF, instructors from Minnesota State's Farm Business Management (FBM) program, and native producers who were in the process of or considering implementing regenerative practices.

[ 27 ] It examined native farmers and producers' business choices and financial opportunities to find benefits to transitions to more regenerative and sustainable practices as well as patterns in barriers to accessing the resources and support needed for those transitions.

[ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Climate change in the United States References [ edit ] ^ a b Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. 2019. "Science and Impacts".

https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/uploads/2019/09/science-and-impacts.pdf ^ a b National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition. 2019. Agriculture and Climate Change: Policy Imperatives and Opportunities to Help Producers Meet the Challenge. Washington D.C.

^ a b c d e f g h USGCRP, 2017: Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II [Wuebbles, D.J., D.W. Fahey, K.A. Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart, and T.K. Maycock (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, US, 470 pp, doi : 10.7930/J0J964J6 .

^ a b c d "General Information | Home" .

www.usda.gov . 2025-02-19 . Retrieved 2025-02-20 .

^ Evich, Helena Bottemiller (2019-09-19).

"Senate Democrats release list of climate studies buried by Trump administration" .

POLITICO . Retrieved 2019-10-25 .

^ US Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry.

"Peer-Reviewed Research on Climate Change by USDA Authors, January 2017-August 2019" .

Politico . Retrieved 2019-10-25 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j USDA Agricultural Research Service, Climate Change Program Office (2013).

"Climate Change and Agriculture in the United States: Effects and Adaptation" (PDF) .

United States Department of Agriculture . USDA Technical Bulletin 1935. pp.

1– 2.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-05-13 . Retrieved 2025-02-20 .

^ a b c "Intertribal Agriculture Council" .

IAC . Retrieved 2025-02-23 .

^ Carlisle, Liz, Maywa Montenegro de Wit, Marcia S. DeLonge, Alastair Iles, Adam Calo, Christy Getz, Joanna Ory, Katherine Munden-Dixon, Ryan Galt, Brett Melone, Reggie Knox, and Daniel Press. 2019. "Transitioning to Sustainable Agriculture Requires Growing and Sustaining an Ecologically Skilled Workforce." Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems.

https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2019.00096 ^ a b c Elias, E.H.; Flynn, R.; Idowu, O.J.; Reyes, J.; Sanogo, S.; Schutte, B.J.; Smith, R.; Steele, C.; Sutherland, C. Crop Vulnerability to Weather and Climate Risk: Analysis of Interacting Systems and Adaptation Efficacy for Sustainable Crop Production.

Sustainability 2019, 11 , 6619.

doi : 10.3390/su11236619 ^ Vasiliev, Denis; Greenwood, Sarah (25 June 2021).

"The role of climate change in pollinator decline across the Northern Hemisphere is underestimated" .

Science of the Total Environment .

775 145788.

Bibcode : 2021ScTEn.77545788V .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.145788 .

ISSN 0048-9697 .

PMID 33618305 .

S2CID 232017603 . Retrieved 20 October 2022 .

^ a b Persad, G.G., Swain, D.L., Kouba, C.

et al.

Inter-model agreement on projected shifts in California hydroclimate characteristics critical to water management.

Climatic Change 162, 1493–1513 (2020).

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-020-02882-4 ^ a b "Climate Change and Agriculture | Union of Concerned Scientists" .

www.ucsusa.org . Retrieved 2021-05-09 .

^ Hussain, Grace (2023-05-10).

"What Does the USDA Do?" .

Sentient Media . Retrieved 2025-04-24 .

^ a b "Topics | Home" .

www.usda.gov . 2025-02-19 . Retrieved 2025-02-20 .

^ a b "Farm Bill | Home" .

www.usda.gov . 2025-02-20 . Retrieved 2025-02-20 .

^ a b c McClelland, Rebekah (2025-01-13).

"Farm Bill, industry growth among agricultural leaders' priorities in 2025" .

LVB . Retrieved 2025-02-20 .

^ Elbein, Saul (2024-05-21).

"Left and right unite in panning House Republicans' farm bill proposal" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on 2024-09-30 . Retrieved 2025-03-01 .

^ "Land Conservation | Home" .

www.usda.gov . 2025-02-19 . Retrieved 2025-02-20 .

^ a b "USDA Announces Availability of $12.5 Million in Conservation Innovation Grants" .

Successful Farming . Retrieved 2025-02-20 .

^ a b Gustin, Georgina (2020-02-08).

"Is Trump's USDA Ready to Address Climate Change? There are Hopeful Signs" .

InsideClimate News .

Archived from the original on 2020-10-28 . Retrieved 2025-02-20 .

^ a b c d Lewis, Tim (2020-01-24).

"Intertribal Agriculture Council" .

USSA . Retrieved 2025-02-23 .

^ a b "Case Example: Intertribal Agriculture Council" .

Center for High Impact Philanthropy - University of Pennsylvania . Retrieved 2025-04-28 .

^ United States Department of Agriculture, Farm Service Agency.

"Notice FLP-612" (PDF) . Retrieved 2025-02-23 .

^ "IAC | Regenerative Agriculture" .

IAC . Retrieved 2025-02-23 .

^ "Financial impacts of regenerative agriculture on Native farms and ranches" .

EDF+Business . Retrieved 2025-04-29 .

^ "IAC | Regerative Agriculture Projects" .

IAC . Retrieved 2025-02-23 .

^ Nelson, Kate (2023-11-20).

"Building a Case for Investment in Regenerative Agriculture on Indigenous Farms" .

Civil Eats . Retrieved 2025-04-29 .

External links [ edit ] This article incorporates public domain material from USDA Agricultural Research Service, Climate Change Program Office.

Climate Change and Agriculture in the United States: Effects and Adaptation (PDF) .

United States Department of Agriculture . Retrieved 2019-10-15 .

2018 Farm Bill v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Climate_change_and_agriculture_in_the_United_States&oldid=1300815584 " Categories : Climate change and agriculture Climate change in the United States Agriculture in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating text from public domain works of the United States Government This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Climate change and agriculture in the United States 3 languages Add topic

