Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient Mesopotamia 1.2 China 1.3 India 1.4 Islamic world 1.5 Europe 1.6 Japan 2 Names 3 In popular culture 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Elixir of life 35 languages العربية Dansk Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Suomi Svenska Taclḥit తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Alchemical potion that grants immunity, eternal youth and immortality to its drinker This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Elixir of life" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The mythological White Hare from Chinese mythology , brewing the elixir of life on the Moon The elixir of life ( Medieval Latin : elixir vitae ), also known as elixir of immortality , is a potion that supposedly grants the drinker eternal life and/or eternal youth . This elixir was also said to cure all diseases .

Alchemists in various ages and cultures sought the means of formulating the elixir.

History [ edit ] Ancient Mesopotamia [ edit ] An early mention of an elixir of life is found in the Epic of Gilgamesh (from the 2nd millennium BC) in which Gilgamesh comes to fear his own declining years following the death of his beloved companion Enkidu .

[ 1 ] He seeks out Utnapishtim , a figure in Mesopotamian mythology known for surviving a great flood sent by the gods and being granted immortality.  Gilgamesh is directed by Utnapishtim to find a plant at the bottom of the sea, but he loses it to a serpent before he can use it himself. This legend is an archaic explanation for snakes shedding their skin, seen as mystical rejuvenation.

China [ edit ] Xu Fu 's first expedition to the Mount of the immortals . By Utagawa Kuniyoshi .

Many rulers of ancient China sought the fabled elixir to achieve eternal life. During the Qin dynasty , Qin Shi Huang sent Taoist alchemist Xu Fu to the eastern seas with 500 young men and 500 young women to find the elixir in the legendary Penglai Mountain , but returned without finding it. He embarked on a second voyage with 3000 young girls and boys, but none of them ever returned (legend has it that he found Japan instead).

[ 2 ] The ancient Chinese believed that ingesting long-lasting mineral substances such as jade , cinnabar , or hematite would confer some of that longevity on the person who consumed them.

[ 3 ] Gold was considered particularly potent, as it was a non-tarnishing precious metal; the idea of potable or drinkable gold is found in China by the end of the third century BC. The most famous Chinese alchemical book, Danjing yaojue ("Essential Formulas of Alchemical Classics") attributed to Sun Simiao (c. 581 – c. 682 AD), [ 4 ] [ 5 ] a famous medical specialist respectfully called "King of Medicine" by later generations, discusses in detail the creation of elixirs for immortality (including several toxic ingredients such as mercury , sulphur , and arsenates ), as well as those for curing certain diseases and the fabrication of precious stones.

Many of these substances, far from contributing to longevity, were actively toxic and resulted in Chinese alchemical elixir poisoning . The Jiajing Emperor in the Ming dynasty died from ingesting a lethal dosage of mercury in the supposed "Elixir of Life" conjured by alchemists.

[ citation needed ] India [ edit ] Mohini , the female form of Vishnu , holding the pot of amrita, which she distributes amongst all the devas , leaving the asuras without it.

Darasuram , Tamil Nadu , India Amrita , the elixir of life, has been described in Hindu scriptures . In the Puranas , that due to the defeat of the devas at the hands of the asuras , both power-seeking races, the preserver deity Vishnu asked the devas to churn the ocean of milk , so that they may retrieve amrita to empower themselves.

[ 6 ] Mercury, which was so vital to alchemy everywhere, is first mentioned in the 4th- to 3rd-century BC Arthashastra , about the same time it is encountered in China and in the West. Evidence of the idea of transmuting base metals to gold appears in 2nd- to 5th-century AD Buddhist texts, about the same time as in the West.

It is also possible that the alchemy of medicine and immortality came to China from India, or vice versa; in any case, for both cultures, gold-making appears to have been a minor concern, and medicine the major concern. But the elixir of immortality was of little importance in India (which had other avenues to immortality). The Indian elixirs were mineral remedies for specific diseases or, at the most, to promote long life.

Islamic world [ edit ] Main article: Alchemy in the medieval Islamic world Further information: Jabir ibn Hayyan , pseudo-Geber , Khalid ibn Yazid , Emerald Tablet , Picatrix , Brethren of Purity , and Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Europe [ edit ] Main article: Philosopher's stone Dell' elixir vitae , 1624 In European alchemical tradition, the elixir of life is closely related to the creation of the philosopher's stone . According to legend, certain alchemists have gained a reputation as creators of the elixir. These include Nicolas Flamel and St. Germain . A work by Michael Scot speaks of gold as an elixir of life.

[ 7 ] Japan [ edit ] In the 8th century AD Man'yōshū , 'waters of rejuvenation' ( 変若水 , ochimizu ) are said to be in the possession of the moon god Tsukuyomi . Similarities have been noted with a folktale from the Ryukyu Islands , in which the moon god decides to give man the water of life ( Miyako : sïlimizï ), and serpents the water of death ( sïnimizï ). However, the person entrusted with carrying the pails down to Earth gets tired and takes a break, and a serpent bathes in the water of life, rendering it unusable. This is said to be why serpents can rejuvenate themselves each year by shedding their skin while men are doomed to die.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Names [ edit ] The Elixir has had hundreds of names (one scholar of Chinese history reportedly found over 1,000 names for it), among them Kimia , Amrit Ras or Amrita , Aab-i-Hayat, Maha Ras, Aab-Haiwan, Dancing Water, Chasma-i-Kausar, Mansarover or the Pool of Nectar, Philosopher's stone , and Soma Ras.  The word elixir was not used until the 7th century A.D. and derives from the Arabic name for miracle substances, "al iksir".  Some view it as a metaphor for the spirit of God ( e.g.

, Jesus's reference to "the Water of Life " or "the Fountain of Life ").  "But whoever drinks the water I give him will never thirst.  Indeed, the water I give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life."  (John 4:14)  The Scots and the Irish adopted the name for their "liquid gold": the Gaelic name for whiskey is uisce beatha , or water of life.

“ Kimia ” is from Ancient Greek language and used in old Persian literature, in which it means something that transforms and brings life.

Aab-i-Hayat is Persian and means "water of life".

[ 10 ] "Chashma-i-Kausar" (not "hasma") is the "Fountain of Bounty", which Muslims believe to be located in Paradise.  As for the Indian names, "Amrit Ras" means "immortality juice", "Maha Ras" means "great juice", and "Soma Ras" means "juice of Soma".  Later, Soma came to mean the Moon.  "Ras" later came to mean "sacred mood experienced listening to poetry or music"; there are altogether nine of them.

Mansarovar , the "mind lake" is the holy lake at the foot of Mount Kailash in Tibet, close to the source of the Ganges.

In popular culture [ edit ] Main article: Alchemy in art and entertainment The elixir of life has been an inspiration, plot feature, or subject of artistic works including animation , comics , films , musical compositions, novels , and video games . Some examples are L. Frank Baum's fantasy novel John Dough and the Cherub , the science fiction series Doctor Who , Natalie Babbitt's 1975 novel Tuck Everlasting and its film adaptation , Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone , House of Anubis , The Puppet Master , the manga Fullmetal Alchemist and Hell's Paradise: Jigokuraku , the light novel Baccano!

, the movie Professor Layton and the Eternal Diva of the Professor Layton franchise, the horror film As Above, So Below and the video games Touhou Project and Sims 2 .

See also [ edit ] Aether (mythology) Aether (classical element) Ageing Al Khidr Ambrosia and Nectar Amrita Cup of Jamshid Death Becomes Her Elixir Fountain of Youth Golden apple Holy Grail Holy water Ichor Immortality Jintan (Japanese medicine) Magu (deity) Manna Panacea Peaches of Immortality Philosopher's stone Langgan Pill of Immortality Chinese alchemical elixir poisoning Waidan Potion Rejuvenation References [ edit ] ^ "The Epic of Gilgamesh: Enkidu" .

SparkNotes . Retrieved 2022-12-27 .

^ Liu, Hong.

The Chinese Overseas . Routledge Library of Modern China. Published by Taylor & Francis, [2006] (2006).

ISBN 0-415-33859-X , 9780415338592.

^ Johnson, Obed Simon.

A Study of Chinese Alchemy . Shanghai, Commercial Press, 1928. rpt. New York: Arno Press, 1974. page 63 ^ Glick, T.F., Livesey, S.J., Wallis, F.

Medieval Science, Technology And Medicine: An Encyclopedia . Routledge, 2005. p. 20 ^ "Tan chin yao chueh – occultism" .

britannica.com .

^ Chaturvedi, B. K. (2006).

Vishnu Purana . Diamond Pocket Books (P) Ltd. p. 25.

ISBN 978-81-7182-673-5 .

^ Multhauf, R.P. (1953).

The Relationship Between Technology and Natural Philosophy, Ca. 1250-1650 as Illustrated by the Technology of the Mineral Acids . University of California . Retrieved 2023-06-04 .

^ Nelly Naumann (2000).

Japanese Prehistory: The Material and Spiritual Culture of the Jōmon Period . Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 133.

ISBN 978-3-447-04329-8 .

^ Nevsky, Nikolai (April 1971).

Masao, Oka (ed.).

月と不死 [Tsuki to fushi] (in Japanese). 平凡社.

ISBN 9784582801859 . Retrieved 17 December 2018 .

^ I. K. Poonawala.

"ĀB ii. Water in Muslim Iranian culture" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica . Retrieved 12 February 2012.

Bibliography [ edit ] Heart of the Earth: The Elixir of Earth , second novel in the trilogy by Richard Anderson no Al-Khidr, The Green Man Alchemy and Daoism Archived 2020-02-14 at the Wayback Machine Naam or Word, Book Three: Amrit, Nectar or Water of Life Needham, Joseph , Ping-Yu Ho, Gwei-Djen Lu.

Science and Civilisation in China , Volume V, Part III Archived 2014-11-27 at the Wayback Machine . Cambridge at the University Press, 1976.

Turner, John D. (transl.).

The Interpretation of Knowledge v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐67cc48b65d‐75h72
Cached time: 20250818101904
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.541 seconds
Real time usage: 0.675 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1256/1000000
Revision size: 13470/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 68190/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1563/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37839/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.376/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18579660/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  583.091      1 -total
 22.53%  131.368      1 Template:Reflist
 18.52%  108.015      2 Template:Wikt-lang
 15.23%   88.802      3 Template:Navbox
 14.77%   86.118      1 Template:Alchemy
 14.23%   82.985      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 14.11%   82.298      1 Template:Cite_web
 13.36%   77.924      1 Template:Ambox
 11.34%   66.125      1 Template:Short_description
  6.80%   39.621      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1468466:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818101904 and revision id 1299744818. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elixir_of_life&oldid=1299744818 " Categories : Potions Immortality Life extension Longevity myths Mythological medicines and drugs Medieval legends Supernatural legends Hidden categories: CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Miyako-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 04:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elixir of life 35 languages Add topic

