Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meta-ethics 2 Contribution to legal understanding 3 Publications 4 References Toggle the table of contents Axel Hägerström 13 languages Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Suomi Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swedish philosopher Axel Hägerström Axel Anders Theodor Hägerström (6 September 1868 – 7 July 1939) was a Swedish philosopher .

Born in Vireda , Jönköping County , Sweden , he was the son of a Church of Sweden pastor. As student at Uppsala University , he gave up theology for a career in philosophy. Teaching there from 1893 until his retirement in 1933, he attacked the then dominant philosophical idealism of the followers of Christopher Jacob Boström (1797-1866). He is best known as a founder of the (quasi-) positivistic Uppsala school of philosophy—the Swedish counterpart of the Anglo-American Analytical Philosophy as well as of the Logical Positivism of the Vienna Circle —and as the founder of the Scandinavian legal realism movement.

[ 1 ] Some of his work was published by the Muirhead Library of Philosophy .

He was Inspektor of the Östgöta nation from 1925 to his retirement in 1933. He died in Uppsala .

Meta-ethics [ edit ] In 1911, Hägerström published an essay titled "On the Truth of Moral Propositions", in which he proposed several meta-ethical views that would later become dominant meta-ethical subjects in Analytic Philosophy, particularly, Moral nihilism (or "Moral Error Theory"), Emotivism , and other forms of Non-Cognitivism (comparing, for instance, moral sentences to sentences in the Optative mood ).

Contribution to legal understanding [ edit ] The jurisprudential camp of legal realism , broadly speaking, consists of those scholars who strictly reject the concept of natural law and who believe that legal concepts, terminology and values should be based on experience, observation and experimentation and are thus, ‘real’.

Hägerström is considered to be the founding father of the Scandinavian school of legal realism.  His disciples Karl Olivecrona , Alf Ross and Anders Vilhelm Lundstedt all take a similar basic view to Hägerström in their opinions on the language of Western law . Due to their verdict on natural law, they also reject the concept of human rights .

Hägerström, who had been influenced by the Neo-Kantianism of the Marburg school, rejected metaphysics in their entirety. His motto was: "Praeterea censeo metaphysicam esse delendam", paraphrasing Cato's famous " delenda Carthago ". His opinion was that words such as ‘right’ and ‘duty’ were basically meaningless as they could not be scientifically verified or proven.  They may have influence or be able to direct a person who obtains such a right or duty but ultimately, if they could not stand up to a factual test, they were mere fantasies. Similarly, Hägerström regarded all value judgements as mere emotional expressions using the form of judgements without being judgments in the proper sense of the word. This position caused Hägerström's critics to characterize his philosophy as "value nihilism"  -  a label that was invented by journalists and later endorsed by some of Hägerström's less orthodox followers, mainly Ingemar Hedenius .

Hägerström attacked various words and legal concepts in his writings so as to prove they could not stand up to scientific application.

Publications [ edit ] Aristoteles etiska grundtankar och deras teoretiska förutsättningar , Uppsala, Akamemiska boktrykeriet, E. Berling, 1893 'Axel Hägerström', Filosofiskt lexikon , ed Alfred Ahlberg, Natur & Kultur , Third edition, 1951 Philosophy and Religion , (1964), English translation by Robert T. Sandin Inquiries into the Nature of Law and Morals , Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell, ed.

Karl Olivecrona , transl.

C. D. Broad .

v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX References [ edit ] ^ Szkalej, Kacper (2022-04-21).

"Article 17 DSM Directive: the Swedish proposal (Part 2)" .

Kluwer Copyright Blog . Retrieved 2022-04-22 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Axel_Hägerström&oldid=1298608302 " Categories : 1868 births 1939 deaths 20th-century Swedish philosophers Analytic philosophers Philosophers of language Swedish philosophers Swedish jurists Burials at Uppsala old cemetery Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 14:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Axel Hägerström 13 languages Add topic

