Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 The One 2.2 Motion 2.3 Creation 2.4 Zeno's paradoxes 3 Legacy 4 References 5 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Eleatics 45 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Eleatic School ) Pre-Socratic school of philosophy Bust of Parmenides , considered to be the founder of Eleatic philosophy The Eleatics were a group of pre-Socratic philosophers and school of thought in the 5th century BC centered around the ancient Greek colony of Elea ( Ancient Greek : Ἐλέα ), located around 80 miles south-east of Naples in southern Italy , then known as Magna Graecia .

The primary philosophers who are associated with the Eleatic doctrines are Parmenides , Zeno of Elea , and Melissus of Samos , although other Italian philosophers such as Xenophanes of Colophon and Empedocles have also sometimes been classified as members of this movement. The Eleatics have traditionally been seen as advocating a strict metaphysical view of monism in response to the materialist monism advocated by their predecessors, the Ionian school .

History [ edit ] Patricia Curd states that the chronology of pre-Socratic philosophers is one of the most contentious issues of pre-Socratic philosophy.

[ 1 ] Many of the historical details mentioned by Plato , Diogenes Laertius , or Apollodorus are generally considered by modern scholarship to be of little value, [ 1 ] and there are generally few exact dates that can be verified, so most estimates of dates and relative chronology must rely on interpretations of the internal evidence within the surviving fragments .

[ 1 ] There is generally a consensus that Parmenides lived in the early 5th century BC, [ 1 ] based on the date and setting of the fictionalized events in Plato's Parmenides where Parmenides and Zeno travel to Athens and have a debate with a young Socrates .

[ 1 ] This would place Parmenides well after other philosophers such as Xenophanes , Heraclitus , and Pythagoras .

[ 1 ] Although many philosophers throughout history have interpreted the doctrines of the Eleatics as responses to Xenophanes , Heraclitus , or Pythagoras , there is no broad agreement or direct evidence of any influence or direct response, although many theories have been put forth interpreting the Eleatics in terms of these philosophers.

[ 1 ] For philosophers after Parmenides, however, the relative chronology and potential directions of influence become even more difficult to determine.

[ 1 ] For Zeno, it is not clear whether or not Anaxagoras or Empedocles influenced or were influenced by any of his ideas, although they appear to have lived at approximately the same time.

[ 1 ] For Melissus, who lived one generation later, the problem of influence is further complicated by additional potential influences of Leucippus , Democritus , and Diogenes of Apollonia .

[ 1 ] For example, some interpreters see Melissus as responding to Leucippus' atomism , which is then responded to by Democritus - but others see Melissus responding to Democritus.

[ 1 ] Philosophy [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Eleatics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The One [ edit ] The Eleatics believed in the oneness of the universe , and that "All is One". To justify this view, Parmenides argued that everything either "is" or "is not". Since "is not" doesn't truly exist, this means only "what is" can actually exist, and must everything falls under this one category. In his poem On Nature , Parmenides wrote: Come now, I will tell thee—and do thou hearken to my saying and carry it away—the only two ways of search that can be thought of. The first, namely, that It is, and that it is impossible for it not to be, is the way of belief, for truth is its companion. The other, namely, that It is not, and that it must needs not be,—that, I tell thee, is a path that none can learn of at all. For thou canst not know what is not —that is impossible—nor utter it; for it is the same thing that can be thought and that can be.

This concept was further expanded upon by Melissus of Samos , who was one of the first philosophers to champion the principle that nothing can come from nothing , [ 2 ] and that a first cause was necessary for the universe to exist. He believed that this first cause (called "The One") had to be both eternal and infinite , and that because it is infinite it also cannot be divided into parts, as that would require those parts having to establish finite boundaries in relation to each other. Since The One is already whole it can't change in any way, shape or form.

[ 3 ] Motion [ edit ] Because the Eleatics thought that The One doesn't undergo any changes, they rejected the possibility of motion existing. They believed that any perceived motion was due to illusions of the senses , which are incapable of understanding the universal unity .

[ 4 ] They thus rejected empirical evidence in favour of strict adherence to reason .

Creation [ edit ] The Eleatics argued that there can be no creation , for being cannot come from non-being, because a thing cannot arise from that which is different from it. They argued that errors on this point commonly arise from the ambiguous use of the verb to be, which may imply actual physical existence or be merely the linguistic copula which connects subject and predicate .

[ 5 ] Zeno's paradoxes [ edit ] Zeno of Elea employed various reductio ad absurdum paradoxes in order to disprove the concept of motion, attempting to destroy the arguments of others by showing that their premises led to contradictions ( see: Zeno's paradoxes ).

Legacy [ edit ] One of the characters in Plato 's Sophist is "an Eleatic stranger"; [ 6 ] Plato also acknowledged the Eleatics in the Parmenides and the Statesman . Some authors suggest that Meno's paradox, in Plato's dialogue Meno , can be linked to the Eleatic distinction between "knowing" and "not-knowing".

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Curd 2004 , p. 15-18.

^ "οὐδαμὰ ἂν γένοιτο οὐδὲν ἐκ μηδενός (... in no wise could anything have arisen out of nothing)".

^ Cohen, S. Marc.

"Lecture Notes: Parmenides" .

University of Washington .

^ Boyer & Merzbach 2011 .

^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 168–169.

^ Plato, Sophist: Persons of the Dialogue , the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sophist, translated by Benjamin Jowett , accessed on 4 January 2025 ^ Calvert, B., Meno's Paradox Reconsidered , Journal of the History of Philosophy , Volume 12, Number 2, April 1974, accessed on 4 January 2025 Sources [ edit ] Boyer, Carl B.

; Merzbach, Uta C.

(2011).

A History of Mathematics (Third ed.). Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. pp.

67– 68.

ISBN 978-0-470-52548-7 .

Curd, Patricia (2004).

The legacy of Parmenides : Eleatic monism and later presocratic thought . Las Vegas, Nev.: Parmenides Publishing.

ISBN 1-930972-15-6 .

Andre Laks; Glenn W. Most, eds. (2016). "Western Greek Thinkers, Part 2".

Loeb Classical Library . Early Greek Philosophy. Vol. 528. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-99706-6 .

Palmer, John Anderson (2009).

Parmenides and Presocratic philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199567904 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Eleatic School ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 9 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

168– 169.

Further reading [ edit ] "Eleatic School" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. VIII (9th ed.). 1878. p. 1.

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Parmenides" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Zeno of Elea" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Zeno's Paradoxes" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Xenophanes" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Monism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

External links [ edit ] "On Nature" by Parmenides, translated by John Burnet Fragments of Melissus at Wikisource v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eleatics&oldid=1303852954 " Categories : Eleatic school Presocratic philosophy Greek philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles needing additional references from April 2022 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 12:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eleatics 45 languages Add topic

