Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name Toggle Name subsection 1.1 Etymology 1.2 Ancient interpretations 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Citations 3.2 General bibliography Toggle the table of contents Fauna (deity) 20 languages Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Ελληνικά Français Italiano Latina Limburgs Magyar Македонски Nederlands Polski Português Русиньскый Slovenščina Српски / srpski Tagalog Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Roman goddess; either the wife, sister, or daughter of Faunus Religion in ancient Rome Marcus Aurelius ( head covered ) sacrificing at the Temple of Jupiter Practices and beliefs libation votum temples festivals ludi funerary practices cult ( imperial ) mystery religions Priesthoods Pontifices Augures Vestales Flamines Fetiales Epulones Fratres Arvales Deities Dii Consentes Capitoline Triad Aventine Triad Indigitamenta underworld gods agricultural gods childhood gods divine emperors Related topics Glossary of ancient Roman religion Roman mythology Ancient Greek religion Etruscan religion Gallo-Roman religion Interpretatio Graeca Decline v t e Fauna [ˈfau̯na] is a Roman rustic goddess said in differing ancient sources to be the wife, sister, [ 1 ] or daughter of Faunus (the Roman counterpart of Pan ).

[ 2 ] Varro regarded her as the female counterpart of Faunus, and said that the fauni all had prophetic powers. She is also called Fatua or Fenta Fauna .

Name [ edit ] Etymology [ edit ] The name Fauna is a feminine form of Latin Faunus , the deity of the countryside.

Faunus itself is generally thought to stem from Proto-Italic *fawe or *fawono , ultimately from Proto-Indo-European *bʰh₂u-n ('favourable').

[ 3 ] Consequently, Georges Dumézil translated her name as "the Favourable." [ 4 ] In his conceptual approach to Roman deity, Michael Lipka sees Faunus and Fauna as an example of a characteristically Roman tendency to form gender-complementary pairs within a sphere of functionality. The male-female figures never have equal prominence, and one partner (not always the female) seems to have been modelled on the other.

[ 5 ] An Oscan dedication naming Fatuveís (= Fatui , genitive singular), found at Aeclanum in Irpinia , indicates that the concept is Italic .

[ 6 ] Fauna has also been dismissed as merely "an artificial construction of scholarly casuistics ." [ 7 ] Ancient interpretations [ edit ] Varro explained the role of Faunus and Fauna as prophetic deities: Fauni are gods of the Latins , so that there is both a male Faunus and a female Fauna ; there is a tradition that they used to speak of ( fari ) future events in wooded places using the verses they call 'Saturnians' , and thus they were called 'Fauni' from 'speaking' ( fando ).

[ 8 ] Servius identifies Faunus with Fatuclus, and says his wife is Fatua or Fauna, deriving the names as Varro did from fari , "to speak," "because they can foretell the future." [ 9 ] The early Christian author Lactantius called her Fenta Fauna and said that she was both the sister and wife of Faunus; according to Lactantius, Fatua sang the fata , "fates," to women as Faunus did to men.

[ 10 ] Justin said that Fatua, the wife of Faunus, "being filled with divine spirit assiduously predicted future events as if in a madness (furor) ," and thus the verb for divinely inspired speech is fatuari .

[ 11 ] While several etymologists in antiquity derived the names Fauna and Faunus from fari , "to speak," Macrobius regarded Fauna's name as deriving from faveo, favere , "to favor, nurture," "because she nurtures all that is useful to living creatures." [ 12 ] According to Macrobius, the Books of the Pontiffs ( pontificum libri ) treated Bona Dea , Fauna, Ops , and Fatua as names for the same goddess, Maia .

See also [ edit ] List of Roman deities References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Fauna" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 10 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 209.

^ Joseph Clyde Murley, The Cults of Cisalpine Gaul (Banta, 1922), p. 28 (noting that Fauna appears in no inscriptions in Cisalpine Gaul ) ^ de Vaan 2008 , pp. 205–206.

^ Georges Dumézil , Camillus: A Study of Indo-European Religion as Roman History (University of California Press, 1980), p. 208.

^ Michael Lipka, Roman Gods: A Conceptual Approach (Brill, 2009), pp. 141–142 ^ E. Vetter Handbuch der italischen Dialekte Heidelberg 1953 p. 114 n. 165; J. Champeaux "Sortes et divination inspirée. Pour une préhistoire des oracles italiques"  in Mélanges de l'École française de Rome . Antiquité  102, 2 1990 p. 824 and n. 52.

^ Robert Schilling, "Roman Gods," Roman and European Mythologies (University of Chicago Press, 1992, from the French edition of 1981), p. 70.

^ Varro , De lingua latina 7.36. At 6.55, Varro says that Fatuus and Fatua also derive from fari . See also Auguste Bouché-Leclercq , Histoire de la divination dans l'Antiquité (Éditions Jérôme Millon, 2003), pp. 902–903.

^ Servius, note to Aeneid 7.47; see also note to 7.81 and 8.314.

^ Lactantius, Institutiones I 22, 9, citing Gavius Bassus .

^ Justin, 43.1.8.

^ Quod omni usui animantium favet : Macrobius , Saturnalia 1.12.21–22, Loeb Classical Library translation, Robert A. Kaster, Macrobius. Saturnalia Books 1–2 (Harvard University Press, 2011), p. 147, note 253.

General bibliography [ edit ] de Vaan, Michiel (2008).

Etymological Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic Languages . Brill.

ISBN 9789004167971 .

v t e Ancient Roman religion and mythology Deities ( Dii Consentes ) Agenoria Angerona Anna Perenna Apollo Aurora Bellona Bona Dea Carmenta Castor and Pollux Ceres Cloacina Cupid Dea Dia Diana Dies Dīs Pater Egeria Fauna Faunus Flora Genius Hercules Janus Juno Jupiter Lares Lares Familiares Liber Libertas Luna Mars Mercury Minerva Neptune Nox Ops Orcus Penates Pluto Pomona Priapus Proserpina Quirinus Salacia Saturn Silvanus Sol Summanus Venus Veritas Vesta Vertumnus Vulcan Abstract deities Abundantia Aequitas Aeternitas Africa Annona Averruncus Bonus Eventus Caelus Concordia Feronia Fides Fortuna Fontus Laverna Pax Pietas Roma Salus Securitas Spes Tranquillitas Terra Victoria Legendary figures Aeneas Rhea Silvia Romulus and Remus Numa Pompilius Tullus Hostilius Servius Tullius Ancus Marcius Lucius Tarquinius Priscus Lucius Tarquinius Superbus Kings of Alba Longa Hersilia Legendary beings She-wolf Barnacle goose Texts Virgil Aeneid Ovid Fasti Metamorphoses Propertius Varro Res divinae Sibylline Books Apuleius The Golden Ass Concepts and practices Festivals Interpretatio graeca Imperial cult Charity Palladium Theology of victory Pomerium Temples Capitolium Cella Celtic Philosophy Cynicism Epicureanism Neoplatonism Peripateticism Pythagoreanism Stoicism Events Golden Bough Founding of Rome Natale di Roma Rape of the Sabine Women Battle of Lacus Curtius Objects Gubernaculum Parabiago Plate Pignora imperii Variations Gallo-Roman Mysteries Cybele Isis Mithraism See also Classical mythology Decline Persecution Etruscan religion Glossary Greek mythology Myth and ritual Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fauna_(deity)&oldid=1298884467 " Categories : Roman goddesses Fauns Oracular goddesses Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Pages with Latin IPA This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 10:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fauna (deity) 20 languages Add topic

