Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitional issues Toggle Definitional issues subsection 1.1 The self 1.2 Labour markets and private property 2 History 3 See also 4 Notes and references 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Self-ownership 15 languages العربية Asturianu Català Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Português Русский Simple English Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept of property in one's own person "Sovereign individual" redirects here. For the book, see The Sovereign Individual .

Part of a series on Individualism Principles Autonomy Civil liberties Do it yourself Eremitism Free love Freethought Human rights Individual Individual rights Individual reclamation Individuation Laissez-faire Libertine Liberty Methodological individualism Negative liberty Personal property Positive liberty Private property Rugged individualism Self-actualization Self-ownership Self-sufficiency Subjectivity Philosophers Antiphon Aristippus Camus Diogenes Emerson Godwin Goldman Hayek Hess Hipparchia Igualada Ingersoll Jefferson Jung Laozi Locke Mandeville Marsden Mencken Mill Mises Montaigne Nietzsche Nozick Onfray Paine Popper Quelle Rand Rothbard Sade Schopenhauer Smith Spencer Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tucker Voltaire Warren Wilde Yang Ideologies Autarchism Anarchism Individualist anarchism Egoist anarchism Market anarchism Social anarchism Anarcho-capitalism Egoism Ethical egoism Rational egoism Existentialism Hedonism Humanism Individualist feminism Equity feminism Liberal feminism Liberalism Classical liberalism Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Right-libertarianism Minarchism Mutualism Objectivism Subjectivism Voluntaryism Principal concerns Anti-individualism Authoritarianism Collectivism Conformity Dogmatism Group rights Herd mentality Indoctrination Mass society Mobbing Social engineering Statism Tyranny Tyranny of the majority Theocracy Totalitarianism v t e Part of a series on Anarchism Glossary History Outline Schools of thought Black Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Total liberation Individualist Egoist Market Philosophical Mutualist Queer Religious Christian Jewish Social Collectivist Parecon Communist Magonism Without adjectives Methodology Counter-economics Illegalism Insurrectionary Pacifist Platformism Relationship Syndicalist Synthesis Theory and practice Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Libertarianism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Philosophers La Boétie Locke Franklin Burke Paine Jefferson Bentham Godwin Hodgskin Warren Emerson Stirner Spooner Proudhon Andrews Bakunin Thoreau Spencer Herbert George De Cleyre Goldman Gandhi Mises Paterson Hayek Rand Friedman (Milton) Bookchin Hess Rothbard Chomsky Nozick Machan Block Friedman (David) Van Dun Konkin Hoppe Lottieri Martín Huemer Brennan Politicians Bastiat Gladstone Acton Cleveland Coolidge Goldwater Paul Korwin-Mikke Johnson Milei Hannan Polis National variants Spain United Kingdom England United States Historical background Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Related topics Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Politics portal v t e Self-ownership , also known as sovereignty of the individual or individual sovereignty , is the concept of property in one's own person, expressed as the moral or natural right of a person to have bodily integrity and be the exclusive controller of one's own body and life. Self-ownership is a central idea in several political philosophies that emphasize individualism , such as libertarianism , liberalism, and anarchism .

Definitional issues [ edit ] The self [ edit ] American libertarian socialist Stephen Pearl Andrews frequently discussed the sovereignty of the individual in his writings. In The Science of Society , he says that Protestantism, democracy and socialism are "three partial announcements of one generic principle" which is "the sovereignty of the individual".

[ 1 ] Andrews considered the sovereignty of the individual to be "the basis of harmonious intercourse amongst equals, precisely as the equal Sovereignty of States is the basis of harmonious intercourse between nations mutually recognizing their independence of each other." [ 2 ] Discussion of the boundary of self with respect to ownership and responsibility has been explored by legal scholar Meir Dan-Cohen in his essays on The Value of Ownership and Responsibility and the Boundaries of the Self .

[ undue weight?

– discuss ] The emphasis of this work illuminates the phenomenology of ownership and our common usage of personal pronouns to apply to both body and property – this serves as the folk basis for legal conceptions and debates about responsibility and ownership.

[ 3 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Another view holds that labor is alienable because it can be contracted out, thus alienating it from the self. In this view, the choice of a person to voluntarily sell oneself into slavery is also preserved by the principle of self-ownership.

[ 4 ] Labour markets and private property [ edit ] For anarcho-communist political philosopher L. Susan Brown : "Liberalism and anarchism are two political philosophies that are fundamentally concerned with individual freedom yet differ from one another in very distinct ways. Anarchism shares with liberalism a commitment to individual freedom while rejecting liberalism's competitive property relations".

[ 5 ] Scholar Ellen Meiksins Wood says that "there are doctrines of individualism that are opposed to Lockean individualism ... and non-Lockean individualism may encompass socialism ".

[ 6 ] Right-libertarian conceptions of self-ownership extend the concept to include control of private property as part of the self. According to Gerald Cohen , "the libertarian principle of self-ownership says that each person enjoys, over herself and her powers, full and exclusive rights of control and use, and therefore owes no service or product to anyone else that she has not contracted to supply".

[ 7 ] Philosopher Ian Shapiro says that labor markets affirm self-ownership because if self-ownership were not recognized, then people would not be allowed to sell the use of their productive capacities to others. He says that the individual sells the use of his productive capacity for a limited time and conditions but continues to own what he earns from selling the use of that capacity and the capacity itself, thereby retaining sovereignty over himself while contributing to economic efficiency.

[ 8 ] A common view within classical liberalism is that sovereign-minded individuals usually assert a right of private property external to the body, reasoning that if a person owns themselves, they own their actions, including those that create or improve resources, therefore they own their own labour and the fruits thereof.

[ 9 ] In Human Action , Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises argues that labor markets are the rational conclusion of self-ownership and argues that collective ownership of labor ignores differing values for the labor of individuals: Of course, people believe that there is an essential difference between the tasks incumbent upon the comrades of the socialist commonwealth and those incumbent upon slaves or serfs. The slaves and serfs, they say, toiled for the benefit of an exploiting lord. But in a socialist system, the produce of labor goes to society of which the toiler himself is a part; here the worker works for himself, as it were. What this reasoning overlooks is that the identification of the individual comrades and the totality of all comrades with the collective entity pocketing the produce of all work is merely fictitious. Whether the ends which the community's officeholders are aiming at agreeing or disagreeing with the wishes and desires of the various comrades are of minor importance. The main thing is that the individual's contribution to the collective entity's wealth is not requited in the shape of wages determined by the market.

— Ludwig von Mises [ 10 ] Other scholars are critical of the idea of private property, specifically within anarchism . The anarchist Oscar Wilde said: For the recognition of private property has really harmed Individualism, and obscured it, by confusing a man with what he possesses. It has led Individualism entirely astray. It has made gain, not growth its aim. So that man thought that the important thing was to have, and did not know that the important thing is to be. The true perfection of man lies, not in what man has, but in what man is... With the abolition of private property, then, we shall have true, beautiful, healthy Individualism. Nobody will waste his life in accumulating things, and the symbols for things. One will live. To live is the rarest thing in the world. Most people exist, that is all".

— Oscar Wilde [ 11 ] Within anarchism, the concept of wage slavery refers to a situation perceived as quasi-voluntary slavery , [ 12 ] where a person's livelihood depends on wages, especially when the dependence is total and immediate.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] It is a negatively connoted term used to draw an analogy between slavery and wage labor by focusing on similarities between owning and renting a person. The term "wage slavery" has been used to criticize economic exploitation and social stratification , with the former seen primarily as unequal bargaining power between labor and capital (particularly when workers are paid comparatively low wages, e.g. in sweatshops ) [ 15 ] and the latter as a lack of workers' self-management , fulfilling job choices and leisure in an economy.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] With the advent of the Industrial Revolution , thinkers such as Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and Karl Marx elaborated the comparison between wage labor and slavery in the context of a critique of societal property not intended for active personal use [ 19 ] [ 20 ] while Luddites emphasized the dehumanization brought about by machines.

Emma Goldman famously denounced "wage slavery" by saying: "The only difference is that you are hired slaves instead of block slaves".

[ 21 ] Within left-libertarianism , scholars such as Hillel Steiner , [ 22 ] Peter Vallentyne , [ 23 ] Philippe Van Parijs , [ 24 ] Michael Otsuka [ 25 ] and David Ellerman [ 26 ] [ 27 ] root an economic egalitarianism in the classical liberal concepts of self-ownership and land appropriation , combined with geoist or physiocratic views regarding the ownership of land and natural resources (e.g. those of John Locke and Henry George ). Left-libertarians "maintain that the world's natural resources were initially unowned or belonged equally to all, and it is illegitimate for anyone to claim exclusive private ownership of these resources to the detriment of others. Such private appropriation is legitimate only if everyone can appropriate an equal amount, or if those who appropriate more are taxed to compensate those who are thereby excluded from what was once common property". This position is articulated in contrast to the position of other libertarians who argue for a right to appropriate parts of the external world based on sufficient use, even if this homesteading yields unequal results.

[ 28 ] Some left-libertarians of the Steiner–Vallentyne type support some form of income redistribution on the grounds of a claim by each individual to be entitled to an equal share of natural resources.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] History [ edit ] John Locke wrote in his Two Treatises on Government that "every man has a Property in his own Person". Libertarian philosopher Robert Nozick interprets Locke as saying that the individual "has a right to decide what would become of himself and what he would do, and as having a right to reap the benefits of what he did".

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Josiah Warren was the first who wrote about the "sovereignty of the individual".

[ 33 ] See also [ edit ] Castle doctrine Civil libertarianism Civil liberties Cognitive liberty Counter-economics Empowerment Free will Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Harm principle Individualist anarchism Law of equal liberty Negative liberty Mind–body dualism Non-aggression principle Perpetual traveler Public-order crime Redemption movement Right to die Right to personal identity Self-determination Sovereign citizen movement Sumptuary law Victimless crime Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Andrews, Stephen Pearl (1888).

The Science of Society . Sarah E. Holmes. p. 155.

^ Andrews, Stephen Pearl (1938).

The Sovereignty of the Individual . Freeman Press. p. 18.

^ Dan-Cohen, Meir (2002).

Harmful Thoughts: Essays on Law, Self, and Morality . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691090078 .

JSTOR j.ctt7shdn .

^ "Toward a Libertarian Theory of Inalienability: A Critique of Rothbard, Barnett, Smith, Kinsella, Gordon, and Epstein" .

Mises Institute . 30 July 2014 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 .

^ L. Susan Brown (1993).

The Politics of Individualism: Liberalism, Liberal Feminism, and Anarchism . Black Rose Books.

^ Ellen Meiksins Wood (1972).

Mind and Politics: An Approach to the Meaning of Liberal and Socialist Individualism .

University of California Press .

ISBN 0520020294 . p. 7 ^ Cited in The Blackwell Dictionary of Western Philosophy . 2004. Blackwell Publishing. p. 630 ^ Shapiro, Ian (2001).

Democratic Justice . Yale University Press. pp. 145–146 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Harris, J. W. (1996).

Property and Justice . Oxford University Press. p. 189 ^ von Mises, Ludwig (18 August 2014). "Work and Wages".

Human Action (PDF) . p. 628 . Retrieved 7 September 2017 .

^ Danson, Lawrence (1998), "The Soul of Man Under Socialism" , Wilde's IntentionsThe Artist in his Criticism , Oxford University Press, pp.

148– 167, doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198186281.003.0008 , ISBN 978-0198186281 , retrieved 28 October 2021 ^ Ellerman 1992 .

^ "wage slave" .

merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 4 March 2013 .

^ "wage slave" .

dictionary.com . Retrieved 4 March 2013 .

^ Sandel 1996 , p.

184 .

^ "Conversation with Noam Chomsky" . Globetrotter.berkeley.edu. p. 2. Archived from the original on 19 September 2019 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Hallgrimsdottir & Benoit 2007 .

^ "The Bolsheviks and Workers Control, 1917–1921: The State and Counter-revolution" .

Spunk Library . Retrieved 4 March 2013 .

^ Proudhon 1890 .

^ Marx 1969 , Chapter VII .

^ Goldman 2003 , p.

283 .

^ Steiner, Hillel (1994).

An Essay on Rights . Oxford: Blackwell.

^ Vallentyne, Peter; Steiner, Hillel, eds. (2000).

Left-Libertarianism and Its Critics: The Contemporary Debate . London: Palgrave Macmillan.

^ Van Parijs, Philippe (2009).

Marxism Recycled . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ Otsuka, Michael (2005).

Libertarianism without Inequality . New York: Oxford University Press.

^ Ellerman, David (1992).

Property and Contract in Economics: The Case for Economic Democracy . Cambridge MA: Blackwell.

^ Ellerman, David (1990).

The Democratic Worker-Owned Firm . London: Unwin Hyman.

^ Rothbard, Murray N. (1982).

The Ethics of Liberty . Atlantic Heights, NJ: Humanities.

^ Vallentyne, Peter; Steiner, Hillel, eds. (2000).

Left-Libertarianism and Its Critics: The Contemporary Debate . London: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 1.

^ Gaus, Gerald F.; Kukathas, Chandran, eds. (2004).

Handbook of Political Theory . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. p. 128.

^ Olsaretti, Serena. 2004.

Liberty, Desert and the Market . Cambridge University Press. p. 91 ^ Dan-Cohen, Meir. 2002.

Harmful Thoughts: Essays on Law, Self, and Morality . Princeton University Press. p. 296 ^ "Josiah Warren Manifesto" .

dwardmac.pitzer.edu . Retrieved 28 October 2021 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Cohen, G. A.

(1995).

Self-Ownership, Freedom, and Equality . Cambridge University Press.

Ellerman, David P.

(1992).

Property and Contract in Economics: The Case for Economic Democracy (PDF) . Cambridge, MA: Blackwell .

ISBN 978-1557863096 . Retrieved 9 March 2013 .

Goldman, Emma (2003).

Falk, Candace ; et al. (eds.).

Emma Goldman: A Documentary History of the American Years, Volume I: Made for America, 1890–1901 . Berkeley & Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0520086708 .

Hallgrimsdottir, Helga Kristin; Benoit, Cecilia (2007). "From Wage Slaves to Wage Workers: Cultural Opportunity Structures and the Evolution of the Wage Demands of the Knights of Labor and the American Federation of Labor, 1880–1900".

Social Forces .

85 (3): 1393– 1411.

doi : 10.1353/sof.2007.0037 .

JSTOR 4494978 .

S2CID 154551793 .

Marx, Karl (1969) [1863].

Theories of Surplus Value . Moscow: Progress Publishers .

Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph (1890) [1840].

What Is Property? or, An Inquiry into the Principle of Right and of Government . New York: Humboldt Publishing.

Sandel, Michael J.

(1996).

Democracy's Discontent: America in Search of a Public Philosophy . Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press .

ISBN 978-0674197442 .

External links [ edit ] Self-Ownership The Ego and Its Own Archived 11 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine (also translated as The Individual and His Property , the main work by German philosopher Max Stirner ) The Philosophy of Liberty What is a sovereign individual?

Portals : Anarchism Economics Liberalism Libertarianism Philosophy v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline v t e Anarcho-capitalism Origins Aristotelianism Austrian school of economics Marginalism School of Salamanca Subjective theory of value Objectivism Classical liberalism French liberal school Homestead principle Labor theory of property Physiocracy Individualist anarchism Concepts Anti-statism Civil rights Corporate governance Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Deregulation Economic liberalism Evictionism Free market Free-market roads Free trade Freedom of contract Individualism Jurisdictional arbitrage Laissez-faire Land tenure Market anarchism Natural law Non-aggression principle Polycentric law Private defense ( Army ( Company / list ), Intelligence , Investigator , Police , Security ) Private property Privatization Propertarianism Property rights Right to property Self-ownership Spontaneous order Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntaryism People Bruce L. Benson Walter Block Bryan Caplan Gerard Casey Anthony de Jasay David D. Friedman Hans-Hermann Hoppe Michael Huemer Stephan Kinsella Nick Land Michael Malice Javier Milei Robert P. Murphy Wendy McElroy Lew Rockwell Murray Rothbard Joseph Salerno Jeffrey Tucker Tom Woods Works The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty (1973) The Machinery of Freedom (1973) Defending the Undefendable (1976) The Ethics of Liberty (1982) To Serve and Protect (1998) Democracy: The God That Failed (2001) The Myth of the Rational Voter (2007) The Voluntary City (2002) The Problem of Political Authority (2012) Issues Abortion Anarchism Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Inheritance Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Minarchism Objectivism Political parties Politics Theories of law Related topics Accelerationism Agorism Paleo-libertarianism Right-libertarianism Libertarianism in the United States Left-libertarianism Ultraliberalism Category v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Liberty Concepts Artistic freedom Cognitive liberty Free will Freedom of conscience Freedom of expression Freedom of Expression (book) Algeria Canada India South Africa Freethought Moral responsibility Personification of Liberty Libertas Negative liberty Positive liberty Rights Self-ownership Topfreedom By type Academic Civil Economic Financial Intellectual Internet Morphological Political By right Abortion Assembly Association Asylum Cannabis Choice Civil and political Clothing Death Digital Education Fair trial Family Freedom from discrimination Food Gun Health Housing Internet access Information Life Morphological Movement Personality Press Privacy Property Protest Religion Repair Resist Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health Sexuality Silence Speech Thought To be forgotten Truth Water and sanitation Workers' right to access the toilet See also All men are created equal Anarchism Autonomy Beard and haircut laws by country Civil libertarianism Clothing laws by country Dancing ban Decriminalization of sex work Drug liberalization Human rights Left-libertarianism Legality of recording by civilians LGBTQ rights Libertarianism Liberty, equality, brotherhood Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Photography and the law Photography Is Not a Crime Pornography laws by region Prostitution law Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Right-libertarianism Self-determination Stanley v. Georgia Universal Declaration of Human Rights v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Self-ownership&oldid=1292003049 " Categories : Abolitionism Anarcho-capitalism Autonomy Classical liberalism Concepts in political philosophy Economic ideologies Libertarian theory Sovereignty Conceptions of self Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with excerpts Articles with minor POV problems from August 2021 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2021 Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from September 2019 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 17:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Self-ownership 15 languages Add topic

