Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Invention of the telescope 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Jacob Metius 9 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands Português Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jacob ( Jacobus ; sometimes James ) Metius (after 1571–1628) was a Dutch instrument-maker and a specialist in grinding lenses . He is primarily known for the patent application he made for an optical telescope in  October 1608, a few weeks after Hans Lippershey submitted a patent for the same device. He was the brother of the geometer and astronomer Adriaan Metius .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Little is known of Jacob Metius other than he lived his life in Alkmaar . His father was Adriaan Anthonisz , a mathematician/map-maker/military engineer and Alkmaar burgomaster , and his brother was Adriaan Metius. Jacob's date of birth was some time after his brother's (1571). He died in Alkmaar, his death date usually given in sources as 1628 [ 2 ] although some put it between 1624 and 1631.

[ 3 ] Invention of the telescope [ edit ] See also: History of the telescope In October 1608, the States General discussed Jacob Metius's patent application for a device for "seeing faraway things as though nearby", consisting of a convex and concave lens in a tube, and the combination magnified three or four times.

[ 4 ] His use of a convex objective lens and concave eyepiece may have been a superior design to the Lippershey telescope design [ 5 ] which was submitted for patent only a few weeks before Metius'.

Metius informed the States General that he was familiar with the secrets of glassmaking and that he could make an even better telescope with the government's support. The States General voted him a small award, although it ended up employing Lippershey to make binocular versions of the telescope. Metius is described as feeling rebuffed by the States General, withdrawing his patent, and not allowing anyone to see his telescope.

[ 6 ] His will and testament ordered that all his tools and designs be destroyed to prevent anyone else from profiting from them.

[ 7 ] There is a claim by Johannes Zachariassen, Zacharias Janssen 's son, that Janssen had invented the telescope and that (Adriaan) Metius and Cornelis Drebbel had bought a telescope from him and his father in 1620 and copied it, [ 8 ] although this claim is put in doubt since Adriaen Metius was using telescopes by 1613, Drebbel had described them in 1609, and Jacob Metius had tried to  patent one in 1608.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] List of astronomical instrument makers References [ edit ] ^ galileo.rice.edu ^ Giorgio Strano, Galileo's Telescope: The Instrument that Changed the World , Giunti, 2008, page 36 ^ Robert D. Huerta, Giants of Delft: Johannes Vermeer and the Natural Philosophers : the Parallel Search for Knowledge During the Age of Discovery , Bucknell University Press, 2003, page 33 ^ galileo.rice.edu ^ "What do we know about Metius?" Archived October 7, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Henry C. King, The History of the Telescope , Courier Corporation, 2003, pages 31-32 ^ Henry C. King, The History of the Telescope , Courier Corporation, 2003, pages 31-32 - Metius's Patent Application for Telescope [ permanent dead link ] , History of telescope website - "What do we know about Metius?" ^ Albert Van Helden, Sven Dupre, Rob Van Gent, The Origins of the Telescope , 2011, page 43 ^ Albert Van Helden, Sven Dupre, Rob Van Gent, The Origins of the Telescope , 2011, page 43 - Huib Zuidervaart, The 'true inventor' of the telescope. A survey of 400 years of debate , KNAW Press, 2012, page 24 "What do we know about Metius?" "The Telescope" , The Galileo Project Archimedes Project: Hutton, Charles Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary 1795 Daniel J. Boorstin , The Discoverers (New York: Random House, 1983), 315.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Netherlands People Netherlands Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jacob_Metius&oldid=1270781343 " Categories : 1570s births 1628 deaths Optical engineers People from Alkmaar 17th-century Dutch inventors Dutch scientific instrument makers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 21 January 2025, at 05:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jacob Metius 9 languages Add topic

