Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Overseas Toggle Overseas subsection 2.1 In France 2.2 In the United States 2.3 In Britain 3 Political activities in France 4 In the Soviet Union and China 5 Viet Minh movement Toggle Viet Minh movement subsection 5.1 Birth of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam 6 President of North Vietnam 7 Vietnam War 8 Personal life 9 Death 10 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 10.1 Depictions of Hồ Chí Minh 11 International influence 12 See also 13 Explanatory notes 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Bibliography 15 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 15.1 Primary sources 15.2 Biography 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Ho Chi Minh 125 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 贛語 گیلکی ગુજરાતી 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى ဘာသာမန် مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் တႆး తెలుగు ไทย Thuɔŋjäŋ Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Leader of North Vietnam from 1945 to 1969 For other uses, see Ho Chi Minh (disambiguation) .

Hồ Chí Minh Portrait, c.

1946 1st President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam In office 2 September 1945 – 2 September 1969 [ a ] Prime Minister Phạm Văn Đồng (from 1955) Vice President Nguyễn Hải Thần (1945–1946) Vacant (1946–1960) Tôn Đức Thắng (1960–1969) Preceded by Bảo Đại (as Emperor ) Succeeded by Bảo Đại (as Chief of State of the State of Vietnam ) Tôn Đức Thắng Chairman of the Workers' Party of Vietnam In office 19 February 1951 – 2 September 1969 General Secretary Trường Chinh Himself Lê Duẩn [ b ] Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Position abolished General Secretary of the Workers' Party of Vietnam In office 5 October 1956 – 10 September 1960 Chairman Himself Preceded by Trường Chinh Succeeded by Lê Duẩn (as First Secretary) Head of Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam [ c ] [ d ] De facto 2 September 1945 – 20 September 1955 Preceded by Trần Trọng Kim (as Chief of Cabinet of the Empire of Vietnam ) Succeeded by Phạm Văn Đồng (as Prime Minister of the DRV) Minister of Foreign Affairs In office 28 August 1945 – 2 March 1946 Preceded by Trần Văn Chương (Empire of Vietnam) Succeeded by Nguyễn Tường Tam In office 3 November 1946 – March 1947 Preceded by Nguyễn Tường Tam Succeeded by Hoàng Minh Giám Full Member of the 2nd and 3rd Politburo In office 31 March 1935 – 2 September 1969 Personal details Born Nguyễn Sinh Cung ( 1890-05-19 ) 19 May 1890 Kim Liên , Annam , French Indochina Died 2 September 1969 (1969-09-02) (aged 79) Hanoi , North Vietnam Resting place Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum Political party Workers' Party of Vietnam (from 1951) Other political affiliations French Section of the Workers' International (1919–1921) French Communist Party (1921–1925) Indochinese Communist Party (1930–1945) Spouse Tăng Tuyết Minh ​ ​ ( m.

1926; sep.

1931) ​ Relations Bạch Liên (or Nguyễn Thị Thanh ; sister) Nguyễn Sinh Khiêm (or Nguyễn Tất Đạt ; brother) Nguyễn Sinh Xin (brother) Parents Nguyễn Sinh Sắc (father) Hoàng Thị Loan (mother) Alma mater Communist University of the Toilers of the East Occupation Politician revolutionary pastry chef Signature Ho Chi Minh's voice Ho Chi Minh declaring the independence of Vietnam from colonial powers and to be a free nation Recorded 2 September 1945 Hồ Chí Minh [ e ] (born Nguyễn Sinh Cung ; [ f ] [ g ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] 19 May 1890 – 2 September 1969), [ h ] colloquially known as Uncle Ho ( Bác Hồ ) [ i ] [ 7 ] among other aliases [ j ] and sobriquets, [ k ] was a Vietnamese revolutionary and politician who served as the founder and first president of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam from 1945 until his death in 1969, and as its first prime minister from 1945 to 1955. Ideologically a Marxist–Leninist , he founded the Indochinese Communist Party in 1930 and its successor Workers' Party of Vietnam (later the Communist Party of Vietnam ) in 1951, serving as the party's chairman until his death.

Hồ was born in Nghệ An province in French Indochina , and received a French education. Starting in 1911, he worked in various countries overseas, and in 1920 was a founding member of the French Communist Party in Paris. After studying in Moscow , Hồ founded the Vietnamese Revolutionary Youth League in 1925, which he transformed into the Indochinese Communist Party in 1930. On his return to Vietnam in 1941, he founded and led the Việt Minh independence movement against the Japanese, and in 1945 led the August Revolution against the monarchy and proclaimed the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. After the French returned to power, Hồ's government retreated to the countryside and initiated guerrilla warfare from 1946.

The Việt Minh defeated the French in 1954 at the Battle of Điện Biên Phủ , ending the First Indochina War . At the 1954 Geneva Conference , Vietnam was divided into two de facto separate states, with the Việt Minh in control of North Vietnam, and anti-communists backed by the United States in control of South Vietnam . Between 1953 and 1956, Hồ's leadership saw the implementation of a land reform campaign , which included executions and political purges.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Hồ remained president and party leader during the Vietnam War , which began in 1955. He supported the Viet Cong insurgency in the south, overseeing the transport of troops and supplies on the Ho Chi Minh trail until his death in 1969. North Vietnam won in 1975, and the country was re-unified in 1976 as the Socialist Republic of Vietnam . Saigon – Gia Định, South Vietnam's former capital, was renamed Ho Chi Minh City in his honor.

The details of Hồ 's life before he came to power in Vietnam are uncertain. He is known to have used between 50 [ 12 ] : 582 and 200 pseudonyms.

[ 13 ] Information on his birth and early life is ambiguous and subject to academic debate. At least four existing official biographies vary on names, dates, places, and other hard facts while unofficial biographies vary even more widely.

[ 14 ] Aside from being a politician, Hồ was a writer, poet, and journalist. He wrote several books, articles, and poems in Chinese, Vietnamese, and French.

Early life Hồ Chí Minh was born as Nguyễn Sinh Cung , also known as Nguyễn Sinh Côn , [ 15 ] and pronounced locally as Nguyễn Sinh Côông , [ 16 ] in 1890 in the village of Hoàng Trù in Kim Liên commune, Nam Đàn district, Nghệ An province , in northern Central Vietnam which was then a French protectorate . Although 1890 is generally accepted as his birth year, at various times he used four other birth years: [ 17 ] 1891, [ 18 ] 1892, [ l ] 1894 [ m ] and 1895.

[ 19 ] He lived in his father Nguyễn Sinh Sắc 's village of Làng Sen in Kim Liên until 1895 when his father sent him to Huế for study. He had three siblings: his sister Bạch Liên (Nguyễn Thị Thanh), a clerk in the French Army ; his brother Nguyễn Sinh Khiêm (Nguyễn Tất Đạt), a geomancer and traditional herbalist ; and another brother (Nguyễn Sinh Nhuận), who died in infancy. As a young child, Cung (Hồ) studied with his father before more formal classes with a scholar named Vương Thúc Quý. He quickly mastered chữ Hán , a prerequisite for any serious study of Confucianism while honing his colloquial Vietnamese writing.

[ 12 ] : 21 In addition to his studies, he was fond of adventure and loved to fly kites and go fishing.

[ 12 ] : 21 Following Confucian tradition, his father gave him a new name when he turned ten: Nguyễn Tất Thành .

His father, Sắc, was a Confucian scholar and teacher, and later, in 1909, an imperial magistrate in the remote district of Bình Khê in Bình Định province . He was demoted for abuse of power after an influential local figure died several days after having received 102 strokes of the cane as punishment for an infraction.

[ 12 ] : 21 Sắc was both a patriot and a collaborator with the French colonial state, supporting the claimedly ' civilizing mission ' of the French.

[ 20 ] Thành received a French education, attending Collège Quốc học ( lycée or secondary education) in Huế in Central Vietnam. His disciples, Phạm Văn Đồng and Võ Nguyên Giáp , also attended the school, as did Ngô Đình Diệm , the future President of South Vietnam and political rival.

[ 21 ] His early life is uncertain but there are some documents indicating activities regarding an early revolutionary spirit during French-occupied Vietnam, but conflicting sources remain. Previously, it was believed that Thành (Hồ) was involved in an anti-slavery (anti- corvée ) demonstration of poor peasants in Huế in May 1908, which endangered his student status at Collège Quốc học . However, a document from the Centre des archives d'Outre-mer in France shows that he was admitted to Collège Quốc học on 8 August 1908, which was several months after the anti- corvée demonstration (9–13 April 1908).

[ g ] Overseas In France In Saigon , he applied to work as a kitchen helper on a French merchant steamer, the Amiral de Latouche-Tréville , using the alias Văn Ba. The ship departed on 5 June 1911 and arrived in Marseille , France on 5 July 1911. The ship then left for Le Havre and Dunkirk , returning to Marseille in mid-September. There, he applied for the French Colonial School but did not succeed. He instead decided to begin traveling the world by working on ships and visiting many countries from 1911 to 1917.

[ 22 ] In the United States While working as the cook's helper on a ship in 1912, Thành (Hồ) traveled to the United States. From 1912 to 1913, he may have lived in New York City ( Harlem ) and Boston , where he claimed to have worked as a baker at the Parker House Hotel . The only evidence that he was in the United States is a single letter to French colonial administrators dated 15 December 1912 and postmarked New York City (he gave his address as the poste restante in Le Havre and his occupation as a sailor) [ 23 ] and a postcard to Phan Chu Trinh in Paris where he mentioned working at the Parker House Hotel. Inquiries to the Parker House management revealed no records of him ever having worked there.

[ 12 ] : 51 It is believed that while in the U.S he made contact with Korean nationalists , an experience that developed his political outlook. Sophie Quinn-Judge states that this is "in the realm of conjecture".

[ 23 ] He was also influenced by Pan-Africanist and black nationalist Marcus Garvey during his stay, and said he attended meetings of the Universal Negro Improvement Association .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] In Britain Commemorative plaque in Haymarket in London This article is part of a series about Ho Chi Minh Personal The Drayton Court Presidential Palace Historical Site Works The Path Which Led Me To Leninism President Ho Chi Minh's Testament Revolutionary movement Indochinese Communist Party French Indochina in World War II Viet Minh OSS Deer Team August Revolution Declaration of independence 1st President of Vietnam Ho–Sainteny Agreement Fontainebleau Agreements First Indochina War Battle of Dien Bien Phu 1954 Geneva Conference Land reform Ho Chi Minh trail Vietnam War Invasion of Laos Viet Cong terror Tet Offensive Five-Year Plans Elections 1946 1960 1964 Legacy Ho Chi Minh Thought Ho Chi Minh City Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum Ho Chi Minh Museum Monument in Moscow v t e At various points from 1913 to 1919, Thành (Hồ) claimed to have lived in West Ealing and later in Crouch End , Hornsey . He reportedly worked as either a chef or dishwasher (reports vary) at the Drayton Court Hotel in West Ealing.

[ 26 ] Claims that he was trained as a pastry chef under Auguste Escoffier at the Carlton Hotel in Haymarket, Westminster are not supported by documentary evidence.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] However, the wall of New Zealand House , home of the New Zealand High Commission which now stands on the site of the Carlton Hotel, displays a blue plaque . During 1913, Thành was also employed as a pastry chef on the Newhaven – Dieppe ferry route.

[ 29 ] Political activities in France 1920 security report by the French Indochinese government on Nguyễn Tất Thành listing his aliases, places of residence, his father's occupation, as well as other information.

Hồ Chí Minh, 1921, using the pseudonym Nguyễn Ái Quốc , attending a Communist congress in Marseille, France.

From 1919 to 1923, Thành (Hồ) began to show an interest in politics while living in France, being influenced by his friend and French Section of the Workers' International comrade Marcel Cachin . Thành claimed to have arrived in Paris from London in 1917, but the French police had only documents recording his arrival in June 1919.

[ 23 ] When he arrived, he met a scholar named Phan Châu Trinh as well as his friend Phan Văn Trường .

[ 30 ] In Paris, he joined the Groupe des Patriotes Annamites (The Group of Vietnamese Patriots) that included Phan Chu Trinh, Phan Văn Trường, Nguyễn Thế Truyền [ vi ] and Nguyễn An Ninh .

[ 31 ] They had been publishing newspaper articles advocating for Vietnamese independence under the pseudonym Nguyễn Ái Quốc ("Nguyễn the Patriot") prior to Thành's arrival in Paris.

[ 32 ] The group petitioned for recognition of the civil rights of the Vietnamese people in French Indochina to the Western powers at the Versailles peace talks , but they were ignored. Citing the principle of self-determination outlined before the peace accords, they requested the allied powers to end French colonial rule of Vietnam and ensure the formation of an independent government.

Before the conference, the group sent their letter to allied leaders, including French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau and United States President Woodrow Wilson . They were unable to obtain consideration at Versailles , but the episode would later help establish the future Hồ Chí Minh as the symbolic leader of the anti-colonial movement at home in Vietnam.

[ 33 ] Since Thành was the public face behind the publication of the document (although it was written by Phan Văn Trường), [ 34 ] he soon became known as Nguyễn Ái Quốc, and first used the name in September during an interview with a Chinese newspaper correspondent.

[ 12 ] Many authors have stated that 1919 was a lost "Wilsonian moment", where the future Hồ Chí Minh could have adopted a pro-American and less radical position if only President Wilson had received him. However, at the time of the Versailles Conference, Hồ Chí Minh was committed to a socialist program. While the conference was ongoing, Nguyễn Ái Quốc was already delivering speeches on the prospects of Bolshevism in Asia and was attempting to persuade French socialists to join Lenin 's Communist International .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Upon hearing of the October 1920 death of Irish republican hunger striker (and Lord Mayor of Cork) Terence MacSwiney , Quốc (Hồ) was said to have burst into tears and said “a country with a citizen like this will never surrender”.

[ 37 ] In December 1920, Quốc (Hồ) became a representative to the Congress of Tours of the French Section of the Workers' International, voted for the Third International , and was a founding member of the French Communist Party. Taking a position in the Colonial Committee of the party, he tried to draw his comrades' attention towards people in French colonies including Indochina, but his efforts were often unsuccessful. While living in Paris, he reportedly had a relationship with a dressmaker named Marie Brière. As a French police document discovered in 2018, Quốc also had relations with the members of Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea like Kim Kyu-sik , Jo So-ang while in Paris.

[ 38 ] While in there, Ho Chi Minh broadened his political opportunities through contact with Chinese and Korean nationalists , many of whom were linked to Protestant institutions, as well as with French and Vietnamese Protestants. While aware of Protestant discourses on liberty, his commitment lay with proletarian internationalism . From 1919 onward, he embraced Leninist anticolonial positions and eventually aligned with the French Communist Party. Over time, his political stance became more rigid and exclusive.

[ 39 ] During this period, he began to write journal articles and short stories as well as run his Vietnamese nationalist group. In May 1922, he wrote an article for a French magazine criticizing the use of English words by French sportswriters.

[ 40 ] The article implored Prime Minister Raymond Poincaré to outlaw such Franglais as le manager , le round and le knock-out . His articles and speeches caught the attention of Dmitry Manuilsky , who would soon sponsor his trip to the Soviet Union and under whose tutelage he would become a high-ranking member of the Soviet Comintern.

[ 41 ] In the Soviet Union and China External videos Booknotes interview with William Duiker on Hồ Chí Minh: A Life , 12 November 2000 , C-SPAN A plaque in Compoint Lane [ fr ] , District 17, Paris indicates where Hồ Chí Minh lived from 1921 to 1923 In 1923, Quốc (Hồ) left Paris for Moscow carrying a passport with the name Chen Vang, a Chinese merchant, [ 12 ] : 86 where he was employed by the Comintern , studied at the Communist University of the Toilers of the East [ 12 ] : 92 [ 42 ] and in January 1924, attended Lenin's funeral .

[ 43 ] : 96 Hồ participated in the Fifth Comintern Congress in June 1924 before arriving in Canton (present-day Guangzhou ), China in November 1924 using the name Ly Thuy. The Comintern assigned him to assist and interpret for Mikhail Borodin , who was the Comintern envoy to the Kuomintang Revolutionary Committee there.

[ 43 ] In Canton, Hồ organized the Association of Vietnamese Youth.

[ 43 ] : 96 He opened a political training school for Vietnamese revolutionaries, [ 43 ] : 96 and in 1925–1926, he organized "Youth Education Classes" and occasionally gave socialist lectures to Vietnamese revolutionary young people living in Canton at the Whampoa Military Academy . These young people would become the seeds of a new revolutionary, pro-communist movement in Vietnam several years later. According to William Duiker , he lived with a Chinese woman, Zeng Xueming (Tăng Tuyết Minh), whom he married on 18 October 1926.

[ 44 ] When his comrades objected to the match, he told them: "I will get married despite your disapproval because I need a woman to teach me the language and keep house".

[ 44 ] She was 21 and he was 36. They married in the same place where Zhou Enlai had married earlier and then lived in the residence of Borodin.

[ 44 ] Hoàng Văn Chí , a Vietnamese anti-communist writer, argued that in June 1925 he betrayed Phan Bội Châu , the famous leader of a rival revolutionary faction and his father's old friend, to French Secret Service agents in Shanghai for 100,000 piastres .

[ 45 ] A source states that he later claimed he did it because he expected Châu's trial to stir up anti-French sentiment and because he needed the money to establish a communist organization.

[ 45 ] In Ho Chi Minh: A Life , William Duiker considered this hypothesis, but ultimately rejected it.

[ 12 ] : 126–128 This hypothesis was also rejected by Sophie Quinn-Judge and Duncan McCargo , who argued that this is likely propaganda invented by anti-communist authors, considering that Lâm Đức Thụ 's reports showed that the French already had all the information they needed from their own spies. Also, according to Quinn-Judge and McCargo, Hồ was rapidly gaining supporters from the "best elements" of the Vietnamese nationalist movement to his ideas, thus having no motivation to eliminate Phan, who considered Hồ more as a successor than a competitor. Thus, Hồ had plenty of reasons to support such a respected activist as a figurehead for his movement.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Other sources claim that Nguyễn Thượng Huyện was responsible for Chau's capture. Chau, sentenced to lifetime house arrest , never denounced Quốc.

After Chiang Kai-shek 's 1927 anti-communist coup , Quốc (Hồ) left Canton again in April 1927 and returned to Moscow, spending part of the summer of 1927 recuperating from tuberculosis in Crimea before returning to Paris once more in November. He then returned to Asia by way of Brussels , Berlin, Switzerland, and Italy, where he sailed to Bangkok , Thailand, arriving in July 1928. "Although we have been separated for almost a year, our feelings for each other do not have to be said to be felt", he reassured Zeng in an intercepted letter.

[ 44 ] Hồ Chí Minh worked as a cook all over the world from 1911 to 1928, including Milan . This plaque in Via Pasubio, on the left next to "Antica Trattoria Della Pesa", remembers one of his workplaces.

House on Memorium for Hồ Chí Minh in Ban Nachok, Nakhon Phanom , Thailand Quốc (Hồ) remained in Thailand, staying in the Thai village of Nachok [ 48 ] until late 1929, when he moved on to India and then Shanghai . In Hong Kong in early 1930, he chaired a meeting with representatives from two Vietnamese communist parties to merge them into a unified organization, the Communist Party of Vietnam.

[ 49 ] He also founded the Indochinese Communist Party (ICP).

[ 50 ] In June 1931, Hồ was arrested by the Hong Kong Police Force (HKPF) as part of a joint operation between the French authorities in Indochina and the HKPF; scheduled to be extradited from Hong Kong to French Indochina, Hồ was successfully defended by British solicitor Frank Loseby.

[ 49 ] Eventually, after appeals to the British Privy Council , Hồ was reported as dead in 1932 to avoid being extradited to Indochina; [ 51 ] it was ruled that, though he would be deported from Hong Kong as an undesirable, it would not be to a destination controlled by France.

[ 49 ] Hồ was eventually released and escorted to Shantou .

[ 43 ] : 98 He subsequently returned to the Soviet Union and studied and taught at the Lenin Institute in Moscow.

[ 52 ] In this period Hồ reportedly lost his positions in the Comintern because of a concern that he had betrayed the organization. However, according to Ton That Thien's research, he was a member of the inner circle of the Comintern, a protégé of Dmitry Manuilsky and a member in good standing of the Comintern throughout the Great Purge .

[ 53 ] [ page needed ] [ 54 ] Hồ was removed from control of the Party he had founded. At that time, the Comintern emphasized class struggle more than finding common ground with non-communists to oppose imperialism .

[ 43 ] : 98 ICP leadership who replaced criticized Hồ for what they described as his nationalist tendencies.

[ 50 ] [ 43 ] : 98 In 1937, Japanese aggression in China and the Nazis' policies prompted the Comintern to emphasize working with anti-fascist groups among non-communists, and Hồ returned to the party's favor.

[ 43 ] : 98 In 1938, Quốc (Hồ) returned to China and served as an advisor to the Chinese Communist armed forces.

[ 23 ] He was also the senior Comintern agent in charge of Asian affairs.

[ 55 ] He served in the Eighth Route Army branch office in Guilin .

[ 43 ] : 98 In 1939, he served under the command of Marshal Ye Jianying .

[ 43 ] : 98 When France was defeated by Germany in 1940 , Hồ and his lieutenants, Võ Nguyên Giáp and Phạm Văn Đồng , saw this as an opportunity to advance their own cause.

[ 56 ] In October 1940, Hồ and his supporters established the League for Vietnamese Independence ( Việt Minh ) in Guilin.

[ 43 ] : 98 Viet Minh movement In 1941, Hồ Chí Minh returned to Vietnam to lead the Việt Minh independence movement. Hồ and ICP founded a communist-led united front to oppose the Japanese.

[ 43 ] : 98 The Japanese occupation of Indochina that year, the first step toward an invasion of the rest of Southeast Asia, created an opportunity for patriotic Vietnamese.

[ 57 ] The so-called "men in black" were a 10,000-member guerrilla force that operated with the Việt Minh.

[ 58 ] He oversaw many successful military actions against the Vichy France and the Japanese occupation of Vietnam during World War II , supported closely yet clandestinely by the United States Office of Strategic Services and later against the French bid to reoccupy the country (1946–1954). He was jailed in China by Chiang Kai-shek's local authorities before being rescued by Chinese Communists.

[ 59 ] Following his release in 1943, he returned to Vietnam. It was during this time that he began regularly using the name Hồ Chí Minh, a Vietnamese name combining a common Vietnamese surname (Hồ, 胡 ) with a given name meaning "Bright spirit" or "Clear will" (from Sino-Vietnamese 志 明 : Chí meaning "will" or "spirit" and Minh meaning "bright").

[ 12 ] : 248–249 His new name was a tribute to General Hou Zhiming (侯志明), Chief Commissar of the 4th Military Region of the National Revolutionary Army , who helped release him from a KMT prison in 1943.

[ citation needed ] Hồ Chí Minh (third from left, standing) with the OSS in 1945 In April 1945, he met with the OSS agent Archimedes Patti and offered to provide intelligence, asking only for "a line of communication" between his Viet Minh and the Allies.

[ 60 ] The OSS agreed to this and later sent a military team of OSS members to train his men and Hồ Chí Minh himself was treated for malaria and dysentery by an OSS doctor.

[ 61 ] Following the August Revolution organized by the Việt Minh, Hồ Chí Minh became Chairman of the Provisional Government (Premier of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam ) and issued a Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.

[ 62 ] Although he convinced former Emperor Bảo Đại to abdicate, his government was not recognized by any country. He repeatedly petitioned President Harry S. Truman for support for Vietnamese independence, [ 63 ] citing the Atlantic Charter , but Truman never responded.

[ 64 ] In 1946, future Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion and Hồ Chí Minh became acquainted when they stayed at the same hotel in Paris.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] He offered Ben-Gurion a Jewish home-in-exile in Vietnam, [ 65 ] [ 66 ] which Ben-Gurion declined.

Birth of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam Main articles: Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) and First Indochina War Following Emperor Bảo Đại's abdication in August, Hồ Chí Minh read the Declaration of Independence of Vietnam on 2 September 1945 [ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ page needed ] [ 69 ] under the name of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. In Saigon , with violence between rival Vietnamese factions and French forces increasing, the British commander, General Sir Douglas Gracey , declared martial law. On 24 September, the Việt Minh leaders responded with a call for a general strike.

[ 70 ] [ page needed ] In the same month, a force of 200,000 Chinese National Revolutionary Army troops arrived in Hanoi to accept the surrender of the Japanese occupiers in northern Indochina. Hồ Chí Minh made a compromise with their general, Lu Han , to dissolve the Communist Party and to hold an election that would yield a coalition government. When Chiang forced the French to give the French concessions in Shanghai back to China in exchange for withdrawing from northern Indochina, he had no choice but to sign an agreement with France on 6 March 1946 in which Vietnam would be recognized as an autonomous state in the Indochinese Federation and the French Union . The agreement soon broke down. The purpose of the agreement, for both the French and Vietminh, was for Chiang's army to leave North Vietnam. Fighting broke out in the North soon after the Chinese left.

Historian Professor Liam Kelley of the University of Hawaii at Manoa on his Le Minh Khai's Asian History Blog challenged the authenticity of the alleged quote where Hồ Chí Minh said he "would rather smell French shit for five years than eat Chinese shit for a thousand," noting that Stanley Karnow provided no source for the extended quote attributed to him in his 1983 Vietnam: A History and that the original quote was most likely forged by the Frenchman Paul Mus in his 1952 book Vietnam: Sociologie d'une Guerre . Mus was a supporter of French colonialism in Vietnam and Hồ Chí Minh believed there was no danger of Chinese troops staying in Vietnam. The Vietnamese at the time were busy spreading anti-French propaganda as evidence of French atrocities in Vietnam emerged, while Hồ Chí Minh showed no qualms about accepting Chinese aid after 1949.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Võ Nguyên Giáp (left) with Hồ Chí Minh (right) in Hanoi in 1945 In 1946, when he traveled outside of the country, his subordinates imprisoned 2,500 non-Communist nationalists and forced 6,000 others to flee.

[ 73 ] Hundreds of political opponents were jailed or exiled in July 1946, notably, members of the Nationalist Party of Vietnam and the Dai Viet National Party after a failed attempt to raise a coup against the Viet Minh government.

[ 74 ] The Việt Minh then collaborated with French colonial forces to massacre supporters of rival Vietnamese nationalist movements in 1945–1946, [ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] and of the Trotskyists. All rival political parties were hereafter banned and local governments were purged [ 78 ] to minimize opposition later on.

Trotskyism in Vietnam did not rival the Party outside of the major cities, but particularly in the South, in Saigon-Cochinchina, they had been a challenge. From the outset, they had called for armed resistance to a French restoration and an immediate transfer of industry to workers and land to peasants.

[ 79 ] The French Socialist leader Daniel Guérin recalls that when in Paris in 1946 he asked Hồ Chí Minh about the fate of the Trotskyist leader Tạ Thu Thâu , Hồ Chí Minh had replied, "with unfeigned emotion," that "'Thâu was a great patriot and we mourn him', but then a moment later added in a steady voice 'All those who do not follow the line which I have laid down will be broken.'" [ 80 ] However, it was noted that the Democratic Republic of Vietnam 's first Congress had over two-thirds of its members come from non-Việt Minh political factions, some without an election. Nationalist Party of Vietnam leader Nguyễn Hải Thần was named vice president. They also held four out of ten ministerial positions.

[ 81 ] The Communists eventually suppressed all non-Communist parties, but they failed to secure a peace deal with France. In the final days of 1946, after a year of diplomatic failure and many concessions in agreements, such as the Dalat and Fontainebleau conferences , the Democratic Republic of Vietnam government found that war was inevitable. The bombardment of Haiphong by the French Navy only strengthened the belief that France had no intention of allowing an autonomous, independent state in Vietnam. The attack reportedly killed more than 6,000 Vietnamese civilians in Haiphong. French forces marched into Hanoi, now the capital city of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. On 19 December 1946, after the Haiphong incident, Hồ Chí Minh declared war against the French, marking the beginning of the First Indochina War .

[ 82 ] The Vietnam National Army, mostly armed with machetes and muskets immediately attacked. They assaulted the French positions, smoking them out with straw bundled with chili pepper, destroying armored vehicles with "lunge mines" (a hollow-charge warhead on the end of a pole, detonated by thrusting the charge against the side of a tank; typically a suicide weapon ) [ 83 ] and Molotov cocktails , holding off attackers by using roadblocks , landmines and gravel. After two months of fighting, the exhausted Việt Minh forces withdrew after systematically destroying any valuable infrastructure . Hồ was mistakenly reported to be captured by a group of French soldiers, led by Jean Étienne Valluy at Việt Bắc, during Operation Léa . The person in question turned out to be a Việt Minh advisor who was killed trying to escape.

According to journalist Bernard Fall , Hồ decided to negotiate a truce after fighting the French for several years. When the French negotiators arrived at the meeting site, they found a mud hut with a thatched roof. Inside they found a long table with chairs. In one corner of the room, a silver ice bucket contained ice and a bottle of good champagne, indicating that Hồ expected the negotiations to succeed. One demand by the French was the return to French custody of several Japanese military officers (who had been helping the Vietnamese armed forces by training them in the use of weapons of Japanese origin) for them to stand trial for war crimes committed during World War II. Hồ Chí Minh replied that the Japanese officers were allies and friends whom he could not betray, therefore he walked out to seven more years of war.

[ 84 ] In February 1950, after the Battle of Route Coloniale 4 successfully broke the French border blockade, he met with Joseph Stalin and Mao Zedong in Moscow after the Soviet Union recognized his government. They all agreed that China would be responsible for backing the Việt Minh.

[ 85 ] Mao Zedong's emissary to Moscow stated in August that China planned to train 60,000–70,000 Viet Minh shortly.

[ 86 ] The road to the outside world was open for Việt Minh forces to receive additional supplies which would allow them to escalate the fight against the French regime throughout Indochina. At the outset of the conflict, Hồ reportedly told a French visitor: "You can kill ten of my men for every one I kill of yours. But even at those odds, you will lose and I will win".

[ 87 ] In 1954, the First Indochina War came to an end after the decisive Battle of Dien Bien Phu , where more than 10,000 French soldiers surrendered to the Viet Minh. The subsequent Geneva Accords peace process partitioned North Vietnam at the 17th parallel.

President of North Vietnam The 1954 Geneva Conference concluded the war between France and the Việt Minh, allowing the latter's forces to regroup in the North whilst anti-Communist groups settled in the South. Hồ's Democratic Republic of Vietnam relocated to Hanoi and became the government of North Vietnam, a Communist -led one-party state . Following the Geneva Accords, there was to be a 300-day period in which people could freely move between the two regions of Vietnam, later known as South Vietnam and North Vietnam. During the 300 days, Ngô Đình Diệm and CIA adviser Colonel Edward Lansdale staged a campaign to convince Northerners, particularly Catholics to move to South Vietnam. The CIA's efforts played a minimal role, as Catholic migrants were driven primarily by their own convictions and circumstances rather than external psychological operations.

[ 88 ] Between 800,000 and 1 million people migrated to the South. With the withdrawal from the French Union and the dissolution of French Indochina in early 1955, Diem assumed temporary control of South Vietnam.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] All the parties at Geneva called for reunification elections, but they could not agree on the details. Recently appointed Việt Minh acting foreign minister Phạm Văn Đồng proposed elections under the supervision of "local commissions". The U.S., with the support of Britain and the Associated States of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia, suggested United Nations supervision. This plan was rejected by Soviet representative Vyacheslav Molotov , who argued for a commission composed of an equal number of communist and non-communist members, which could determine "important" issues only by unanimous agreement.

[ 91 ] The negotiators were unable to agree on a date for the elections for reunification. North Vietnam argued that the elections should be held within six months of the ceasefire while the Western allies sought to have no deadline. Molotov proposed June 1955, then later softened this to any time in 1955 and finally July 1956.

[ 92 ] The Diệm government supported reunification elections, but only with effective international supervision, arguing that genuinely free elections were otherwise impossible in the totalitarian North.

[ 93 ] Ho Chi Minh with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru in New Delhi, India, 7 February 1958 By the afternoon of 20 July 1954, the remaining outstanding issues were resolved as the parties agreed that the partition line should be at the 17th parallel and the elections for a reunified government should be held in July 1956, two years after the ceasefire.

[ 94 ] The Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Vietnam was only signed by the French and Việt Minh military commands, with no participation or consultation of the State of Vietnam .

[ 95 ] Based on a proposal by Chinese delegation head Zhou Enlai, an International Control Commission (ICC) was established to supervise the ceasefire under the Geneva Accords. Chaired by India, the commission included Canada and Poland as its other members.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Because issues were to be decided unanimously, Poland's presence in the ICC provided the Communists with effective veto power over supervision of the treaty.

[ 98 ] The unsigned Final Declaration of the Geneva Conference called for reunification elections, which the majority of delegates expected to be supervised by the ICC. The Việt Minh never accepted ICC authority over such elections, insisting that the ICC's "competence was to be limited to the supervision and control of the implementation of the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities by both parties".

[ 99 ] Of the nine nations represented, only the United States and the State of Vietnam refused to accept the declaration. Undersecretary of state Walter Bedell Smith delivered a "unilateral declaration" of the United States position, reiterating: "We shall seek to achieve unity through free elections supervised by the United Nations to ensure that they are conducted fairly".

[ 100 ] Hồ Chí Minh with East German sailors in Stralsund harbor during his 1957 visit to East Germany Hồ Chí Minh with members of the East German Young Pioneers near Berlin, 1957 Between 1953 and 1956, the North Vietnamese government instituted various agrarian reforms, including rent reduction and land reform , which were accompanied with executions of "reactionary and evil landlords." During the land reform, testimonies by North Vietnamese witnesses suggested a ratio of one execution per 160 village residents, which if extrapolated would indicate a nationwide total of nearly 100,000 executions. Because the campaign was concentrated mainly in the Red River Delta area, a lower estimate of 50,000 executions was widely accepted by scholars at the time.

[ 101 ] [ 10 ] [ n ] However, declassified documents from the Vietnamese and Hungarian archives indicate that the number of executions was much lower than reported at the time, although it was likely greater than 13,500.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] In 1990, economist Vo Nhan Tri reported uncovering a document in the central party archives which put the number of wrongful executions at 15,000. From discussions with party cadres, Vo Nhan Tri concluded that the overall number of deaths was considerably higher than this figure.

[ 105 ] In 2007, scholar Balasz Szalontai wrote that documents of Hungarian diplomats living in North Vietnam at the time of the land reform provided a number of the 62,182 ‘landlords’ identified by the land reform cadres, of whom 1,337 were executed by December 1955, including 1,175 executions during the first stage, which was the rent-reductuon campaign, and 162 executions during the second stage, which was the land reform proper. The third stage in early 1956, likely resulted in more deaths than the previous stages as the repression was more intense.

[ 106 ] In early 1956, North Vietnam ended the land reform and initiated a "correction of errors" to rectify the mistakes and damage done. That year, Hồ Chí Minh apologised and acknowledged the serious errors the government had made in the land reform.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] As part of the campaign, as many as 23,748 political prisoners were released by North Vietnam by September 1957.

[ 109 ] By 1958, the correction campaign had resulted in the return of land to many of those harmed by the land reform.

[ 107 ] Vietnam War Main article: Vietnam War As early as June 1956, the idea of overthrowing the Republic of Vietnam government was presented at a Politburo meeting. In 1959, Hồ Chí Minh began urging the Politburo to send aid to the Việt Cộng in South Vietnam; a " people's war " on the South was approved at a session in January 1959, and this decision was confirmed by the Politburo in March.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] North Vietnam invaded Laos in July 1959, aided by the Pathet Lao , and used 30,000 men to build a network of supply and reinforcement routes running through Laos and Cambodia that became known as the Hồ Chí Minh trail .

[ 112 ] It allowed the North to send manpower and material to the Việt Cộng with much less exposure to South Vietnamese forces, achieving a considerable advantage.

[ 113 ] To counter the accusation that North Vietnam was violating the Geneva Accord, the independence of the Việt Cộng was stressed in communist propaganda. North Vietnam created the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam in December 1960 as a " united front ", or political branch of the Việt Cộng, intended to encourage the participation of non-Communists.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] At the end of 1959, aware that the planned national elections would never be held and that Diệm intended to purge opposing forces (mostly ex-Việt Minh) from South Vietnamese society, Hồ Chí Minh informally chose Lê Duẩn to become the next party leader. This was interpreted by Western analysts as a loss of influence for Hồ, who was said to have preferred the more moderate Võ Nguyên Giáp for the position.

[ 114 ] From 1959 onward, the elderly Hồ became increasingly worried about the prospect of his death, and that year he wrote down his will.

[ 115 ] Hồ stepped down as General Secretary of the Vietnam Communist party in September 1960 and Lê Duẩn was officially named party leader, leaving Hồ to function in a secondary role as head of state and member of the Politburo . He nevertheless maintained considerable influence in the government. Lê Duẩn, Tố Hữu , Trường Chinh and Phạm Văn Đồng often shared dinner with Hồ, and all of them remained key figures throughout and after the war. In the early 1960s, the North Vietnamese Politburo was divided into the "North First" faction which favored focusing on the economic development of North Vietnam, and the "South First" faction, which favored a guerrilla war in South Vietnam to reunite the country within the short term.

[ 116 ] Between 1961 and 1963, 40,000 Communist soldiers infiltrated South Vietnam from the North.

[ 110 ] In 1963, Hồ purportedly corresponded with South Vietnamese President Diệm in hopes of achieving a negotiated peace.

[ 117 ] During the so-called "Maneli Affair" of 1963, a French diplomatic initiative was launched to achieve a federation of the two Vietnams, which would be neutral in the Cold War.

[ 118 ] The four principal diplomats involved in the Maneli affair were Ramchundur Goburdhun , the Indian Chief Commissioner of the ICC; Mieczysław Maneli , the Polish Commissioner to the ICC; Roger Lalouette, the French ambassador to South Vietnam; and Giovanni d'Orlandi, the Italian ambassador to South Vietnam.

[ 118 ] Maneli reported that Hồ was very interested in the signs of a split between President Diệm and President Kennedy and that his attitude was: "Our real enemies are the Americans. Get rid of them, and we can cope with Diệm and Nhu afterward".

[ 118 ] Hồ and Maneli also discussed the Ho Chi Minh Trail, which passed through officially neutral Cambodia and Laos, saying "Indochina is just one single entity".

[ 119 ] At a meeting in Hanoi held in French, Hồ told Goburdhun that Diệm was "in his way a patriot", noting that Diệm had opposed French rule over Vietnam, and ended the meeting saying that the next time Goburdhun met Diệm "shake hands with him for me".

[ 120 ] The North Vietnamese Premier Phạm Văn Đồng, speaking on behalf of Hồ, told Maneli he was interested in the peace plan, saying that just as long as the American advisers left South Vietnam "we can agree with any Vietnamese".

[ 121 ] On 2 September 1963, Maneli met with Ngô Đình Nhu , the younger brother and right-hand man to Diệm to discuss the French peace plan.

[ 122 ] It remains unclear if the Ngo brothers were serious about the French peace plan or were merely using the possibility of accepting it to blackmail the United States into supporting them at a time when the Buddhist crisis had seriously strained relations between Saigon and Washington.

[ 121 ] Supporting the latter theory is the fact that Nhu promptly leaked his meeting with Maneli to the American columnist Joseph Alsop , who publicized it in a column entitled "Very Ugly Stuff".

[ 121 ] The possibility that the Ngo brothers might accept the peace plan contributed to the Kennedy administration's plan to support a coup against them. On 1 November 1963, a coup overthrew Diệm, who was killed the next day together with his brother.

[ 121 ] Diệm had followed a policy of "deconstructing the state" by creating several overlapping agencies and departments that were encouraged to feud with one another to disorganize the South Vietnamese state to such an extent that he hoped that it would make a coup against him impossible.

[ 123 ] When Diệm was overthrown and killed, without any kind of arbiter between the rival arms of the South Vietnamese state, regime authority in South Vietnam promptly disintegrated.

[ 124 ] The American Defense Secretary Robert McNamara reported after visiting South Vietnam in December 1963 that "there is no organized government worthy of the name" in Saigon.

[ 125 ] At a meeting of the plenum of the Politburo in December 1963, Lê Duẩn's "South first" faction triumphed, with the Politburo passing a resolution calling for North Vietnam to complete the overthrow of the regime in Saigon as soon as possible; while the members of the "North first" faction were dismissed.

[ 126 ] As the South descended into chaos, whatever interest Hồ might have had in the French peace plan faded, as it became clear the Việt Cộng could overthrow the Saigon government. A CIA report from 1964 stated that factionalism in South Vietnam had reached "almost the point of anarchy" as various South Vietnamese leaders fought one another, making any sort of concerted effort against the Việt Cộng impossible; leading to much of the South Vietnamese countryside being rapidly taken over by communist guerilla forces.

[ 127 ] As South Vietnam collapsed into factionalism and in-fighting while the Việt Cộng continued to win the war, it became increasingly apparent to President Lyndon Johnson that only American military intervention could save South Vietnam.

[ 128 ] Though Johnson did not wish to commit American forces until he had won the 1964 election, he decided to make his intentions clear to Hanoi. In June 1964, the "Seaborn Mission" began as J. Blair Seaborn , the Canadian commissioner to the ICC, arrived in Hanoi with a message from Johnson offering billions of American economic aid and diplomatic recognition in exchange for which North Vietnam would cease trying to overthrow the government of South Vietnam.

[ 129 ] Seaborn also warned that North Vietnam would suffer the "greatest devastation" from American bombing, saying that Johnson was seriously considering a strategic bombing campaign against North Vietnam.

[ 130 ] Little came of the backchannel of the "Seaborn Mission" as the North Vietnamese distrusted Seaborn, who pointedly was never allowed to meet Hồ.

[ 131 ] In late 1964, the People's Army of Vietnam combat troops were sent southwest into officially neutral Laos and Cambodia .

[ 132 ] By March 1965, American combat troops began arriving in South Vietnam, first to protect the airbases around Chu Lai and Da Nang , later to take on most of the fight as "[m]ore and more American troops were put in to replace Saigon troops who could not or would not, get involved in the fighting".

[ 133 ] As fighting escalated, widespread aerial and artillery bombardment all over North Vietnam by the United States Air Force and Navy began with Operation Rolling Thunder . On 8–9 April 1965, Hồ made a secret visit to Beijing to meet Mao Zedong.

[ 134 ] It was agreed that no Chinese combat troops would enter North Vietnam unless the United States invaded North Vietnam, but that China would send support troops to North Vietnam to help maintain the infrastructure damaged by American bombing.

[ 134 ] There was deep distrust and fear of China within the North Vietnamese Politburo and the suggestion that Chinese troops, even support troops, be allowed into North Vietnam caused outrage in the Politburo.

[ 135 ] Hồ had to use all his moral authority to obtain Politburo's approval.

[ 135 ] According to Chen Jian, during the mid-to-late 1960s, Lê Duẩn permitted 320,000 Chinese volunteers into North Vietnam to help build infrastructure for the country, thereby freeing a similar number of PAVN personnel to go south.

[ 136 ] There are no sources from Vietnam, the United States, or the Soviet Union that confirm the number of Chinese troops stationed in North Vietnam. However, the Chinese government later admitted to sending 320,000 Chinese soldiers to Vietnam during the 1960s and spent over $20 billion to support Hanoi's regular North Vietnamese Army and Việt Cộng guerrilla units.

[ 137 ] To counter the American bombing, the entire population of North Vietnam was mobilized for the war effort, with vast teams of women being used to repair the damage to roads and bridges done by the aerial bombers, often at a speed that astonished the Americans.

[ 138 ] The bombing of North Vietnam proved to be the principal obstacle to opening peace talks, as Hồ repeatedly stated that no peace talks would be possible unless the United States unconditionally ceased bombing North Vietnam.

[ 139 ] Like many of the other leaders of the newly independent states of Asia and Africa, Hồ was extremely sensitive about threats, whether perceived or real, to his nation's independence and sovereignty.

[ 139 ] Hồ regarded the American bombing as a violation of North Vietnam's sovereignty, and he felt that to negotiate with the Americans reserving the right to bomb North Vietnam should he not behave as they wanted him to do, would diminish North Vietnam's independence.

[ 139 ] In March 1966, a Canadian diplomat, Chester Ronning , arrived in Hanoi with an offer to use his "good offices" to begin peace talks.

[ 140 ] However, the Ronning mission foundered upon the bombing issue, as the North Vietnamese demanded an unconditional halt to the bombing, an undertaking that Johnson refused to give.

[ 140 ] In June 1966, Janusz Lewandowski , the Polish Commissioner to the ICC, was able via d'Orlandi to see Henry Cabot Lodge Jr , the American ambassador to South Vietnam, with an offer from Hồ.

[ 140 ] Hồ's offer for a "political compromise" as transmitted by Lewandowski included allowing South Vietnam to maintain its alliance with the U.S., instead of becoming neutral; having the Việt Cộng "take part" in negotiations for a coalition government, instead of being allowed to automatically enter a coalition government; and allowing a "reasonable calendar" for the withdrawal of American troops instead of an immediate withdrawal.

[ 141 ] Operation Marigold , as the Lewandowski channel came to be codenamed, almost led to American-North Vietnamese talks in Warsaw in December 1966; but such plans ultimately collapsed over the bombing issue.

[ 142 ] In January 1967, General Nguyễn Chí Thanh , the commander of communist forces in South Vietnam, returned to Hanoi to present a plan that became the genesis of the Tet Offensive a year later.

[ 143 ] Thanh expressed much concern about the Americans invading Laos to cut the Ho Chi Minh Trail, and to preempt this possibility, urged an all-out offensive to win the war with a sudden blow.

[ 143 ] Lê' Duẩn supported Thanh's plans, which were stoutly opposed by the Defense Minister, General Võ Nguyên Giáp, who preferred to continue with guerrilla war, arguing that superior American firepower would ensure the failure of Thanh's proposed offensive.

[ 144 ] With the Politburo divided, it was agreed to study and debate the issue more.

[ 145 ] In July 1967, Hồ Chí Minh and most of the Politburo of the Communist Party met in a high-profile conference, where they concluded that the war had fallen into a stalemate. The American military presence forced the PAVN to expend the majority of their resources on maintaining the Hồ Chí Minh trail, rather than reinforcing their comrades' ranks in the South. Hồ seems to have agreed to Thanh's offensive because he wanted to see Vietnam reunified within his lifetime, and the increasingly ailing Hồ was painfully aware that he did not have much time left.

[ 146 ] With Hồ's permission, the Việt Cộng planned a massive offensive that would commence on 31 January 1968, to take much of the South by force and deal a heavy blow to the American military. The offensive was executed at great cost and with heavy casualties on Việt Cộng's political branches and armed forces. The scope of the action shocked the world, which until then had been assured that the Communists were "on the ropes". The optimistic spin that the American military command had sustained for years was no longer credible. The bombing of North Vietnam and the Hồ Chí Minh trail was halted, and American and Vietnamese negotiators held discussions on how the war might be ended. From then on, Hồ Chí Minh and his government's strategy materialized: Hanoi's terms would eventually be accepted not by engaging in conventional warfare against the might of the United States Army, but by wearing down American resolve through a prolonged guerilla conflict.

In early 1969, Hồ suffered a heart attack and was in increasingly bad health for the rest of the year.

[ 147 ] In July 1969, Jean Sainteny , a former French official in Vietnam who knew Hồ, secretly relayed a letter written to him from President Richard Nixon.

[ 147 ] Nixon's letter proposed working together to end this "tragic war", but also warned that if North Vietnam made no concessions at the peace talks in Paris by 1 November, Nixon would resort to "measures of great consequence and force".

[ 147 ] Hồ's reply letter, which Nixon received on 30 August 1969, welcomed peace talks with the U.S. to look for a way to end the war but made no concessions, as Nixon's threats made no impression on him.

[ 147 ] Personal life Hồ Chí Minh holding his goddaughter, baby Elizabeth (Babette) Aubrac, with Elizabeth's mother, Lucie , 1946.

In addition to being a politician, Hồ Chí Minh was also a writer, journalist, poet [ 148 ] and polyglot . His father was a scholar and teacher who received a high degree in the Nguyễn dynasty Imperial examination . Hồ was taught to master Classical Chinese at a young age. Before the August Revolution, he often wrote poetry in Chữ Hán , the Vietnamese name for the Chinese writing system. One of those is Poems from the Prison Diary , written when he was imprisoned by the police of the Republic of China . This poetry chronicle is Vietnam National Treasure No. 10 and was translated into many languages. It is used in Vietnamese high schools.

[ 149 ] After Vietnam gained independence from France, the new government exclusively promoted Chữ Quốc Ngữ (Vietnamese writing system in Latin characters) to eliminate illiteracy. Hồ started to create more poems in the modern Vietnamese language for dissemination to a wider range of readers. From when he became president until the appearance of serious health problems, a short poem of his was regularly published in the Tết (Lunar new year) edition of Nhân Dân newspaper to encourage his people in working, studying or fighting Americans in the new year.

Hồ Chí Minh in 1958 watching a football (soccer) game in Hanoi in his favorite fashion, with his closest comrade Prime Minister Phạm Văn Đồng seated to Hồ's left (photo right) Because he was in exile for nearly 30 years, Hồ could speak fluently as well as read and write professionally in several languages, including French, Russian, English, [ 150 ] Cantonese and Mandarin, as well as his mother tongue Vietnamese.

[ 12 ] In addition, he was reported to speak conversational Esperanto .

[ 151 ] In the 1920s, he was bureau chief/editor of many newspapers which he established to criticize French Colonial Government of Indochina and serving communist propaganda purposes. Examples are Le Paria (The Pariah) first published in Paris 1922 or Thanh Nien (Youth) first published on 21 June 1925 (21 June was named by The Socialist Republic of Vietnam Government as Vietnam Revolutionary Journalism Day ). In many state official visits to the Soviet Union and China, he often talked directly to their communist leaders in Russian and Mandarin without interpreters, especially about top-secret information. While being interviewed by Western journalists, he often spoke French, regardless of the language being spoken to him.

[ citation needed ] He spoke Vietnamese with a strong accent from his birthplace in the central province of Nghệ An , but he could still be widely understood throughout the country.

[ o ] As president, he held formal receptions for foreign heads of state and ambassadors at the Presidential Palace , but he did not personally live there. He ordered the building of a stilt house at the back of the palace, which is today known as the Presidential Palace Historical Site . His hobbies (according to his secretary Vũ Kỳ ) included reading, gardening, feeding fish (many of which are still [ when?

] living), and visiting schools and children's homes.

[ citation needed ] Hồ Chí Minh remained in Hanoi during his final years, demanding the unconditional withdrawal of all non-Vietnamese troops from South Vietnam. By 1969, with negotiations still dragging on, his health began to deteriorate from multiple health problems, including diabetes which prevented him from participating in further active politics. However, he insisted that his forces in the South continue fighting until all of Vietnam was reunited regardless of the length of time that it might take, believing that time was on his side.

[ citation needed ] Hồ Chí Minh's marriage has long been swathed in secrecy and mystery. He is believed by several scholars of Vietnamese history, to have married a Chinese midwife named Zeng Xueming in October 1926, [ 153 ] [ 44 ] although only being able to live with her for less than a year. Historian Peter Neville claimed that Hồ (at the time known as Ly Thuy [ 44 ] ) wanted to engage Zeng in the communist movements but she demonstrated a lack of ability and interest in it.

[ 153 ] In 1927, the mounting repression of Chiang Kai-shek's KMT against the Chinese Communists compelled Hồ to leave for Hong Kong, and his relationship with Zeng appeared to have ended at that time.

[ 154 ] In addition to the marriage with Zeng Xueming, there is a number of published studies indicating that Hồ had a romantic relationship with Nguyễn Thị Minh Khai .

[ 155 ] As a young and high-spirited female revolutionary, Minh Khai was delegated to Hong Kong to serve as an assistant to Ho Chi Minh in April 1930 and quickly drew Hồ's attention owing to her physical attractiveness.

[ 156 ] Hồ even approached the Far Eastern Bureau and requested permission to marry Minh Khai even though the previous marriage with Zeng remained legally valid.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] However, the marriage was unable to take place since Minh Khai had been detained by the British authorities in April 1931.

[ 159 ] [ 158 ] Death With the outcome of the Vietnam war still in question, Hồ Chí Minh died of heart failure at his home in Hanoi at 9:47 on the morning of 2 September 1969; he was 79 years old.

[ 5 ] [ 160 ] His embalmed body is currently on display in the President Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum in Ba Đình Square in Hanoi, despite his will which stated that he wanted to be cremated.

[ 12 ] : 565 Due to the sensitivity of 2 September being Independence Day , the North Vietnamese government originally delayed announcing Hồ's death until 3 September. A week of mourning for his death was decreed nationwide in North Vietnam from 4 to 11 September 1969.

[ 161 ] His funeral was attended by about 250,000 people and 5,000 official guests, which included many international mourners.

[ citation needed ] Representatives from 40 countries and regions were also presented. During the mourning period, North Vietnam received more than 22,000 condolences letters from 20 organizations and 110 countries across the world, such as France, Ethiopia , Yugoslavia , Cuba , Zambia , China, the Soviet Union and many others, mostly socialist countries.

[ citation needed ] He was not initially replaced as president; instead, a "collective leadership" composed of several ministers and military leaders took over, known as the Politburo. During North Vietnam's final campaign in 1975, a famous song written by composer Huy Thuc [ vi ] was often sung by PAVN soldiers: " Bác vẫn cùng chúng cháu hành quân " ("You are still marching with us, Uncle Hồ").

[ citation needed ] During the Fall of Saigon on 30 April 1975, several PAVN tanks displayed a poster with those same words on it. The day after the battle ended, on 1 May, veteran Australian journalist Denis Warner reported that "When the North Vietnamese marched into Saigon yesterday, they were led by a man who wasn't there".

[ 162 ] Legacy Hồ Chí Minh Mausoleum, Hanoi .

1954 postage stamp of Hồ Chí Minh with Chinese Leader Mao Zedong and Soviet Leader Georgy Malenkov .

The Socialist Republic of Vietnam still praises the legacy of Uncle Hồ ( Bác Hồ ), the Bringer of Light ( Chí Minh ). Although Hồ Chí Minh wished for his body to be cremated and his ashes spread to North, Central, and South Vietnam, the body instead is embalmed on view in a mausoleum . His image is featured in many public buildings and schoolrooms, and other displays of reverence.

[ 7 ] There is at least one temple dedicated to him, built in then Việt Cộng-controlled Vĩnh Long shortly after his death in 1970.

[ 163 ] Hồ Chí Minh statue outside Hồ Chí Minh City Hall, Hồ Chí Minh City In The Communist Road to Power in Vietnam (1982), Duiker suggests that Hồ Chí Minh's cult of personality is indicative of a larger legacy, one that drew on "elements traditional to the exercise of control and authority in Vietnamese society." [ 164 ] Duiker is drawn to an "irresistible and persuasive" comparison with China. As in China, leading party cadres were "most likely to be intellectuals descended [like Hồ Chí Minh] from rural scholar-gentry families" in the interior (the protectorates of Annam and Tonkin). Conversely, the pioneers of constitutional nationalism tended to be from the more "Westernised" coastal south (Saigon and surrounding French direct-rule Cochinchina ) and to be from "commercial families without a traditional Confucian background".

[ 165 ] In Vietnam, as in China, Communism presented itself as a root and branch rejection of Confucianism, condemned for its ritualism, inherent conservatism, and resistance to change. Once in power, the Vietnamese Communists may not have fought Confucianism "as bitterly as did their Chinese counterparts", but its social prestige was "essentially destroyed." In the political sphere, the puppet son of heaven (which had been weakly represented by the Bảo Đại) was replaced by the people's republic. Orthodox materialism accorded no place to heaven, gods, or other supernatural forces. Socialist collectivism undermined the tradition of the Confucian family leader ( Gia Truong ). The socialist conception of social equality destroyed the Confucian views of class.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] Temple devoted to Nguyễn Sinh Sắc , Hồ Chí Minh's father Duiker argues many were to find the new ideology "congenial" precisely because of its similarities with the teachings of the old Master: "the belief in one truth, embodied in quasi-sacred texts"; in "an anointed elite, trained in an all-embracing doctrine and responsible for leading the broad masses and indoctrinating them in proper thought and behavior"; in "the subordination of the individual to the community"; and in the perfectibility, through corrective action, of human nature.

[ 168 ] All of this, Duiker suggests, was in some manner present in the aura of the new Master, Chi Minh, "the bringer of light", "Uncle Hồ" to whom "all the desirable qualities of Confucian ethics" are ascribed.

[ 169 ] Under Hồ Chí Minh, Vietnamese Marxism developed, in effect, as a kind of "reformed Confucianism" revised to meet "the challenges of the modern era" and, not least among these, of "total mobilization in the struggle for national independence and state power." [ 170 ] U.S. President Joe Biden with Vietnamese Prime Minister Phạm Minh Chính in front of a statue of Hồ Chí Minh in Hanoi, September 2023 This "congeniality" with Confucian tradition was remarked on by Nguyen Khac Vien , a leading Hanoi intellectual of the 1960s and 70s. In "Confucianism and Marxism in Vietnam" [ 171 ] Nguyen Khac Vien, saw definite parallels between Confucian and party discipline, between the traditional scholar gentry and Hồ Chí Minh's party cadres.

[ 172 ] A completely different form of the cult of Hồ Chí Minh (and one tolerated by the government with uneasiness) is his identification in Vietnamese folk religion with the Jade Emperor , who supposedly incarnated again on earth as Hồ Chí Minh. Today, Hồ Chí Minh as the Jade Emperor is supposed to speak from the spirit world through Spiritualist mediums. The first such medium was one Madam Lang in the 1990s, but the cult acquired a significant number of followers through another medium, Madam Xoan. She established on 1 January 2001 the Đạo Ngọc Phật Hồ Chí Minh (the Way of Hồ Chí Minh as the Jade Buddha), also known as Đạo Bác Hồ (the Way of Uncle Hồ) at đền Hòa Bình (the Peace Temple) in Chí Linh-Sao Đỏ district of Hải Dương province. She then founded the Peace Society of Heavenly Mediums (Đoàn đồng thiên Hòa Bình). Reportedly, the movement had around 24,000 followers by 2014.

[ 173 ] The Vietnamese government's attempts to immortalize Hồ Chí Minh were also met with significant controversies and opposition. The regime is sensitive to anything that might question the official hagiography . This includes references to Hồ Chí Minh's personal life that might detract from the image of the dedicated "father of the revolution", [ 174 ] the "celibate married only to the cause of revolution".

[ 175 ] William Duiker's Ho Chi Minh: A Life (2000) was candid on the matter of Hồ Chí Minh's liaisons.

[ 12 ] : 605, fn 58 The government sought cuts in the Vietnamese translation [ 176 ] and banned distribution of an issue of the Far Eastern Economic Review , which carried a small item about the controversy.

[ 176 ] Many authors writing on Vietnam argued on the question of whether Hồ Chí Minh was fundamentally a nationalist or a Communist.

[ 177 ] Depictions of Hồ Chí Minh This article or section possibly contains original synthesis .

Source material should verifiably mention and relate to the main topic.

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ho Chí Minh pictured with children in a photo by state media Busts, statues, and memorial plaques and exhibitions are displayed in destinations on his extensive world journey in exile from 1911 to 1941 including France, the United Kingdom, Russia, China, and Thailand.

[ 178 ] Many activists and musicians wrote songs about Hồ Chí Minh and his revolution in different languages during the Vietnam War to demonstrate against the United States. Spanish songs were composed by Félix Pita Rodríguez , Carlos Puebla and Alí Primera . In addition, the Chilean folk singer Víctor Jara referenced Hồ Chí Minh in his anti-war song "El derecho de vivir en paz" ("The Right to Live in Peace").

Pete Seeger wrote "Teacher Uncle Ho".

Ewan MacColl produced "The Ballad of Ho Chi Minh" in 1954, describing "a man who is the father of the Indo-Chinese people, And his name [it] is Ho Chi Minh." [ 179 ] Russian songs about him were written by Vladimir Fere , and German songs about him were written by Kurt Demmler .

[ citation needed ] Various places, boulevards, and squares are named after him around the world, especially in Socialist states and former Communist states . In Russia, there is a Hồ Chí Minh square and monument in Moscow, a Hồ Chí Minh boulevard in Saint Petersburg , and a Hồ Chí Minh square in Ulyanovsk (the birthplace of Vladimir Lenin, a sister city of Vinh , the birthplace of Hồ Chí Minh). During the Vietnam War, the then- West Bengal government, in the hands of CPI(M) , renamed Harrington Street to Ho Chi Minh Sarani, which is also the location of the consulate general of the United States in Kolkata .

[ 180 ] According to the Vietnamese Ministry of Foreign Affairs , as many as 20 countries across Asia, Europe, America and Africa have erected monuments or statues in remembrance of Hồ Chí Minh.

[ 181 ] International influence Hồ Chí Minh bust in Kolkata, India Hồ Chí Minh is considered one of the most influential leaders in the world.

Time magazine listed him in the list of 100 Most Important People of the Twentieth Century ( Time 100) in 1998.

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] His thought and revolution inspired many leaders and people on a global scale in Asia, Africa and Latin America during the decolonization movement which occurred after World War II. As a communist, he was one of the few international figures who were relatively well regarded in the West, and did not face the same extent of international criticism as much as other Communist rulers and factions, even winning praise for his actions.

[ 184 ] In 1987, UNESCO officially recommended that its member states "join in the commemoration of the centenary of the birth of President Hồ Chí Minh by organizing various events as a tribute to his memory", considering "the important and many-sided contributions of President Hồ Chí Minh to the fields of culture, education and the arts" who "devoted his whole life to the national liberation of the Vietnamese people, contributing to the common struggle of peoples for peace, national independence, democracy, and social progress".

[ 185 ] One of Hồ Chí Minh's works, The Black Race , much of it originally written in French, highlights his views on the oppression of peoples from colonialism and imperialism in 20 written articles.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] Other books such as Revolution which published selected works and articles of Hồ Chí Minh in English also highlighted Hồ Chí Minh's interpretation and beliefs in socialism and communism, and in fighting against what he perceived to be evils stemming from capitalism, colonialism, and imperialism.

[ 188 ] See also Communism in Vietnam First Indochina War Vietnam War Explanatory notes ^ As President of North Vietnam from 2 July 1949 following the State of Vietnam 's proclamation of independence.

^ as First Secretary ^ President was also head of government at the time.

^ As Chairman of Provisional Revolutionary Government of Democratic Republic of Vietnam from 2 September to 31 December 1945, the President of Provisional Coalition Government of Democratic Republic of Vietnam from 1 January to 2 March 1946, the President of United Resistance Government of Democratic Republic of Vietnam from 2 March to 3 November 1946, and Chairman of United National Government of Democratic Republic of Vietnam from 1946 to 1955 ^ / ˌ h oʊ tʃ iː ˈ m ɪ n / HOH chee MIN ; [ 1 ] Vietnamese: [hò cǐ mīŋ] ⓘ , Saigon: [hò cǐ mɨn] .

^ Vietnamese: [ŋʷiə̌ˀn sīŋ kūŋm] ⓘ ^ a b His birth name appeared in a letter from the director of Collège Quốc học , dated 7 August 1908.

[ 2 ] ^ The North Vietnamese government initially announced his death on 3 September in order to prevent it from coinciding with National Day . In 1989, the Politburo of unified Vietnam revealed the change, along with changes which were made to his original will, and it revised the date of death to 2 September.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] ^ [ɓǎːk hò] .

^ including Nguyễn Tất Thành , Nguyễn Ái Quốc , Văn Ba and over 50–200 aliases.

^ including Hồ Chủ tịch ('President Hồ'), Người cha già của dân tộc (' Father of the people '), or 'Founding father of modern Vietnam' [ 8 ] [ 9 ] ^ In his application to the French Colonial School – "Nguyen Tat Thanh, born 1892 at Vinh, son of Mr. Nguyen Sinh Huy (sub doctor in literature)" ^ He told Paris Police (Surete) he was born 15 January 1894.

^ Dommen (2001), p.340 gives a lower estimate of 32,000 executions ^ He sometimes went on-air to deliver important political messages and encourage soldiers.

[ 152 ] [ page needed ] References ^ "Ho Chi Minh" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ Vũ Ngự Chiêu (23 October 2011).

"Vài vấn nạn lịch sử thế kỷ XX: Hồ Chí Minh – Nhà ngoại giao, 1945–1946" .

Hợp Lưu Magazine (in Vietnamese). Archived from the original on 7 January 2019 . Retrieved 10 December 2013 .

Note: See the document in French, from Centre des archives d'Outre-mer [CAOM] (Aix)/Gouvernement General de l'Indochine [GGI]/Fonds Residence Superieure d'Annam [RSA]/carton R1 , and the note in English at the end of the cited article ^ Trần Quốc Vượng.

"Lời truyền miệng dân gian về Hồ Chí Minh" . BBC Vietnamese . Retrieved 10 December 2013 .

^ Nguyễn Vĩnh Châu.

"Phỏng vấn sử gia Vũ Ngự Chiêu về những nghiên cứu lịch sử liên quan đến Hồ Chí Minh" .

Hợp Lưu Magazine . Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 10 December 2013 .

^ a b Nguyễn Xuân Tùng (18 September 2014).

"Giới thiệu những tư liệu về Di chúc của Chủ tịch Hồ Chí Minh" [Introduction to documents related to President Ho Chi Minh's will] (in Vietnamese).

Ministry of Justice (Vietnam) . Retrieved 1 October 2021 .

^ Ngo, Tam T. T. (2018).

"The Uncle Hồ religion in Vietnam" . In Dean, Kenneth; van der Veer, Peter (eds.).

The Secular in South, East, and Southeast Asia . Springer. p. 219.

ISBN 978-3-319-89369-3 .

^ a b Marsh, Viv (7 June 2012).

"Uncle Ho's legacy lives on in Vietnam" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2015 . Retrieved 2 December 2012 .

^ Watanabe, Musa (25 July 2014).

"Father of modern Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh" .

The OpenLab at New York City College of Technology . Retrieved 17 April 2023 .

^ Woolf, Chris (18 September 2017).

"The little-known story of Vietnamese communist leader Ho Chi Minh's admiration for the US" .

The World .

^ a b Gittinger, J. Price (1959).

"Communist Land Policy in North Viet Nam" .

Far Eastern Survey .

28 (8): 113– 126.

doi : 10.2307/3024603 .

ISSN 0362-8949 .

JSTOR 3024603 .

^ Teodoru, Daniel E. (1973).

"The Bloodbath Hypothesis: The Maoist Pattern in North Vietnam's Radical Land Reform" .

Southeast Asian Perspectives (9): 1– 79.

ISSN 0042-577X .

JSTOR 30176408 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Duiker, William J.

Ho Chi Minh: A Life . New York: Hyperion, 2000.

^ Duncanson 1957 , p. 85.

^ Pike 1976 .

^ "75 tên gọi, bút danh và bí danh của Chủ tịch Hồ Chí Minh" . 2020.

^ "Láng 5 hương nắng làng sen" . 2021.

^ Trần Dân Tiên 1994 , p. 42.

^ Yen Son. "Nguyen Ai Quoc, the Brilliant Champion of the Revolution." Thuong Tin Hanoi. 30 August 1945.

^ Ton That Thien 18, 1890 is the most likely year of his birth. There is troubling conflicting evidence, however. When he was arrested in Hong Kong in 1931, he attested in court documents that he was 36. The passport he used to enter Russia in 1921 also gave the year 1895 as his birth date. His application to the Colonial School in Paris gave his birth year as 1892 ^ Miller, Edward (2017). "Paths to Power". In Ward, Geoffrey C.; Burns, Ken (eds.).

The Vietnam War: An Intimate History . Knopf. p. 44.

ISBN 9780307700254 .

^ "Ngo Dinh Diem and ho Chi Minh" . nguoiviet.com. 3 November 2018.

^ Tucker 1999 , p. 42.

^ a b c d Quinn-Judge 2002 , p. 20.

^ Debolt, Abbe A; Baugess, James S (2011).

Encyclopedia of the Sixties: A Decade of Culture and Counterculture [2 volumes]: A Decade of Culture and Counterculture . Abc-Clio.

ISBN 978-1440801020 .

^ Duiker 2012 , p. 42.

^ "The Drayton Court Hotel" . Government of the United Kingdom . Retrieved 30 January 2013 .

^ Quinn-Judge 2002 , p. 25.

^ Forbes, Andrew; Henley, David (2012).

Vietnam Past and Present: The North . Chiang Mai, Thailand: Cognoscenti Books.

^ Harries, David.

"Maritime Sussex" .

Sussex Express . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 12 June 2015 .

^ Brocheux 2007 , p. 11.

^ Gisele Bousquet, Behind the Bamboo Hedge: The Impact of Homeland Politics in Parisian Vietnamese Community , University of Michigan Press, pp. 47–48 ^ Phong, Huy; Anh, Yen (1989).

"Unmasking Ho Chi Minh" .

Viet Quoc . Archived from the original on 10 May 2015 . Retrieved 11 June 2015 .

^ Huynh, Kim Kháhn, Vietnamese Communism, 1925–1945 . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1982; p. 60.

^ Tran Dan, Tien.

"Ho Chi Minh, Life and Work" .

Communist Party of Vietnam Online Newspaper . Gioi Publishers. Archived from the original on 17 June 2015 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ Reilly, Brett (2016). "Review: Embers of War by Fredrik Logevall".

Journal of Vietnamese Studies .

11 (1): 145– 151.

doi : 10.1525/jvs.2016.11.1.145 .

^ Reilly, Brett (17 June 2019).

"The Myth of the Wilsonian Moment" .

Wilson Center .

^ Dwyer, Ryle (13 August 2019).

"Death of MacSwiney had enormous significance as prisoners hunger strike drew global coverage" .

Irish Examiner . Retrieved 1 October 2023 .

^ "호찌민 감시 佛 경찰문건 대거발굴…한국 임시정부 활약상 생생" . 15 December 2018. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018.

^ Bourdeaux, Pascal (2012). "Notes on an Unpublished Letter by Hồ Chí Minh to a French Pastor (September 8, 1921) or the Art of Dissenting Evangelization".

Journal of Vietnamese Studies .

7 (2). Translated by Abu-Zeid, Kareem James: 8– 28.

doi : 10.1525/vs.2012.7.2.8 .

^ Brocheux 2007 , p. 21.

^ Tôn Thất Thiện 1990 , pp. 23–24.

^ "The Learning Network" .

The New York Times .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Li, Xiaobing (2018).

The Cold War in East Asia . Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-138-65179-1 .

^ a b c d e f Brocheux 2007 , p. 39.

^ a b Davidson, Phillip B., Vietnam at War: The History: 1946–1975 (1991), p. 4.

Hoàng Văn Chí .

From Colonialism to Communism (1964), p. 18.

^ Quinn-Judge, Sophie (2003).

Ho Chi Minh: The Missing Years, 1919-1941 . C. Hurst & Co. Publishers. pp.

75– 77.

ISBN 9781850656586 .

^ McCargo, Duncan (2004).

Rethinking Vietnam . Routledge. p. 30.

ISBN 9781134374397 .

^ Brocheux 2007 , p. 44 and xiii.

^ a b c "Then & now: In the name of the law" . 30 June 2013.

^ a b Moise 1988 , p. 11.

^ Brocheux 2007 , pp. 57–58.

^ "Ho Chi Minh" .

u-s-history.com . Archived from the original on 13 February 2018 . Retrieved 25 July 2014 .

^ Tôn Thất Thiện 1990 .

^ Hong Ha (2010).

Bác Hồ Trên Đất Nước Lê-Nin . Nhà Xuất Bản Thanh Niên.

[ page needed ] ^ Tôn Thất Thiện 1990 , p. 39.

^ "Ho Chi Minh | Biography, Presidency, & Facts" .

www.britannica.com . 20 June 2023 . Retrieved 16 July 2023 .

^ Hunt 2016 , p. 124.

^ "Ho Chi Minh Was Noted for Success in Blending Nationalism and Communism" , The New York Times ^ Brocheux 2007 , p. 198.

^ Interview with Archimedes L. A. Patti, 1981 Archived 1 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine , ^ "Interview with OSS officer Carleton Swift, 1981" . Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 January 2013 .

^ Zinn 1995 , p. 460.

^ "Collection of Letters by Ho Chi Minh" . Rationalrevolution.net . Retrieved 26 September 2009 .

^ Zinn 1995 , p. 461.

^ a b "Ben-gurion Reveals Suggestion of North Vietnam's Communist Leader" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 8 November 1966 . Retrieved 5 September 2015 .

^ a b "Israel Was Everything" .

The New York Times . 21 June 1987 . Retrieved 5 September 2015 .

^ "Vietnam Declaration of Independence" . Coombs.anu.edu.au. 2 September 1945. Archived from the original on 6 October 2009 . Retrieved 26 September 2009 .

^ Neville, Peter (2019).

Ho Chi Minh . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-69411-8 .

^ "Ho Chi Minh" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 18 July 2023 .

^ Karnow 1983 .

^ "Liam Kelley | Department of History" . 14 October 2014. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014.

^ "Chiang Kai-shek and Vietnam in 1945" . 25 April 2013. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ Currey, Cecil B.

Victory At Any Cost (Washington: Brassey's, 1997), p. 126 ^ Tucker, Spencer.

Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: a political, social, and military history (vol. 2), 1998 [ page needed ] ^ Turner 1975 , pp. 57–59, 67–69, 74.

^ "Myths of the Vietnam War".

Southeast Asian Perspectives . September 1972. pp.

14– 18.

^ Dommen 2001 , pp. 153–154.

^ Colvin, John.

Giap: the Volcano under the Snow (New York: Soho Press, 1996), p. 51 ^ Ngo Van (2000) Viet-nam 1920–1945: Révolution et Contre-révolution sous la domination coloniale , Paris: Nautilus Editions [ page needed ] ^ Daniel Guérin (1954) Aux services des colonises, 1930–1953 , Editions Minuit, Paris, p. 22 ^ Christof Hartmann (2001). "Vietnam". In Dieter Nohlen , Florian Grotz & Christof Hartmann (ed.).

Elections in Asia: A data handbook, Volume II . p. 325, 336.

ISBN 0-19-924959-8 .

^ A nationwide call for resistance [ vi ] ^ "Lone Sentry: New Weapons for Jap Tank Hunters (U.S. WWII Intelligence Bulletin, March 1945)" .

lonesentry.com . Retrieved 27 May 2016 .

^ Fall 1967 , p. 88.

^ Luo, Guibo. pp. 233–236 ^ Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, "Chronology", p. 45.

^ McMaster, H.R. (1997) "Dereliction of Duty: Lyndon Johnson, Robert McNamara, The Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Lies that Led to Vietnam", p. 35.

^ Hansen, Peter (2009). "Bắc Di Cư: Catholic Refugees from the North of Vietnam, and Their Role in the Southern Republic, 1954–1959".

Journal of Vietnamese Studies .

4 (3). Berkeley, California: University of California Press: 173– 211.

doi : 10.1525/vs.2009.4.3.173 .

^ Maclear, pp. 65–68.

^ Jacobs 2006 , pp. 43–53.

^ Turner 1975 , pp. 89, 91, 97.

^ Logevall 2012 , p. 610.

^ Turner 1975 , p. 107.

^ Logevall 2012 , p. 604.

^ Turner 1975 , p. 97.

^ Logevall 2012 , p. 603.

^ Turner 1975 , pp. 90, 97.

^ Turner 1975 , pp. 97–98.

^ Turner 1975 , p. 99.

^ Turner 1975 , pp. 95, 99–100.

^ Turner 1975 , p. 143.

^ Vu, Tuong (25 May 2007).

"Newly released documents on the land reform" (Mailing list). Vietnam Studies Group. Archived from the original on 1 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 November 2017 .

Thus the number of 13,500 executed people seems to be a low-end estimate of the real number. This is corroborated by Edwin Moise in his recent paper "Land Reform in North Vietnam, 1953–1956" presented at the 18th Annual Conference on SE Asian Studies, Center for SE Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley (February 2001). In this paper, Moise (7–9) modified his earlier estimate in his 1983 book (which was 5,000) and accepted an estimate of close to 15,000 executions. Moise made the case based on Hungarian reports provided by Balazs, but the document I cited above offers more direct evidence for his revised estimate. This document also suggests that the total number should be adjusted up some more, taking into consideration the later radical phase of the campaign, the unauthorized killings at the local level, and the suicides following arrest and torture (the central government bore less direct responsibility for these cases, however).

^ Szalontai, Balazs (November 2005).

"Political and Economic Crisis in North Vietnam, 1955–56" (PDF) .

Cold War History .

5 (4): 395– 426.

doi : 10.1080/14682740500284630 .

S2CID 153956945 . Retrieved 30 November 2017 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Vu 2010 , p. 103. "Clearly Vietnamese socialism followed a moderate path relative to China.  ... Yet the Vietnamese 'land reform' campaign ... testified that Vietnamese communists could be as radical and murderous as their comrades elsewhere".

^ Nhan, Vo Tri (1990).

Vietnam's Economic Policy Since 1975 (1st. ed.). Institute for Southeast Asian Studies. pp.

2– 3.

ISBN 978-981-3035-54-6 . Retrieved 8 July 2015 .

^ Szalontai, Balazs.

"Political and Economic Crisis in North Vietnam, 1955–56" (PDF) .

Cold War History (journal) . Retrieved 1 July 2023 .

^ a b Moise, pp. 237–268 ^ "Từ chức, thôi chức và những lần sửa sai thời Chủ tịch Hồ Chí Minh" .

^ Szalontai, p. 401 ^ a b c Ang 2002 , pp. 55–58, 76.

^ a b "The History Place – Vietnam War 1945–1960" . Retrieved 21 December 2017 .

^ The Economist , 26 February 1983.

^ Lind, 1999 ^ Ang 2002 , p. 21.

^ Langguth 2000 , p. 550.

^ Nguyen 2012 , p. 62.

^ Brocheux 2007 , p. 174.

^ a b c Karnow 1983 , p. 291.

^ Brocheux 2007 , p. 237.

^ Jacobs 2006 , p. 165.

^ a b c d Karnow 1983 , p. 292.

^ Langguth 2000 , pp. 233–234.

^ Shafer 1988 , p. 255.

^ Shafer 1988 , pp. 271–273.

^ Shafer 1988 , p. 271.

^ Gaiduk 2003 , p. 203.

^ Shafer 1988 , p. 272.

^ Karnow 1983 , pp. 340–342.

^ Karnow 1983 , p. 348.

^ Hunt 1993 , p. 15.

^ Langguth 2000 , p. 290.

^ Davidson, Vietnam at War: the history, 1946–1975 , 1988 [ page needed ] ^ "Vietnam Veterans Against the War: History of the U.S. War in Vietnam" .

vvaw.org .

^ a b Langguth 2000 , p. 355.

^ a b Langguth 2000 , p. 356.

^ Chen Jian. "China's Involvement in the Vietnam Conflict, 1964–69", China Quarterly , No. 142 (June 1995), pp. 366–369.

^ "China Admits Combat in Vietnam War" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 6 November 2017 . Retrieved 21 April 2018 .

^ Karnow 1983 , p. 456.

^ a b c Langguth 2000 , p. 413.

^ a b c Karnow 1983 , p. 492.

^ Karnow 1983 , pp. 492–493.

^ Karnow 1983 , p. 493.

^ a b Langguth 2000 , p. 439.

^ Langguth 2000 , pp. 439–440.

^ Langguth 2000 , p. 440.

^ Karnow 1983 , p. 535.

^ a b c d Karnow 1983 , p. 597.

^ Minh, Ho Chi (7 May 1968).

"Ho Chi Minh: From 'Prison Diary' " .

The Nation .

^ Translated version: French – Người tình nguyện vào ngục Bastille dịch "Nhật ký trong tù" Czech – by Ivo Vasiljev [ cs ] .

Korean – "Prison Diary" published in Korean Archived 16 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine by Ahn Kyong Hwan.

English – by Steve Bradbury, Tinfish Press Older version – by Aileen Palmer Spanish – [1] by Félix Pita Rodríguez Romanian – by ro:Constantin Lupeanu Russian – by Pavel Antokolsky ^ "1960s Interview with Ho Chi Minh, Vietnam" .

YouTube . Kinolibrary. 12 February 2015 . Retrieved 5 December 2023 .

^ Brown, Simon Leo (6 June 2014).

"Esperanto the language of love" .

ABC . Retrieved 29 May 2019 .

^ Marr 2013 .

^ a b Neville 2018 , p. 33.

^ Duiker 2000 , pp. 143–145, 198; Brocheux 2007 , p. 40; Neville 2018 , p. 33.

^ Duiker 2000 , pp. 198–189; Brocheux 2007 , pp. 62–63; Neville 2018 , p. 34; Lanzona & Rettig 2020 , p. 34. Quote: "In fact, Minh Khai managed to gain the attention of Nguyen Ai Quoc [...] whom she married in late 1930 or early 1931.".

^ Duiker 2000 , pp. 185, 198.

^ Brocheux 2007 , p. 63.

^ a b Duiker 2000 , p. 199.

^ Marr 1984 , p. 244.

^ Duiker 2000 , p.

561 .

^ "Ho Chi Minh dies of heart attack".

The Globe and Mail . 4 September 1969. p. 1.

^ The Sun News-Pictorial , 1 May 1975, p. 1.

^ "Đền Thờ Bác Hồ" [Temple of Uncle Hồ].

SkyDoor (in Vietnamese).

Vietnam National Administration of Tourism .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2011 . Retrieved 14 December 2011 .

^ Manfred McDowell, "Sky without Light: a Vietnamese Tragedy", New Politics , Vol XIII, No. 3, 2011, pp. 131–136, p. 133.

^ Duiker 1982 , p. 25.

^ Pham Duy Nghia (2005), "Confucianism and the conception of the law in Vietnam," Asian Socialism and Legal Change: The dynamics of Vietnamese and Chinese Reform, John Gillespie, Pip Nicholson eds., Australian National University Press, pp. 76–90, 83–84 ^ Pham, Duy Nghia (2005). "4 Confucianism and the conception of the law in Vietnam". In Gillespie, John; Nicholson, Pip (eds.).

Asian Socialism and Legal Change: The dynamics of Vietnamese and Chinese Reform (PDF) .

ANU Press . pp.

76– 90.

ISBN 978-1-920942-27-4 .

JSTOR j.ctt2jbjds.12 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 February 2022 . Retrieved 3 November 2019 .

^ See also R. Peerenboom (2001).'Globalization, path dependency and the limits of the law: administrative law reform and the rule of law in the PRC', Berkeley Journal of International Law , 19(2):161–264.

^ Duiker 1982 , pp. 26–28.

^ McDowell, p. 133 ^ "Confucianism and Marxism in Vietnam" in Nguyen Khac Vien, Tradition and Revolution in Vietnam , Berkeley, the Indochina Resource Center, 1974 ^ Stein Tonnesson, From Confucianism to Communism and Back: Vietnam 1925–1995 Archived 1 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine , paper presented to the Norwegian Association of Development Studies, "State and Society in East Asia", 29 April – 2 May 1993.

^ Chung Van Hoang, New Religions and State's Response to Religious Diversification in Contemporary Vietnam: Tensions from the Reinvention of the Sacred , Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, 87–107.

^ Dinh, Thuy.

"The Writer's Life Stephen B. Young and Hoa Pham Young: Painting in Lacquer" .

The Zenith by Duong Thu Huong . Da Mau magazine . Retrieved 25 December 2013 .

^ Baker, Mark (15 August 2002).

"Uncle Ho: a legend on the battlefield and in the boudoir" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 25 December 2013 .

^ a b "Great 'Uncle Ho' may have been a mere mortal" .

The Age . 15 August 2002 . Retrieved 2 August 2009 .

^ Moise 1988 , p. 6.

^ The places where President Ho Chi Minh lived and worked in Thailand Archived 6 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Vietnam Breaking News, 19 May 2017 ^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : "The Ballad of Ho Chi Minh – Ewan MacColl with the London Critics Group" .

Youtube . 19 May 2011 . Retrieved 21 June 2021 .

^ "Layers of History – Most Indian street names honor little men for the wrong reasons" .

www.telegraphindia.com .

^ "Remembering Vietnam's late President Ho Chi Minh in foreign countries – Tuoi Tre News" . 4 December 2014. Archived from the original on 23 May 2017 . Retrieved 29 May 2017 .

^ "Time Magazine – U.S. Edition – April 13, 1998 Vol. 151 No. 14" .

Time .

^ Karnow, Stanley (13 April 1998).

"Ho Chi Minh" .

Time . Archived from the original on 9 March 2018 . Retrieved 29 May 2017 – via content.time.com.

^ "[Ho Chi Minh: A Life] | C-SPAN.org" .

www.c-span.org .

^ "UNESCO. General Conference; 24th; Records of the General Conference, 24th session, Paris, 20 October to 20 November 1987, v. 1: Resolutions; 1988" (PDF) . Retrieved 26 September 2009 .

^ VietnamPlus (20 February 2022).

"Foreign scholars highlights values of President Ho Chi Minh's writings on anti-racism | Society | Vietnam+ (VietnamPlus)" .

VietnamPlus . Retrieved 20 February 2022 .

^ "The Black Race by Ho Chi Minh by New Vietnam Publishing – Issuu" .

issuu.com . 20 February 2021. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022 . Retrieved 20 February 2022 .

^ HoChiMinhOnRevolution-SelectedWritings.pdf Bibliography Ang, Cheng Guan (2002).

The Vietnam War from the Other Side . RoutledgeCurzon. pp.

55– 58, 76.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1615-9 .

Brocheux, Pierre (2007).

Ho Chi Minh: A Biography . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-85062-9 .

Dommen, Arthur J. (2001).

The Indochinese Experience of the French and the Americans . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0253338549 .

Duncanson, Dennis J (1957). "Ho Chi Minh in Hong Kong 1931–1932".

The China Quarterly .

57 (Jan–Mar 1957): 85.

Duiker, William J.

(1982).

The Communist Road to Power in Vietnam . Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.

OCLC 864836133 .

—————— (2000).

Ho Chi Minh: A Life . Hyperion Books.

ISBN 978-0786887019 . Archived from the original on 13 May 2021 . Retrieved 13 May 2021 .

—————— (2012).

Ho Chi Minh: A Life . Hachette Books.

ISBN 978-1401305611 .

Fall, Bernard. B (1967).

Last Reflections on a War . Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0805203295 .

Gaiduk, Ilya (2003).

Confronting Vietnam: Soviet Policy Toward the Indochina Conflict, 1954–1963 . Stanford: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0804747121 .

Forbes, Andrew; Henley, David (2012).

Vietnam Past and Present: The North . Chiang Mai, Thailand: Cognoscenti Books.

Hunt, David (1993).

The American War in Vietnam . SEAP Publications.

ISBN 0877271313 .

Hunt, Michael H. (2016).

The World Transformed 1945 To the Present . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 125.

ISBN 978-0-19-937102-0 .

Jacobs, Seth (2006).

Cold War Mandarin: Ngo Dinh Diem and the Origins of America's War in Vietnam, 1950–1963 . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0742573956 .

Karnow, Stanley (1983).

Vietnam: A History . New York: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0712600101 .

Langguth, A.J.

(2000).

Our Vietnam: The War 1954–1975 . New York: Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0743212441 .

[ permanent dead link ] Lanzona, V.A.; Rettig, F. (2020).

Women Warriors in Southeast Asia . Routledge Studies in the Modern History of Asia. Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-317-57184-1 . Retrieved 19 November 2021 .

Logevall, Fredrik (2012).

Embers of War: The fall of an Empire and the making of America's Vietnam . Random House.

ISBN 978-0-679-64519-1 .

Marr, David G. (2013).

Vietnam: State, War, and Revolution (1945–1946) . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0520954977 .

—————— (1984).

Vietnamese Tradition on Trial, 1920–1945 . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-90744-7 . Retrieved 17 November 2021 .

Moise, Edwin E. (1988). "Nationalism and Communism in Vietnam".

Journal of Third World Studies .

5 (2). University Press of Florida: 6– 22.

JSTOR 45193059 .

Neville, Peter (2018). "Chapter 3: Survival".

Ho Chi Minh . Routledge Historical Biographies. Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-429-82822-5 . Retrieved 17 November 2021 .

Nguyen, Lien-Hang T. (2012).

Hanoi's War: An International History of the War for Peace in Vietnam . University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 9780807882696 .

Pike, Douglas (1976).

Ho Chi Minh: A Post-War Re-evaluation . 30th Annual Congress of Orientalists. Mexico City . Retrieved 21 December 2017 – via Vietnam Center and Sam Johnson Vietnam Archive.

Quinn-Judge, Sophie (2002).

Ho Chi Minh: The Missing Years 1919–1941 .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0520235335 .

Shafer, D. Michael (1988).

Deadly Paradigms: The Failure of U.S. Counterinsurgency Policy . Vol. 1032. Princeton University Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt7zvtwm .

ISBN 978-1400860586 .

JSTOR j.ctt7zvtwm .

Trần Dân Tiên (1994).

Những mẩu chuyện về đời hoạt động của Hồ Chủ tịch [The tales of the life of President Ho] . Nhà xuất bản Chính trị quốc gia [National Political Publishing House].

Tôn Thất Thiện (1990).

Ho Chi Minh and the Comintern . Singapore: Information and Resource Center.

ISBN 978-9810021399 .

Tucker, Spencer C. (1999).

Vietnam . UCL Press.

ISBN 978-1857289220 .

Turner, Robert F. (1975).

Vietnamese Communism: Its Origin and Development . Hoover Institution Press.

Valentino, Benjamin (2005).

Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the 20th Century .

Cornell University Press .

ISBN 978-0801472732 .

Vu, Tuong (2010).

Paths to Development in Asia: South Korea, Vietnam, China, and Indonesia .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1139489010 .

Zinn, Howard (1995).

A People's History of the United States: 1492–present . New York: Harper Perennial. pp.

460– 461.

ISBN 978-0-06-092643-4 .

Further reading Library resources about Ho Chi Minh Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Primary sources Hồ Chí Minh toàn tập . Nhà xuất bản Chính trị quốc gia.

Fall, Bernard B.

, ed. (1967).

Ho Chi Minh on Revolution and War: Selected Writings 1920–1966 . New American Library.

Minh, Hồ Chí (2012). "Unpublished Letter by Hồ Chí Minh to a French Pastor".

Journal of Vietnamese Studies .

7 (2). Translated by Abu-Zeid, Kareem James: 1– 7.

doi : 10.1525/vs.2012.7.2.1 .

Biography Duiker, William J.

(2001).

Ho Chi Minh: A Life . New York: Hyperion.

Halberstam, David (1971).

Ho . Rowman & Littlefield.

Khắc Huyên, N. (1971).

Vision Accomplished? The Enigma of Ho Chi Minh . The Macmillan Company.

Lacouture, Jean (1968) [1968, "Ho Chi Minh", Allen Lane].

Ho Chi Minh: A Political Biography . Random House.

Morris, Virginia; Hills, Clive (2018).

Ho Chi Minh's Blueprint for Revolution: In the Words of Vietnamese Strategists and Operatives . McFarland & Co.

Osborne, Milton (November 1980). "Ho Chi Minh".

History Today . Vol. 30, no. 11. pp.

40– 46.

Tôn Thất Thiện (1990).

Was Ho Chi Minh a Nationalist? Ho Chi Minh and the Comintern (PDF) . Singapore: Information and Resource Centre. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 24 July 2025 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) External links English Wikisource has original works by or about: Hồ Chí Minh Wikiquote has quotations related to Ho Chi Minh .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Hồ Chí Minh ( category ) Chi Minh Ho (1890–1969) at IMDb Works by or about Ho Chi Minh at the Internet Archive Hồ Chí Minh obituary at The New York Times (4 September 1969) Time 100: Hồ Chí Minh (archived 31 May 2000) Ho Chi Minh Selected Writings ( PDF ) Hồ Chí Minh's biography (archived 14 July 2007) Satellite photo of the mausoleum on Google Maps Final Tribute to Hồ from the Central Committee of the Vietnam Workers' Party [ permanent dead link ] Bibliography: Writings by and about Hồ Chí Minh Political offices Preceded by Bảo Đại as Emperor President of North Vietnam 2 September 1945 – 2 September 1969 Succeeded by Tôn Đức Thắng Preceded by Trần Trọng Kim as Prime Minister of the Empire of Vietnam Prime Minister of North Vietnam 2 September 1945 – 20 September 1955 Succeeded by Phạm Văn Đồng Party political offices Preceded by New title Chairman of the Workers' Party of Vietnam 1951–1969 Succeeded by None Preceded by Trường Chinh First Secretary of the Workers' Party of Vietnam 1956–1960 Succeeded by Lê Duẩn Links to related articles v t e Vietnamese independence movements Events Cochinchina campaign Siege of Saigon Tonkin campaign Cần Vương movement Pacification of Tonkin Bãi Sậy uprising Hanoi Poison Plot Yên Thế Insurrection World War I 1916 Cochinchina uprising Thái Nguyên uprising Bazin assassination Yên Bái mutiny Nghệ-Tĩnh Soviets World War II 1940 Cochinchina uprising Japanese coup d'état in French Indochina August Revolution Declaration of independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam First Indochina War Battle of Dien Bien Phu Geneva Conference Organisations Duy Tân Hội Tonkin Free School Đông Du Nguyễn dynasty Empire of Vietnam Việt Nam Quang Phục Hội Vietnamese Revolutionary Youth League Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng Communist Party of Vietnam Viet Minh State of Vietnam Uprising leaders Phạm Bành Nguyễn Quang Bích Võ Duy Dương Trương Định Phan Xích Long Nguyễn Xuân Ôn Phan Đình Phùng Tống Duy Tân Hoàng Hoa Thám Nguyễn Thiện Thuật Tôn Thất Thuyết Cầm Bá Thước Đinh Công Tráng Nguyễn Trung Trực Revolutionaries Lương Văn Can Trần Quý Cáp Phan Bội Châu Cường Để Phan Châu Trinh Huỳnh Thúc Kháng Ngô Đức Kế Nguyễn Thần Hiến Nguyễn Thượng Hiền Nguyễn Thái Học Ho Chi Minh Nguyễn An Ninh Nguyễn Quyền Nguyễn Thành Tạ Thu Thâu Phan Văn Trường Trần Cao Vân Vũ Hồng Khanh Emperors Tự Đức Hàm Nghi Thành Thái Duy Tân Bảo Đại French rulers Albert Sarraut Pierre Pasquier Jean Decoux French Indochina Governor-General French protectorate of Annam Administrator French protectorate of Tonkin Administrator French colony of Cochinchina Administrator Collaborators Hoàng Cao Khải Trần Bá Lộc Nguyễn Trọng Hợp Huỳnh Công Tấn Nguyễn Thân Lê Hoan Wars in Vietnam independence movement v t e Heads of state of Vietnam since 1945 Empire of Vietnam (1945) Empire of Vietnam Bảo Đại Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam; 1945–1976) North Vietnam Ho Chi Minh Huỳnh Thúc Kháng 1 Tôn Đức Thắng State / Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam; 1949–1975) South Vietnam Bảo Đại Ngô Đình Diệm Dương Văn Minh 2 Nguyễn Khánh 2 Provisional Leadership Committee Dương Văn Minh 2 Phan Khắc Sửu 2 Nguyễn Văn Thiệu 2 Trần Văn Hương Dương Văn Minh Socialist Republic of Vietnam (1976–present) Vietnam Tôn Đức Thắng Nguyễn Hữu Thọ 1 Trường Chinh 3 Võ Chí Công 3 Lê Đức Anh Trần Đức Lương Nguyễn Minh Triết Trương Tấn Sang Trần Đại Quang Đặng Thị Ngọc Thịnh 1 Nguyễn Phú Trọng Nguyễn Xuân Phúc Võ Thị Ánh Xuân 1 Võ Văn Thưởng Võ Thị Ánh Xuân 1 Tô Lâm Lương Cường 1 acting 2 military 3 Chairman of the Council of State v t e Prime ministers of Vietnam since 1945 Empire of Vietnam (1945) Empire of Vietnam Trần Trọng Kim Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam; 1945–1976) North Vietnam Ho Chi Minh Huỳnh Thúc Kháng 1 Phạm Văn Đồng Republic of Cochinchina (1946–1949) Republic of Cochinchina Nguyễn Văn Thinh Lê Văn Hoạch Nguyễn Văn Xuân Trần Văn Hữu Provisional Central Government of Vietnam (1948–1949) Nguyễn Văn Xuân State / Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam; 1949–1975) South Vietnam Bảo Đại Nguyễn Phan Long Trần Văn Hữu Nguyễn Văn Tâm Bửu Lộc Phan Huy Quát Ngô Đình Diệm Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ 2 Nguyễn Khánh 2 Nguyễn Xuân Oánh 1, 2 Nguyễn Khánh 2 Trần Văn Hương 2 Nguyễn Xuân Oánh 1, 2 Phan Huy Quát 2 Nguyễn Cao Kỳ 2 Nguyễn Văn Lộc Trần Văn Hương Trần Thiện Khiêm Nguyễn Bá Cẩn Vũ Văn Mẫu Socialist Republic of Vietnam (1976–present) Vietnam Phạm Văn Đồng Phạm Hùng Võ Văn Kiệt 1 Đỗ Mười Võ Văn Kiệt Phan Văn Khải Nguyễn Tấn Dũng Nguyễn Xuân Phúc Phạm Minh Chính 1 acting 2 head of a military government v t e Communist Party of Vietnam Central Committee General Secretary Trần Phú (1930–31) Lê Hồng Phong (1931–36) Hà Huy Tập (1936–38) Nguyễn Văn Cừ (1938–40) Trường Chinh (1940–56) Hồ Chí Minh (1956–1960) Lê Duẩn (1960–86) Trường Chinh (Jul.–Dec. 1986) Nguyễn Văn Linh (1986–91) Đỗ Mười (1991–97) Lê Khả Phiêu (1997–01) Nông Đức Mạnh (2001–11) Nguyễn Phú Trọng (2011–2024) Tô Lâm (2024–present) Permanent Member Nguyễn Duy Trinh (1976–82) Lê Đức Thọ (1980–82) Lê Thanh Nghị (1980–82) Võ Chí Công (1982–86) Nguyễn Văn Linh (June–Dec. 1986) Đỗ Mười (1986–88) Nguyễn Thanh Bình (1988–91) Lê Đức Anh (1991–92) Đào Duy Tùng (1991–96) Lê Khả Phiêu (1996–97) Phạm Thế Duyệt (1998–01) Nguyễn Phú Trọng (1999–01) Trần Đình Hoan (Apr.–Jul. 2001) Phan Diễn (2002–06) Trương Tấn Sang (2006–11) Lê Hồng Anh (2011–16) Đinh Thế Huynh (2016–18) Trần Quốc Vượng (2018–21) Võ Văn Thưởng (2021–2023) Trương Thị Mai (2023–2024) Lương Cường (May - October 2024) Trần Cẩm Tú (2024-present) Decision-making bodies Politburo Secretariat Central Military Commission Central Inspection Commission Apparatus Commission for External Relations Central Office Mass Mobilization Commission Commission for Information and Education Organisation Commission Theoretical Council Hồ Chí Minh National Academy of Politics and Public Administration National Political Publishing House – The Truth Nhân Dân The Communist Newspaper Steering committees Anti-corruption Central Highlands Judicial Reform Northwest Southwest National meetings National Congress 1st (1935) 2nd (1951) 3rd (1960) 4th (1976) 5th (1982) 6th (1986) 7th (1991) 8th (1996) 9th (2001) 10th (2006) 11th (2011) 12th (2016) 13th (2021) Leadership sittings Elected by the Central Committee Politburo 1st: 1935–51 2nd: 1951–60 3rd: 1960–76 4th: 1976–82 5th: 1982–86 6th: 1986–91 7th: 1991–96 8th: 1996–01 ( Enlarged & Standing ) 9th: 2001–06 10th: 2006–11 11th: 2011–16 12th: 2016–21 13th: 2021–present Secretariat 2nd: 1951–60 3rd: 1960–76 4th: 1976–82 5th: 1982–86 6th: 1986–91 7th: 1991–96 9th: 2001–06 10th: 2006–11 11th: 2011–16 12th: 2016–21 13th: 2021– Military Commission 1946–48 1952–60 1960–76 1976–82 1980–85 1985–90 1990–95 1995–00 2000–05 2005–10 2010–15 2015–20 2020–25 Inspection Commission 1st: 1948–51 2nd: 1951–60 3rd: 1960–76 4th: 1976–82 5th: 1982–86 6th: 1986–91 7th: 1991–96 8th: 1996–01 9th: 2001–06 10th: 2006–11 11th: 2011–16 12th: 2016–21 13th: 2021–present Elected by Congress Central Committee Provisional: 1930–35 1st: 1935–51 2nd: 1951–60 3rd: 1960–76 4th: 1976–82 5th: 1982–86 6th: 1986–91 7th: 1991–96 8th: 1996–01 9th: 2001–06 10th: 2006–11 11th: 2011–16 12th: 2016–21 ( Members Alternates Directly Subordinated Organs ) 13th: 2021–present Wider organisation Other organs Constitution Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union Ho Chi Minh Young Pioneer Organization Vietnam People's Armed Forces Ideology Ho Chi Minh Thought Marxism–Leninism Socialist-oriented market economy Đổi Mới v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e Ho Chi Minh Thought Basic concepts Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Marxism–Leninism Social Morality Land Reform Self-criticism Socialist-oriented market economy Key figures Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Le Duan Nguyễn Văn Linh Đỗ Mười Nông Đức Mạnh Nguyễn Phú Trọng Organizations Communist Party of Vietnam Vietnamese Fatherland Front Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union Key works Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam The Path Which Led Me To Leninism The Last Testament of Ho Chi Minh The Vietnamese Revolution: Fundamental Problems, Essential Tasks Renewal in Việt Nam: Theory and Reality Related topics Politics of Vietnam Communism in Vietnam History of the Communist Party of Vietnam Five-Year Plans of Vietnam 6th National Congress of the Communist Party of Vietnam Việt Minh Vietnam War North Vietnam Viet Cong Vietnam Communism Socialism Politics v t e Declarations of independence of Vietnam Nam quốc sơn hà ( Lý Thường Kiệt ) Bình Ngô đại cáo ( Nguyễn Trãi ) Tuyên ngôn độc lập ( Hồ Chí Minh ) Portals : Communism Socialism Politics Literature Asia Vietnam Biography Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ho_Chi_Minh&oldid=1306502326 " Categories : Ho Chi Minh 1890 births 1969 deaths Ho Chi Minh family Age controversies 20th-century atheists 20th-century Vietnamese poets Anti-revisionists Communist University of the Toilers of the East alumni Ministers of foreign affairs of Vietnam 20th-century Vietnamese diplomats General secretaries of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Vietnam Government ministers of Vietnam Left-wing nationalism Members of the 1st Standing Committee of the Indochinese Communist Party Members of the 2nd Politburo of the Workers' Party of Vietnam Members of the 3rd Politburo of the Workers' Party of Vietnam Members of the 2nd Secretariat of the Workers' Party of Vietnam Members of the 1st Central Committee of the Indochinese Communist Party Members of the 2nd Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Vietnam Members of the 3rd Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Vietnam North Vietnam Pastry chefs People from Nghệ An province People of the Cold War People of the First Indochina War Political party founders Presidents of Vietnam Prime ministers of Vietnam Recipients of the Order of Lenin Resistance members against Imperial Japan Viet Minh members Vietnamese anti-capitalists Vietnamese anti-imperialists Vietnamese atheists Vietnamese communists Vietnamese expatriates in China Vietnamese expatriates in France Vietnamese expatriates in Hong Kong Vietnamese expatriates in the Soviet Union Vietnamese expatriates in the United Kingdom Vietnamese independence activists Vietnamese male poets Vietnamese Marxists Vietnamese nationalists Vietnamese people of the Vietnam War Vietnamese revolutionaries Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with Vietnamese IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2021 CS1 Vietnamese-language sources (vi) Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2025 Articles with hAudio microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from October 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles that may contain original research from March 2022 Articles with dead external links from February 2024 CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with dead external links from November 2017 S-bef: 'before' parameter begins with the word 'new' This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 02:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ho Chi Minh 125 languages Add topic

