Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Family 2 Early church career 3 Episcopate and cardinalate 4 Pontificate 5 Death 6 Legacy 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Pope Callixtus III 76 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Head of the Catholic Church from 1455 to 1458 "Calixtus III" and "Calistus III" redirect here. For the antipope, see Antipope Callixtus III .

Pope Callixtus III Bishop of Rome Portrait by Sano di Pietro , 1455 Church Catholic Church Papacy began 8 April 1455 Papacy ended 6 August 1458 Predecessor Nicholas V Successor Pius II Previous post(s) Vice-Chancellor of the University of Lerida (1420–1423) Apostolic Administrator of Mallorca (1424–1429) Bishop of Valencia (1429–1455) Cardinal-Priest of Santi Quattro Coronati (1444–1455) Orders Consecration 31 August 1429 by Pierre de Foix Created cardinal 2 May 1444 by Eugene IV Personal details Born Alfons de Borja 31 December 1378 Canals , Valencia , Crown of Aragon Died 6 August 1458 (aged 79) Rome , Papal States Parents Juan Domingo de Borja Francina Llançol Education University of Lleida Coat of arms Other popes  named Callixtus Papal styles of Pope Callixtus III Reference style His Holiness Spoken style Your Holiness Religious style Holy Father Posthumous style None Pope Callixtus III ( Italian : Callisto III , Valencian : Calixt III , Spanish : Calixto III ; 31 December 1378 – 6 August 1458), born Alonso de Borja, but referred to in English-language accounts as Alfonso de Borgia as a member of the House of Borgia , was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 8 April 1455 to his death, in August 1458.

Borgia spent his early career as a professor of law at the University of Lleida ; he later served as a diplomat for the kings of Aragon . He became a tutor for King Alfonso V 's illegitimate son Ferdinand . After arranging a reconciliation between Alfonso and Pope Martin V , Borgia was made Bishop of Valencia.

In 1444, Pope Eugene IV named him a cardinal , and Borgia became a member of the Roman Curia. During the siege of Belgrade (1456) , Callixtus initiated the custom that bells be rung at midday to remind the faithful to pray for the crusaders. The tradition of the Angelus noon bell still exists in most Catholic churches to this day. He was also responsible for the retrial of Joan of Arc that saw her vindicated. He appointed two nephews as cardinals , one of whom became Pope Alexander VI . He is the last pope to date to take on the pontifical name "Callixtus".

Family [ edit ] Alfonso de Borgia was born in La Torreta in 1378. La Torreta was at the time in the Señorío de Torre de Canals (but is now a neighborhood of Novetlè ).

[ 1 ] At the time he was born in the Kingdom of Valencia under the Crown of Aragon . He was the eldest child of Juan Domingo de Borja y Doncel and Francina Llançol. His sister Isabel married Jofré Llançol i Escrivà (son of Rodrigo Gil de Borja y Fennolet ), and become the mother of Pedro Luis de Borja and Pope Alexander VI . His other sister Catalina became of the mother of Luis de Milà y de Borja .

Alfonso was baptized at Saint Mary's Basilica in Xativa , where he is honored with a statue in his memory.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Early church career [ edit ] Borgia studied grammar, logic and the arts in Valencia and went in 1392 to the University of Lleida where he obtained a doctorate in both canon law and civil law . His early career was spent as a professor of law at the University of Lleida. Around 1411, he attended a sermon by Vincent Ferrer . Afterward, the Dominican said to the future pope: "My son, you one day will be called to be the ornament of your house and of your country. You will be invested with the highest dignity that can fall to the lot of man. After my death, I shall be the object of your special honour. Endeavor to persevere in a life of virtue." [ 4 ] Later, as pope, Borgia canonized Ferrer on 3 June 1455.

[ 5 ] Borgia was chosen as a delegate of the Diocese of Lerida to the Council of Constance in 1416, but did not partake in the proceedings as King Alfonso V of Aragon was opposed to the council. Because of this he went to Barcelona as a representative of his diocese in a synod. Borgia cared strongly for the reestablishment of the unity of the church; his influence with the Aragonese monarch was the factor that allowed for the conclusion of the accord between the king and the new pope.

In 1418, he was named as the rector of San Nicolas of Valencia. He was also the vice-chancellor of the University of Lleida from 1420 to 1423. In 1424, he resigned his position and dedicated his service to the Aragonese king. In 1424, he was named as the apostolic administrator of the see of Mallorca. It was at that time that the king desired that he be made a cardinal ; Pope Martin V refused the request. During the Great Western Schism he supported Antipope Benedict XIII and was also the driving force behind Antipope Clement VIII 's submission to Pope Martin V in 1429.

[ 6 ] He then served as a diplomat to the kings of Aragon , especially during the Council of Basel (1431–1439).

Episcopate and cardinalate [ edit ] Cardinal Borgia Borgia was appointed Bishop of Valencia by Pope Martin V on 20 August 1429 and was consecrated on 31 August 1429. He authorized Pedro Llorens to take possession of the see in his name.

[ 7 ] Borgia also tutored Alfonso V's illegitimate son Ferrante .

Pope Eugene IV elevated him to the cardinalate on 2 May 1444 after he managed to reconcile the pope and King Alfonso V of Aragon. He was elevated as the Cardinal-Priest of Santi Quattro Coronati . He took up his official residence in Rome and was a member of the Roman Curia . He participated in the papal conclave of 1447 that saw the election of Pope Nicholas V . He was known for an austere and charitable life.

Borgia's coat of arms after he was consecrated featured a grazing ox. As pope it remained the same.

Pontificate [ edit ] Borgia was elected pope at an advanced age as a "compromise candidate" in the conclave of 8 April 1455 . He took the pontifical name Callixtus III.

[ 7 ] He was crowned on 20 April 1455 by Cardinal Protodeacon Prospero Colonna . After his coronation, he rode a white horse through the streets of the city and followed the ancient custom, known as Monte Giordano, where representatives of the Jews met with the pope and presented him with the roll of the law. Callixtus III then read from the law and stated "We ratify the law, but condemn your interpretation", which instigated a riot at the ceremony that endangered the pope's life.

[ 8 ] Not quite two years after the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, Callixtus was chiefly concerned with the organization of Christian Europe against an invasion by the Ottoman Empire . At the time, it was said that Callixtus III "speaks and thinks of nothing but the crusade", spending hours discussing the topic with a warlike zeal.

[ 9 ] An extensive building program underway in Rome was cancelled and the money funneled toward a crusade.

Papal nuncios were dispatched to all the countries of Europe to beseech the princes to join once more in an effort to check the danger of a Turkish invasion. Missionaries were sent to England , France , Germany , Hungary , Portugal , and Aragon to preach the Crusade, and to engage the prayers of the faithful for the success of the enterprise. It was by order of Callixtus III that the bells were rung at midday to remind the faithful that they should pray for the welfare of the crusaders.

[ 7 ] The princes of Europe were slow in responding to the call of the pope, largely due to national rivalries. England and France's Hundred Years' War had just ended in 1453. Forces led by John Hunyadi ( Hungarian : Hunyadi János ), Captain-General of Hungary, met the Turks and defeated them at Belgrade on 22 July 1456. Shortly after his victory, Hunyadi himself died of a fever.

[ 7 ] On 29 June 1456, Callixtus III ordered the church bells to be rung at noon (see noon bell ) as a call to prayer for the welfare of those defending Belgrade. To commemorate this victory, Callixtus III ordered the Feast of the Transfiguration to be held annually on 6 August.

A bull of Callixtus III In 1456 the pope issued the papal bull Inter Caetera (not to be confused with Inter Caetera of 1493), reaffirming the earlier bulls Dum Diversas and Romanus Pontifex which recognized Portugal's trade rights in territories it had discovered along the West African coast. This confirmation of Romanus Pontifex also gave the Portuguese the military Order of Christ under Henry the Navigator .

[ 10 ] Callixtus III ordered a new trial for Joan of Arc (c. 1412–1431), at which she was posthumously vindicated.

[ 11 ] Callixtus III canonized the following four saints during his pontificate: Vincent Ferrer (3 June 1455), Osmund (1 January 1457), Albert of Trapani (15 October 1457), and Rose of Viterbo (1457).

Callixtus III elevated nine new cardinals into the cardinalate in two consistories on 20 February 1456 and 17 December 1456, [ 12 ] two of whom were cardinal nephews . The first of them was Rodrigo de Borgia who later became Pope Alexander VI (1492–1503), infamous for his corruption and immorality.

[ 13 ] The second was Luis Julian de Milà .

The pope approved of the establishment of the University of Greifswald in 1456.

According to one story that first appeared in a 1475 posthumous biography and was subsequently embellished and popularized by Pierre-Simon Laplace , Callixtus III excommunicated the 1456 appearance of Halley's Comet , believing it to be an ill omen for the Christian defenders of Belgrade from the besieging armies of the Ottoman Empire .

[ 14 ] No known primary source supports the authenticity of this account. The 29 June 1456 papal bull of Callixtus III calling for a public prayer for the success of the crusade makes no mention of the comet. By 6 August, when the Turkish siege was broken, the comet had not been visible in either Europe or Turkey for several weeks.

[ 15 ] Death [ edit ] Tomb of Callixtus III and Alexander VI in Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli .

Callixtus III died on 6 August 1458.

[ 16 ] His remains were transferred in 1586 and again in 1610 with the remains of his nephew Alexander VI to Santa Maria in Monserrato . His remains were transferred once more on 21 August 1889 in the Chapel of San Diego de Alcalá in the Rome's Church of Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli . In his will he left 5000 ducats to establish a hospital.

Legacy [ edit ] Catholic historian Ludwig von Pastor opined: "Except for his nepotism, Calixtus III deserves high praise, more especially for the energy, constancy and purpose which he displayed in dealing with the burning question of the day – the protection of Western civilization from the Turkish power. In this matter he gave a grand example to Christendom, and it is to be observed that in the midst of the military and political interest which claimed so large a share of his time and attention, he did not neglect the internal affairs of the Church, and vigorously opposed heresies." [ 17 ] See also [ edit ] List of popes from the Borgia family Cardinals created by Callixtus III Route of the Borgias References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Anna y Canals. Valencia" .

palomatorrijos (in Spanish). 12 June 2013 . Retrieved 25 February 2014 .

... En el siglo XIV se construyó junto a la torre, y aprovechando parte de sus murallas, un pequeño Palacio Gótico que era la sede de la baronía de La Torre, independiente de Canals, cuyos titulares eran los Borgia. En este lugar nació en 1378 Alfonso Borgia, el que fuera futuro papa Calixto III. ...' ^ Rolfe, p. 12 ^ Statue of Pope Calixtus III, St. Mary's Basilica, La Seu Cathedral, Xàtiva, Valencia, Spain , Archived 20 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ Rolfe, pp. 12–13 ^ Reinhart, Albert (1912).

St. Vincent Ferrer . Vol. 15. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ McBrien, p. 260 ^ a b c d "MacCaffrey, James. "Pope Callistus III." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908. 24 Jul. 2014" .

^ Pastor, pp. 337-338 ^ Pastor, p. 348 ^ European treaties bearing on the history of the United States and its Dependencies to 1648 , ed. Frances Gardiner Davenport, (Carnegie Institute of Washington, 1917), 27.

^ Castor, Helen (2015).

Joan of Arc . HarperCollins. pp. 231, 241.

^ Miranda, Salvador.

Consistories for the creation of Cardinals: 15th Century (1394-1503) Archived 12 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church.

Retrieved 29 January 2016.

^ Montor, p. 190.

^ John Stein (1913).

"Bartolomeo Platina" . In Charles George Herbermann (ed.).

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12. Robert Appleton Co. pp.

158– 159.

OCLC 1017058 .

^ Rigge, William F. (1910).

"Rigge, William F. "An Historical Examination of the Connection of Calixtus III with Halley's Comet", Popular Astronomy , p. 214, 1910" .

Popular Astronomy .

18 : 214.

Bibcode : 1910PA.....18..214R .

^ Richardson 2009 , p. xxii.

^ Pastor, pp. 479–480 Bibliography [ edit ] Coulombe, Charles A. (2003).

A History of the Popes : Vicars of Christ . New York: MJF Books.

ISBN 1-56731-747-2 .

Davenport, Frances Gardiner, editor (1917).

European treaties bearing on the history of the United States and its Dependencies to 1648 , Carnegie Institute of Washington.

Gower, Ronald Sutherland (2007).

Joan of Arc , BiblioBazaar LLC.

Hibbert, Christopher (2009).

The Borgias and their Enemies : 1431-1519 . Boston: Mariner Books.

ISBN 978-0-547-24781-6 .

Kelly, J. N. D. (2015).

"Callistus III" .

A Dictionary of Popes . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-179545-9 .

Montor, Artaud de; François, Alexis (1911).

The Lives and Times of the Popes , Vol. 4. Catholic Publication Society of America.

McBrian, Richard P. (2000).

Lives of the Popes: The pontiffs from St Peter to John Paul II , San Francisco: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0060653040 Richardson, Carol Mary (2009).

Reclaiming Rome: Cardinals in the Fifteenth Century . Brill.

ISBN 978 90 04 17183 1 .

Rolfe, Frederick (1901).

Chronicles of the House of Borgia , E.P. Dutton & Co.

Pastor, Ludwig von (1899).

History of the Popes , Vol. 2 (Second Edition, translated by Frederick Ignatius Antrobus).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Callistus III .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Pope Callixtus III .

European treaties bearing on the history of the United States and its Dependencies to 1648 , Ed. Frances Gardiner Davenport, Carnegie Institute of Washington, 1917.

[1] Archived 23 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine DIARIO BORJA BORGIA (Spanish) "Calixtus s.v. Calixtus III." .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

Catholic Church titles Preceded by Nicholas V Pope 8 April 1455 – 6 August 1458 Succeeded by Pius II Preceded by Hug de Llupià Bishop of Valencia 20 August 1429 – 8 April 1455 Succeeded by Rodrigo de Borja Preceded by Louis de Luxembourg Cardinal-Priest of Santi Quattro Coronati 12 July 1444 – 8 April 1458 Succeeded by Luis Juan del Milà y Borja v t e Popes of the Catholic Church List of popes graphical canonised Papal names Tombs extant non-extant Antipope Pope emeritus papal resignation Pope-elect Apocryphal Pope Donus II 1st–4th centuries Peter Linus Anacletus Clement I Evaristus Alexander I Sixtus I Telesphorus Hyginus Pius I Anicetus Soter Eleutherius Victor I Zephyrinus Callixtus I Urban I Pontian Anterus Fabian Cornelius Lucius I Stephen I Sixtus II Dionysius Felix I Eutychian Caius Marcellinus Marcellus I Eusebius Miltiades Sylvester I Mark Julius I Liberius Damasus I Siricius Anastasius I 5th–8th centuries Innocent I Zosimus Boniface I Celestine I Sixtus III Leo I Hilarius Simplicius Felix III Gelasius I Anastasius II Symmachus Hormisdas John I Felix IV Boniface II John II Agapetus I Silverius Vigilius Pelagius I John III Benedict I Pelagius II Gregory I Sabinian Boniface III Boniface IV Adeodatus I Boniface V Honorius I Severinus John IV Theodore I Martin I Eugene I Vitalian Adeodatus II Donus Agatho Leo II Benedict II John V Conon Sergius I John VI John VII Sisinnius Constantine Gregory II Gregory III Zachary Stephen II Paul I Stephen III Adrian I Leo III 9th–12th centuries Stephen IV Paschal I Eugene II Valentine Gregory IV Sergius II Leo IV Benedict III Nicholas I Adrian II John VIII Marinus I Adrian III Stephen V Formosus Boniface VI Stephen VI Romanus Theodore II John IX Benedict IV Leo V Sergius III Anastasius III Lando John X Leo VI Stephen VII John XI Leo VII Stephen VIII Marinus II Agapetus II John XII Benedict V Leo VIII John XIII Benedict VI Benedict VII John XIV John XV Gregory V Sylvester II John XVII John XVIII Sergius IV Benedict VIII John XIX Benedict IX Sylvester III Gregory VI Clement II Damasus II Leo IX Victor II Stephen IX Nicholas II Alexander II Gregory VII Victor III Urban II Paschal II Gelasius II Callixtus II Honorius II Innocent II Celestine II Lucius II Eugene III Anastasius IV Adrian IV Alexander III Lucius III Urban III Gregory VIII Clement III Celestine III Innocent III 13th–16th centuries Honorius III Gregory IX Celestine IV Innocent IV Alexander IV Urban IV Clement IV Gregory X Innocent V Adrian V John XXI Nicholas III Martin IV Honorius IV Nicholas IV Celestine V Boniface VIII Benedict XI Clement V John XXII Benedict XII Clement VI Innocent VI Urban V Gregory XI Urban VI Boniface IX Innocent VII Gregory XII Martin V Eugene IV Nicholas V Callixtus III Pius II Paul II Sixtus IV Innocent VIII Alexander VI Pius III Julius II Leo X Adrian VI Clement VII Paul III Julius III Marcellus II Paul IV Pius IV Pius V Gregory XIII Sixtus V Urban VII Gregory XIV Innocent IX Clement VIII 17th–21st centuries Leo XI Paul V Gregory XV Urban VIII Innocent X Alexander VII Clement IX Clement X Innocent XI Alexander VIII Innocent XII Clement XI Innocent XIII Benedict XIII Clement XII Benedict XIV Clement XIII Clement XIV Pius VI Pius VII Leo XII Pius VIII Gregory XVI Pius IX Leo XIII Pius X Benedict XV Pius XI Pius XII John XXIII Paul VI John Paul I John Paul II Benedict XVI Francis Leo XIV History of the papacy Antiquity and Early Middle Ages During the Roman Empire (until 493) Under Constantine (312–337) Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537) Byzantine Papacy (537–752) Frankish Papacy (756–857) Saeculum obscurum (904–964) Crescentii era (974–1012) High and Late Middle Ages Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044 / 1048) Conflicts with the HRE (1048–1257) Wandering Papacy Viterbo , 1257–1281 Orvieto , 1262–1297 Perugia , 1228–1304 Avignon Papacy (1309–1378) Western Schism (1378–1417) Early Modern and Modern Era Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534) Reformation Papacy (1534–1585) Baroque Papacy (1585–1689) Age of Enlightenment (c. 1640–1740) Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848) Roman question (1870–1929) Vatican City (1929–present) World War II (1939–1945) Cold War (1945–1991) Category Portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pope_Callixtus_III&oldid=1303949729 " Categories : Pope Callixtus III 1378 births 1458 deaths People from Costera Popes Spanish popes 15th-century Roman Catholic archbishops in the Kingdom of Aragon Archbishops of Valencia House of Borgia Burials at Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli Renaissance Papacy People associated with the University of Greifswald 15th-century popes Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2021 Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Valencian-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Hungarian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 01:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pope Callixtus III 76 languages Add topic

