Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 DNA sequencing Toggle DNA sequencing subsection 1.1 Sanger sequencing 1.2 Pyrosequencing 1.3 True single molecule sequencing 1.4 Large-scale sequencing 2 RNA sequencing 3 Protein sequencing 4 Polysaccharide sequencing 5 See also 6 References 7 Links Toggle the table of contents Sequencing 20 languages Català Čeština Eesti Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia In genetics and biochemistry, determining the structure of an unbranched biopolymer This article is about the genetics definition of "sequencing". For the sense of "sequencing" used in electronic music, see music sequencer . For sequence learning in cognitive science, see sequence learning . For other uses of the terms "sequencer" and "sequence", see Sequencer (disambiguation) and Sequence (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sequencing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In genetics and biochemistry , sequencing means to determine the primary structure (sometimes incorrectly called the primary sequence) of an unbranched biopolymer .  Sequencing results in a symbolic linear depiction known as a sequence which succinctly summarizes much of the atomic-level structure of the sequenced molecule.

DNA sequencing [ edit ] Main article: DNA sequencing DNA sequencing is the process of determining the nucleotide order of a given DNA fragment. So far, most DNA sequencing has been performed using the chain termination method developed by Frederick Sanger . This technique uses sequence-specific termination of a DNA synthesis reaction using modified nucleotide substrates.  However, new sequencing technologies such as pyrosequencing are gaining an increasing share of the sequencing market. More genome data are now being produced by pyrosequencing than Sanger DNA sequencing. Pyrosequencing has enabled rapid genome sequencing. Bacterial genomes can be sequenced in a single run with several times coverage with this technique. This technique was also used to sequence the genome of James Watson recently.

[ 1 ] The sequence of DNA encodes the necessary information for living things to survive and reproduce. Determining the sequence is therefore useful in fundamental research into why and how organisms live, as well as in applied subjects. Because of the key importance DNA has to living things, knowledge of DNA sequences is useful in practically any area of biological research. For example, in medicine it can be used to identify, diagnose, and potentially develop treatments for genetic diseases. Similarly, research into pathogens may lead to treatments for contagious diseases.

Biotechnology is a burgeoning discipline, with the potential for many useful products and services.

The Carlson curve is a term coined by The Economist [ 2 ] to describe the biotechnological analog of Moore's law , and is named after author Rob Carlson.

[ 3 ] Carlson accurately predicted the doubling time of DNA sequencing technologies (measured by cost and performance) would be at least as fast as Moore's law.

[ 4 ] Carlson curves illustrate the rapid (in some cases hyperexponential) decrease in cost and increase in performance of a variety of technologies, including DNA sequencing, DNA synthesis , and a range of physical and computational tools used in protein expression and in determining protein structures.

Sanger sequencing [ edit ] Main article: Sanger sequencing Part of a radioactively labelled sequencing gel In chain terminator sequencing (Sanger sequencing), extension is initiated at a specific site on the template DNA by using a short oligonucleotide 'primer' complementary to the template at that region. The oligonucleotide primer is extended using a DNA polymerase , an enzyme that replicates DNA. Included with the primer and DNA polymerase are the four deoxynucleotide bases (DNA building blocks), along with a low concentration of a chain terminating nucleotide (most commonly a di- deoxynucleotide). The deoxynucleotides lack in the OH group both at the 2' and at the 3' position of the ribose molecule, therefore once they are inserted within a DNA molecule they prevent it from being further elongated. In this sequencer four different vessels are employed, each containing only of the four dideoxyribonucleotides; the incorporation of the chain terminating nucleotides by the DNA polymerase in a random position results in a series of related DNA fragments, of different sizes, that terminate with a given dideoxiribonucleotide. The fragments are then size-separated by electrophoresis in a slab polyacrylamide gel, or more commonly now, in a narrow glass tube (capillary) filled with a viscous polymer.

View of the start of an example dye-terminator read (click to expand) An alternative to the labelling of the primer is to label the terminators instead, commonly called 'dye terminator sequencing'. The major advantage of this approach is the complete sequencing set can be performed in a single reaction, rather than the four needed with the labeled-primer approach. This is accomplished by labelling each of the dideoxynucleotide chain-terminators with a separate fluorescent dye, which fluoresces at a different wavelength . This method is easier and quicker than the dye primer approach, but may produce more uneven data peaks (different heights), due to a template dependent difference in the incorporation of the large dye chain-terminators. This problem has been significantly reduced with the introduction of new enzymes and dyes that minimize incorporation variability.
This method is now used for the vast majority of sequencing reactions as it is both simpler and cheaper.  The major reason for this is that the primers do not have to be separately labelled (which can be a significant expense for a single-use custom primer), although this is less of a concern with frequently used 'universal' primers.  This is changing rapidly due to the increasing cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation systems from Illumina, 454, ABI, Helicos, and Dover.

Pyrosequencing [ edit ] Main article: Pyrosequencing The pyrosequencing method is based on the detection of the pyrophosphate release on nucleotide incorporation. Before performing pyrosequencing, the DNA strand to sequence has to be amplified by PCR. Then the order in which the nucleotides have to be added in the sequencer is chosen (i.e. G-A-T-C). When a specific nucleotide is added, if the DNA polymerase incorporates it in the growing chain, the pyrophosphate is released and converted into ATP by ATP sulfurylase. ATP powers the oxidation of luciferase through the luciferase; this reaction generates a light signal recorded as a pyrogram peak. In this way, the nucleotide incorporation is correlated to a signal. The light signal is proportional to the amount of nucleotides incorporated during the synthesis of the DNA strand (i.e. two nucleotides incorporated correspond to two pyrogram peaks). When the added nucleotides aren't incorporated in the DNA molecule, no signal is recorded; the enzyme apyrase removes any unincorporated nucleotide remaining in the reaction.
This method requires neither fluorescently-labelled nucleotides nor gel electrophoresis.
Pyrosequencing, which was developed by Pål Nyrén and Mostafa Ronaghi DNA, has been commercialized by Biotage (for low-throughput sequencing) and 454 Life Sciences (for high-throughput sequencing). The latter platform sequences roughly 100 megabases [now up to 400 megabases] in a seven-hour run with a single machine.  In the array-based method (commercialized by 454 Life Sciences), single-stranded DNA is annealed to beads and amplified via EmPCR .  These DNA-bound beads are then placed into wells on a fiber-optic chip along with enzymes which produce light in the presence of ATP .  When free nucleotides are washed over this chip, light is produced as ATP is generated when nucleotides join with their complementary base pairs .  Addition of one (or more) nucleotide(s) results in a reaction that generates a light signal that is recorded by the CCD camera in the instrument. The signal strength is proportional to the number of nucleotides, for example, homopolymer stretches, incorporated in a single nucleotide flow.

[1] True single molecule sequencing [ edit ] Large-scale sequencing [ edit ] Whereas the methods above describe various sequencing methods, separate related terms are used when a large portion of a genome is sequenced. Several platforms were developed to perform exome sequencing (a subset of all DNA across all chromosomes that encode genes) or whole genome sequencing (sequencing of the all nuclear DNA of a human).

RNA sequencing [ edit ] RNA is less stable in the cell, and also more prone to nuclease attack experimentally. As RNA is generated by transcription from DNA, the information is already present in the cell's DNA. However, it is sometimes desirable to sequence RNA molecules. While sequencing DNA gives a genetic profile of an organism, sequencing RNA reflects only the sequences that are actively expressed in the cells. To sequence RNA, the usual method is first to reverse transcribe the RNA extracted from the sample to generate cDNA fragments. This can then be sequenced as described above.
The bulk of RNA expressed in cells are ribosomal RNAs or small RNAs , detrimental for cellular translation, but often not the focus of a study. This fraction can be removed in vitro , however, to enrich for the messenger RNA, also included, that usually is of interest. Derived from the exons these mRNAs are to be later translated to proteins that support particular cellular functions. The expression profile therefore indicates cellular activity, particularly desired in the studies of diseases, cellular behaviour, responses to reagents or stimuli.

Eukaryotic RNA molecules are not necessarily co-linear with their DNA template, as introns are excised. This gives a certain complexity to map the read sequences back to the genome and thereby identify their origin.
For more information on the capabilities of next-generation sequencing applied to whole transcriptomes see: RNA-Seq and MicroRNA Sequencing .

Protein sequencing [ edit ] Main article: protein sequencing Methods for performing protein sequencing
include: Edman degradation Peptide mass fingerprinting Mass spectrometry Protease digests If the gene encoding the protein is known, it is currently much easier to sequence the DNA and infer the protein sequence. Determining part of a protein's amino-acid sequence (often one end) by one of the above methods may be sufficient to identify a clone carrying this gene.

Polysaccharide sequencing [ edit ] Though polysaccharides are also biopolymers, it is not so common to talk of 'sequencing' a polysaccharide, for several reasons. Although many polysaccharides are linear, many have branches. Many different units (individual monosaccharides ) can be used, and bonded in different ways. However, the main theoretical reason is that whereas the other polymers listed here are primarily generated in a 'template-dependent' manner by one processive enzyme, each individual join in a polysaccharide may be formed by a different enzyme . In many cases the assembly is not uniquely specified; depending on which enzyme acts, one of several different units may be incorporated. This can lead to a family of similar molecules being formed. This is particularly true for plant polysaccharides. Methods for the structure determination of oligosaccharides and polysaccharides include NMR spectroscopy and methylation analysis .

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Exome sequencing Full genome sequencing Genetic code Pathogenomics RNA-Seq MicroRNA sequencing Sequence motif References [ edit ] ^ Wheeler, David A.; Srinivasan, Maithreyan; Egholm, Michael; Shen, Yufeng; Chen, Lei; McGuire, Amy; He, Wen; Chen, Yi-Ju; Makhijani, Vinod (2008-04-17).

"The complete genome of an individual by massively parallel DNA sequencing" .

Nature .

452 (7189): 872– 876.

Bibcode : 2008Natur.452..872W .

doi : 10.1038/nature06884 .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMID 18421352 .

^ Life 2.0. (2006, August 31). The Economist ^ Carlson, Robert H. Biology Is Technology: The Promise, Peril, and New Business of Engineering Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 2010. Print ^ Carlson, Robert (2003). "The Pace and Proliferation of Biological Technologies".

Biosecurity and Bioterrorism: Biodefense Strategy, Practice, and Science .

1 (3): 203– 214.

doi : 10.1089/153871303769201851 .

PMID 15040198 .

^ "A practical guide to structural analysis of carbohydrates" .

Links [ edit ] https://www.nature.com/subjects/sequencing v t e Bioinformatics Databases Sequence databases: GenBank , European Nucleotide Archive , DNA Data Bank of Japan and China National GeneBank Secondary databases: UniProt , database of protein sequences grouping together Swiss-Prot , TrEMBL and Protein Information Resource Other databases: BioNumbers , Protein Data Bank , Ensembl , InterPro , KEGG , and Gene Ontology Specialised genomic databases: BOLD , Saccharomyces Genome Database , FlyBase , VectorBase , WormBase , Rat Genome Database , PHI-base , Arabidopsis Information Resource , GISAID and Zebrafish Information Network Software BLAST Bowtie Clustal EMBOSS HMMER MUSCLE PANGOLIN SAMtools SOAP suite TopHat Other Server: ExPASy Rosalind (education platform) Institutions Broad Institute Computational Biology Department (CBD) Microsoft Research - University of Trento Centre for Computational and Systems Biology (COSBI) Database Center for Life Science (DBCLS) DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ) European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI) European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Flatiron Institute J. Craig Venter Institute (JCVI) Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics (MPI-CBG) US National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Japanese Institute of Genetics Netherlands Bioinformatics Centre (NBIC) Philippine Genome Center (PGC) Scripps Research Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB) Wellcome Sanger Institute Whitehead Institute Organizations African Society for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (ASBCB) Australia Bioinformatics Resource (EMBL-AR) European Molecular Biology network (EMBnet) International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration (INSDC) International Society for Biocuration (ISB) International Society for Computational Biology (ISCB) Student Council (ISCB-SC) Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (CSIR-IGIB) Japanese Society for Bioinformatics (JSBi) Meetings Basel Computational Biology Conference‎ ([BC 2 ]) European Conference on Computational Biology (ECCB) Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology (ISMB) International Conference on Bioinformatics (InCoB) International Conference on Computational Intelligence Methods for Bioinformatics and Biostatistics (CIBB) ISCB Africa ASBCB Conference on Bioinformatics Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB) Research in Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB) File formats CRAM format FASTA format FASTQ format NeXML format Nexus format Pileup format SAM format Stockholm format VCF format GFF format GTF format Related topics Computational biology List of biobanks List of biological databases Molecular phylogenetics Sequencing Sequence database Sequence alignment Category Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐sflxf
Cached time: 20250812021039
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.324 seconds
Real time usage: 0.420 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 780/1000000
Revision size: 13234/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 39101/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 908/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 24713/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.215/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5216326/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  359.427      1 -total
 31.26%  112.348      1 Template:Reflist
 24.85%   89.320      2 Template:Cite_journal
 23.57%   84.703      1 Template:Bioinformatics
 22.80%   81.955      1 Template:Navbox
 18.81%   67.606      1 Template:Short_description
 15.87%   57.034      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 14.57%   52.368      1 Template:Ambox
 11.09%   39.870      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.00%   21.568      1 Template:About Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:28615:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021039 and revision id 1303929959. Rendering was triggered because: diff-page Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sequencing&oldid=1303929959 " Categories : Biochemistry methods Molecular biology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2008 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 22:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sequencing 20 languages Add topic

