Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Precursors 1.2 Birth of industrial design 2 Education Toggle Education subsection 2.1 Institutions 3 Definition 4 Design process 5 Industrial design rights Toggle Industrial design rights subsection 5.1 Hague top applicants 6 Examples of industrial design 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Industrial design 47 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of design Olivetti Divisumma 24 calculator designed by Marcello Nizzoli (1956) Braun SK 4 "Snow White's coffin" radiogram designed by Dieter Rams , Herbert Lindinger , and Hans Gugelot (1956) Industrial design is a process of design applied to physical products that are to be manufactured by mass production .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is the creative act of determining and defining a product's form and features, which takes place in advance of the manufacture or production of the product. Industrial manufacture consists of predetermined, standardized and repeated, often automated, acts of replication, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] while craft -based design is a process or approach in which the form of the product is determined personally by the product's creator largely concurrent with the act of its production.

[ 5 ] All manufactured products are the result of a design process, but the nature of this process can vary. It can be conducted by an individual or a team, and such a team could include people with varied expertise (e.g. designers, engineers, business experts, etc.). It can emphasize intuitive creativity or calculated scientific decision-making , and often emphasizes a mix of both. It can be influenced by factors as varied as materials , production processes , business strategy , and prevailing social, commercial, or aesthetic attitudes.

[ 3 ] Industrial design, as an applied art , most often focuses on a combination of aesthetics and user-focused considerations, [ 6 ] but also often provides solutions for problems of form, function, physical ergonomics , marketing, brand development, sustainability, and sales.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] Precursors [ edit ] For several millennia before the onset of industrialization , design, technical expertise, and manufacturing was often done by individual crafts people , who determined the form of a product at the point of its creation, according to their own manual skill, the requirements of their clients, experience accumulated through their own experimentation, and knowledge passed on to them through training or apprenticeship .

[ 5 ] The division of labour that underlies the practice of industrial design did have precedents in the pre-industrial era.

[ 1 ] The growth of trade in the medieval period led to the emergence of large workshops in cities such as Florence , Venice , Nuremberg , and Bruges , where groups of more specialized craftsmen made objects with common forms through the repetitive duplication of models which defined by their shared training and technique.

[ 8 ] Competitive pressures in the early 16th century led to the emergence in Italy and Germany of pattern books : collections of engravings illustrating decorative forms and motifs which could be applied to a wide range of products, and whose creation took place in advance of their application.

[ 8 ] The use of drawing to specify how something was to be constructed later was first developed by architects and shipwrights during the Italian Renaissance .

[ 9 ] In the 17th century, the growth of artistic patronage in centralized monarchical states such as France led to large government-operated manufacturing operations epitomized by the Gobelins Manufactory , opened in Paris in 1667 by Louis XIV .

[ 8 ] Here teams of hundreds of craftsmen, including specialist artists, decorators and engravers, produced sumptuously decorated products ranging from tapestries and furniture to metalwork and coaches , all under the creative supervision of the King's leading artist Charles Le Brun .

[ 10 ] This pattern of large-scale royal patronage was repeated in the court porcelain factories of the early 18th century, such as the Meissen porcelain workshops established in 1709 by the Grand Duke of Saxony , where patterns from a range of sources, including court goldsmiths, sculptors, and engravers, were used as models for the vessels and figurines for which it became famous.

[ 11 ] As long as reproduction remained craft-based, however, the form and artistic quality of the product remained in the hands of the individual craftsman, and tended to decline as the scale of production increased.

[ 12 ] Birth of industrial design [ edit ] The emergence of industrial design is specifically linked to the growth of industrialization and mechanization that began with the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain in the mid 18th century.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The rise of industrial manufacture changed the way objects were made, urbanization changed patterns of consumption , the growth of empires broadened tastes and diversified markets, and the emergence of a wider middle class created demand for fashionable styles from a much larger and more heterogeneous population.

[ 13 ] The first use of the term "industrial design" is often attributed to the industrial designer Joseph Claude Sinel in 1919 (although he himself denied this in interviews), but the discipline predates 1919 by at least a decade.

Christopher Dresser is considered among the first independent industrial designers.

[ 14 ] Industrial design's origins lie in the industrialization of consumer products. For instance, the Deutscher Werkbund (a precursor to the Bauhaus founded in 1907 by Peter Behrens and others) was a state-sponsored effort to integrate traditional crafts and industrial mass-production techniques, to put Germany on a competitive footing with Great Britain and the United States.

The earliest published use of the term may have been in The Art-Union , 15 September 1840.

Dyce's Report to the Board of Trade, on Foreign Schools of Design for Manufactures.

Mr. Dyce's official visit to France, Prussia, and Bavaria, for the purpose of examining the state of schools of design in those countries, will be fresh in the recollection of our readers. His report on this subject was ordered to be printed some few months since, on the motion of Mr. Hume; and it is the sum and substance of this Report that we are now about to lay before our own especial portion of the reading public.

The school of St. Peter, at Lyons, was founded about 1750, for the instruction of draftsmen employed in preparing patterns for the silk manufacture. It has been much more successful than the Paris school; and having been disorganized by the revolution, was restored by Napoleon and differently constituted, being then erected into an Academy of Fine Art: to which the study of design for silk manufacture was merely attached as a subordinate branch.

It appears that all the students who entered the school commence as if they were intended for artists in the higher sense of the word and are not expected to decide as to whether they will devote themselves to the Fine Arts or to Industrial Design, until they have completed their exercises in drawing and painting of the figure from the antique and from the living model. It is for this reason, and from the fact that artists for industrial purposes are both well-paid and highly considered (as being well-instructed men), that so many individuals in France engage themselves in both pursuits.

[ 15 ] The Practical Draughtsman's Book of Industrial Design by Jacques-Eugène Armengaud was printed in 1853.

[ 16 ] The subtitle of the (translated) work explains, that it wants to offer a "complete course of mechanical, engineering, and architectural drawing." The study of those types of technical drawing, according to Armengaud, belongs to the field of industrial design. This work paved the way for a big expansion in the field of drawing education in France, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

Robert Lepper helped to establish one of the USA's first industrial design degree programs in 1934 at Carnegie Institute of Technology .

[ 17 ] Education [ edit ] Product design and industrial design overlap in the fields of user interface design , information design , and interaction design . Various schools of industrial design specialize in one of these aspects, ranging from pure art colleges and design schools (product styling), to mixed programs of engineering and design, to related disciplines such as exhibit design and interior design , to schools that almost completely subordinated aesthetic design to concerns of usage and ergonomics, the so-called functionalist school.

[ 18 ] Except for certain functional areas of overlap between industrial design and engineering design, the former is considered an applied art [ 6 ] while the latter is an applied science.

[ 19 ] Educational programs in the U.S. for engineering require accreditation by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) [ 20 ] in contrast to programs for industrial design which are accredited by the National Association of Schools of Art and Design (NASAD).

[ 21 ] Of course, engineering education requires heavy training in mathematics and physical sciences, which is not typically required in industrial design education.

[ 22 ] Institutions [ edit ] Most industrial designers complete a design or related program at a vocational school or university. Relevant programs include graphic design , interior design, industrial design, architectural technology, and drafting . Diplomas and degrees in industrial design are offered at vocational schools and universities worldwide. Diplomas and degrees take two to four years of study. The study results in a Bachelor of Industrial Design (B.I.D.), Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) or Bachelor of Fine Arts (B.F.A.). Afterwards, the bachelor programme can be extended to postgraduate degrees such as Master of Design , Master of Fine Arts and others to a Master of Arts or Master of Science .

Definition [ edit ] Industrial design studies function and form—and the connection between product, user, and environment. Generally, industrial design professionals work in small scale design, rather than overall design of complex systems such as buildings or ships. Industrial designers don't usually design motors, electrical circuits, or gearing that make machines move, but they may affect technical aspects through usability design and form relationships. Usually, they work with other professionals such as engineers who focus on the mechanical and other functional aspects of the product, assuring functionality and manufacturability, and with marketers to identify and fulfill customer needs and expectations.

Industrial design (ID) is the professional service of creating and developing concepts and specifications that optimize the function, value and appearance of products and systems for the mutual benefit of both user and manufacturer.

Industrial Designers Society of America , [ 23 ] Design, itself, is often difficult to describe to non-designers because the meaning accepted by the design community is not made of words. Instead, the definition is created as a result of acquiring a critical framework for the analysis and creation of artifacts. One of the many accepted (but intentionally unspecific) definitions of design originates from Carnegie Mellon's School of Design : "Everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones." [ 24 ] [ 25 ] This applies to new artifacts, whose existing state is undefined, and previously created artifacts, whose state stands to be improved.

Industrial design can overlap significantly with engineering design , and in different countries the boundaries of the two concepts can vary, but in general engineering focuses principally on functionality or utility of products, whereas industrial design focuses principally on aesthetic and user-interface aspects of products. In many jurisdictions this distinction is effectively defined by credentials and/or licensure required to engage in the practice of engineering.

[ 26 ] "Industrial design" as such does not overlap much with the engineering sub-discipline of industrial engineering , except for the latter's sub-specialty of ergonomics .

At the 29th General Assembly in Gwangju, South Korea, 2015, the Professional Practise Committee unveiled a renewed definition of industrial design as follows:
"Industrial Design is a strategic problem-solving process that drives innovation, builds business success and leads to a better quality of life through innovative products, systems, services and experiences."
An extended version of this definition is as follows:
"Industrial Design is a strategic problem-solving process that drives innovation, builds business success and leads to a better quality of life through innovative products, systems, services and experiences. Industrial Design bridges the gap between what is and what's possible. It is a trans-disciplinary profession that harnesses creativity to resolve problems and co-create solutions with the intent of making a product, system, service, experience or a business, better. At its heart, Industrial Design provides a more optimistic way of looking at the future by reframing problems as opportunities. It links innovation, technology, research, business and customers to provide new value and competitive advantage across economic, social and environmental spheres.
Industrial Designers place the human in the centre of the process. They acquire a deep understanding of user needs through empathy and apply a pragmatic, user centric problem solving process to design products, systems, services and experiences. They are strategic stakeholders in the innovation process and are uniquely positioned to bridge varied professional disciplines and business interests. They value the economic, social and environmental impact of their work and their contribution towards co-creating a better quality of life. " [ 27 ] Design process [ edit ] A Fender Stratocaster with sunburst finish, one of the most widely recognized electric guitars in the world Model 1300 Volkswagen Beetle Olivetti Valentine typewriter Although the process of design may be considered 'creative,' many analytical processes also take place. In fact, many industrial designers often use various design methodologies in their creative process. Some of the processes that are commonly used are user research, sketching, comparative product research, model making, prototyping and testing. The design process is iterative, involving dozens or even hundreds of ideas being considered until the final design is reached. Industrial designers often utilize 3D software , computer-aided industrial design and CAD programs to move from concept to production. They may also build a prototype or scaled down sketch models through a 3D printing process or using other materials such as paper, balsa wood, various foams, or clay for modeling. They may then use industrial CT scanning to test for interior defects and generate a CAD model. From this the manufacturing process may be modified to improve the product.

Product characteristics specified by industrial designers may include the overall form of the object, the location of details with respect to one another, colors , texture, form, and aspects concerning the use of the product . Additionally, they may specify aspects concerning the production process, choice of materials and the way the product is presented to the consumer at the point of sale . The inclusion of industrial designers in a product development process may lead to added value by improving usability , lowering production costs, and developing more appealing products.

Industrial design may also focus on technical concepts, products, and processes. In addition to aesthetics , human factors , ergonomics and anthropometrics , it can also encompass engineering , usefulness, market placement, and other concerns—such as psychology , and the emotional attachment of the user. These values and accompanying aspects that form the basis of industrial design can vary—between different schools of thought, and among practicing designers.

Industrial design rights [ edit ] Main articles: Industrial design rights and WIPO Hague System Industrial design rights are intellectual property rights that make exclusive the visual design of objects that are not purely utilitarian. A design patent would also be considered under this category. An industrial design consists of the creation of a shape, configuration or composition of pattern or color, or combination of pattern and color in three-dimensional form containing aesthetic value. An industrial design can be a two- or three-dimensional pattern used to produce a product, industrial commodity or handicraft. Under the Hague Agreement Concerning the International Deposit of Industrial Designs , a WIPO -administered treaty, a procedure for an international registration exists. An applicant can file for a single international deposit with WIPO or with the national office in a country party to the treaty. The design will then be protected in as many member countries of the treaty as desired.

In 2022, about 1.1 million industrial design applications were filed worldwide. This represents a decrease of 3% on 2021, marking a first drop in filings since 2014.

[ 28 ] In 2023, the number of applications rose again, with about 1.19 million design applications filed.

[ 29 ] Hague top applicants [ edit ] The Hague System for the International Registration of Industrial Designs [ 30 ] provides an international mechanism that secures protection of up to 100 designs [ 30 ] [ 31 ] in multiple countries or regions, through a single international application. International design applications are filed directly through WIPO using the WIPO Hague System . The domestic legal framework of each designated contracting party governs the design protection provided by the resulting international registrations.

[ 32 ] The Hague System does not require the applicant to file a national or regional design application.

[ 33 ] Hague top applicants in 2023 [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Applicant Origine Hague applications in 2019 Hague applications in 2020 Hague applications in 2021 Hague applications in 2022 Hague applications in 2023 Samsung South Korea 166 170 862 451 544 Procter & Gamble United States 65 57 665 687 525 Porsche Germany 45 117 352 LG Electronics South Korea 449 446 655 366 352 Xiaomi China 111 216 227 251 315 Volkswagen Germany 73 84 403 233 312 Philips Netherlands 85 95 678 633 294 Jellycat Limited United Kingdom 100 403 255 Hermès France 27 68 168 72 251 Kärcher Germany 35 47 102 47 189 Examples of industrial design [ edit ] Lurelle Guild . Vacuum Cleaner, c.

1937 .

Brooklyn Museum Chair by Charles Eames Russel Wright. Coffee Urn, c.

1935 . Brooklyn Museum A number of industrial designers have made such a significant impact on culture and daily life that their work is documented by historians of social science.

Alvar Aalto , renowned as an architect , also designed a significant number of household items, such as chairs, stools, lamps, a tea-cart, and vases.

Raymond Loewy was a prolific American designer who is responsible for the Royal Dutch Shell corporate logo, the original BP logo (in use until 2000), the PRR S1 steam locomotive, the Studebaker Starlight (including the later bulletnose), as well as Schick electric razors, Electrolux refrigerators, short-wave radios, Le Creuset French ovens, and a complete line of modern furniture, among many other items.

Richard Teague , who spent most of his career with the American Motors Corporation , originated the concept of using interchangeable body panels so as to create a wide array of different vehicles using the same stampings. He was responsible for such unique automotive designs as the Pacer , Gremlin , Matador coupe , Jeep Cherokee , and the complete interior of the Eagle Premier .

Milwaukee's Brooks Stevens was best known for his Milwaukee Road Skytop Lounge car and Oscar Mayer Wienermobile designs, among others.

Viktor Schreckengost designed bicycles manufactured by Murray bicycles for Murray and Sears, Roebuck and Company. With engineer Ray Spiller, he designed the first truck with a cab-over-engine configuration, a design in use to this day. Schreckengost also founded The Cleveland Institute of Art's school of industrial design.

Oskar Barnack was a German optical engineer, precision mechanic, industrial designer, and the father of 35mm photography. He developed the Leica , which became the hallmark for photography for 50 years, and remains a high-water mark for mechanical and optical design.

[ 36 ] Charles and Ray Eames were most famous for their pioneering furniture designs, [ 37 ] such as the Eames Lounge Chair Wood and Eames Lounge Chair . Other influential designers included Henry Dreyfuss , Eliot Noyes , John Vassos , and Russel Wright .

Dieter Rams is a German industrial designer closely associated with the consumer products company Braun and the Functionalist school of industrial design.

German industrial designer Luigi Colani , who designed cars for automobile manufacturers including Fiat , Alfa Romeo , Lancia , Volkswagen , and BMW , was also known to the general public for his unconventional approach to industrial design. He had expanded in numerous areas ranging from mundane household items, instruments and furniture to trucks, uniforms and entire rooms. A grand piano created by Colani, the Pegasus , is manufactured and sold by the Schimmel piano company.

Many of Apple 's recent products were designed by Sir Jonathan Ive .

See also [ edit ] Automotive design Design Designer Design museum Engineering design process Engineering design Experience design Form follows function Hardware interface design Human factors and ergonomics Industrial Designers Society of America Interaction design List of industrial designers Product design Product development Rapid prototyping Sensory design Sustainable design Transgenerational design WikID References [ edit ] ^ a b c Heskett 1980 , pp. 10–11.

^ a b Kirkham 1999 .

^ a b Heskett 1980 , p. 10.

^ Noblet 1993 , pp. 21–22.

^ a b Noblet 1993 , p. 21.

^ a b "Usability glossary | Usability Body of Knowledge" .

usabilitybok.org .

Archived from the original on 2022-01-23 . Retrieved 2022-01-30 .

^ de Noblet, J., Industrial Design , Paris: A.F.A.A. (1993) ^ a b c Heskett 1980 , p. 11.

^ Baynes 1991 , p. 108.

^ Heskett 1980 , pp. 11–12.

^ Heskett 1980 , p. 12.

^ Heskett 1980 , pp. 12–13.

^ Benton 2000 , p. 380.

^ "Christopher Dresser" .

Design Museum . Archived from the original on 20 September 2014 . Retrieved 9 April 2015 .

^ "Dyce's Report to the Board of Trade, on Foreign Schools of Design for Manufacture" .

The Art-Union .

2 (20). London: William West: 144– 143. 15 September 1840.

^ "The practical draughtsman's book of industrial design: forming a complete course of mechanical, engineering, and architectural drawing by Armengaud, aîné (Jacques-Eugène), 1810–1891" .

Internet Archive . Retrieved 14 April 2015 .

^ "Newsbriefs: Lepper show runs at Warhol." Archived 2016-10-11 at the Wayback Machine Carnegie Mellon Magazine. Winter 2002. Retrieved January 17, 2014.

^ Pulos, Arthur J., The American Design Adventure 1940–1975 , Cambridge, Mass:MIT Press (1988), p. 249 ( ISBN 9780262161060 ).

^ "Engineering" .

ScienceDaily .

Archived from the original on 2023-05-19 . Retrieved 2020-05-26 .

^ "Accreditation | ABET" .

Archived from the original on 2018-09-30 . Retrieved 2020-07-15 .

^ "Nasad.arts-accredit.org" . Archived from the original on August 12, 2015.

^ "NASAD Competencies Summary – Degree: The BFA in Industrial Design, a professional undergraduate degree" (PDF) .

National Association of Schools of Art and Design . 2014-01-08.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2023-09-29 . Retrieved 2020-07-15 .

upload 2015 ^ "Industrial Designers Society of America" . Archived from the original on January 24, 2010 . Retrieved 2010-01-25 .

^ Simon, Herbert A. (1988).

"The Science of Design: Creating the Artificial" .

Design Issues .

4 (1/2): 67– 82.

JSTOR 1511391 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Simon, Herbert A. (2019).

The sciences of the artificial . John Laird (Third edition [2019 edition] ed.). Cambridge: MIT Press . p. 111.

ISBN 978-0-262-35474-5 .

OCLC 1099679934 .

^ "The Difference Between Industrial Design And Design Engineering" .

MCADC Cafe . Archived from the original on 20 September 2014 . Retrieved 9 April 2015 .

^ ICSID web：DEFINITION OF INDUSTRIAL DESIGN Archived 2007-03-17 at the Wayback Machine ^ "World Intellectual Property Indicators 2023" (PDF) .

wipo.int . p. 109.

^ "Number of industrial design applications worldwide" .

Statista . Retrieved 2025-05-30 .

^ a b "Hague – The International Design System" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2021-12-30 .

^ Hartwig, Henning (2021-05-18).

Research Handbook on Design Law . Edward Elgar.

ISBN 978-1-78195-588-8 .

^ "Hague System Member Profiles" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2021-12-30 .

^ "How the Hague System Works" .

hague-system . Retrieved 2025-05-15 .

^ "WIPO Lex" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2024-06-25 .

^ "Hague Yearly Review 2024" (PDF) .

wipo.int .

^ "Oskar Barnack" .

International Photography Hall of Fame and Museum .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2017 . Retrieved 23 March 2021 .

^ "Eames Expert Insights: Mastering the Art of Vintage Eames Furniture Ac" .

industrial Konzept Store . 2023-09-01 . Retrieved 2023-10-20 .

Sources [ edit ] Barnwell, Maurice.

Design, Creativity and Culture , Black Dog, 2011, ISBN 978 1 907317 408 Barnwell, Maurice.

Design Evolution: Big Bang to Big Data, Toronto, 2014.

ISBN 978-0-9937396-0-6 Baynes, Ken (1991). "Forms of Representation". In Pirovano, Carlo (ed.).

History of Industrial Design . Vol. 1. Milan: Electa. pp.

108– 127.

OCLC 32885051 .

Benton, Charlotte (2000). "Design and Industry". In Kemp, Martin (ed.).

The Oxford History of Western Art . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

380– 383.

ISBN 0198600127 .

Forty, Adrian.

Objects of Desire: Design and Society Since 1750 . Thames Hudson, May 1992.

ISBN 978-0-500-27412-5 Heskett, John (1980).

Industrial Design . Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 0500201811 .

Kirkham, Pat (1999).

Industrial design .

Grove Art Online .

Oxford University Press .

Mayall, WH, Industrial Design for Engineers , London: Iliffe Books, 1967, ISBN 978-0592042053 Mayall, WH, Machines and Perception in Industrial Design , London: Studio Vista, 1968, ISBN 978-0289279168 Meikle, Jeffrey.

Twentieth Century Limited: Industrial Design engineering in America, 1925 - 1939 ,  Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1979 ISBN 978-0877222460 Noblet, Jocelyn de (1993). "Design in Progress". In Noblet, Jocelyn de (ed.).

Industrial design: reflection of a century . Paris: Flammarion/APCI. pp.

21– 25.

ISBN 2080135392 .

Pulos, Arthur (1983).

American Design Ethic: A History of Industrial Design .

MIT Press .

ISBN 9780262368100 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Product Design .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Industrial design .

Doodles, Drafts and Designs: Industrial Drawings from the Smithsonian (2004) Smithsonian Institution Libraries Hague Yearly Review related to industrial design Hague applications v t e Design Outline Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Brand design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage / Traffic sign design Typography / Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Interactive design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic / glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewellery design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stage/set lighting design Textile design Other design & engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Work design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Test design Approaches Active Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Design–bid–build Design–build architect-led Diffuse Domain-driven Ecological design Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Ergonomic Error-tolerant Evidence-based Fault-tolerant Feminist For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For the environment For X Framework-oriented Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Hostile Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Over Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Prevention through Process-centered Public interest Opinion poll Public opinion Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Speculative Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Quality by Secure by Design choice computing controls culture flow justice leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Design specification Design system Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing HTML editor Website wireframe Intellectual property Clean-room design Community design Design around Design infringement Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations American Institute of Graphic Arts Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art) Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum) Graphex IF Product Design Award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Dominant design Enterprise architecture Form factor Futures studies Indie design Innovation management Intelligent design Lean startup New product development OODA loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Reference design Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design attributes brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum optimization paradigm principles rationale review specification studies studio technology Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Industrial_design&oldid=1303046888 " Categories : Industrial design Product management Design history Design for X Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles prone to spam from September 2012 Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 20:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Industrial design 47 languages Add topic

