Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background and history 2 Timeline of parties Toggle Timeline of parties subsection 2.1 19th Century 2.2 The Republican tradition 2.3 The Radical tradition 2.4 Classical liberals 2.5 Democratic Movement 2.6 La République En Marche!

3 Liberal leaders 4 Liberal thinkers 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Liberalism and radicalism in France 5 languages العربية Español Français Italiano Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of liberalism and radicalism in France This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liberalism and radicalism in France" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on Liberalism in France Schools Catholic Classical Orthodox Pure orléanism Economic National Radical Jacobinism Social Principles Civic nationalism Civil and political rights Economic freedom Equality before the law Freedom of the press Freedom of speech Internationalism Laicism Laissez-faire Liberté, égalité, fraternité Republicanism Laïcité History Dreyfusards February Revolution French Resistance French Revolution July Monarchy July Revolution Lumières People Alain Aron Bastiat Brissot Clemenceau Condorcet Constant Doumergue Fallières Freund Gambetta de Gouges Grévy Hugo Lamennais Louis Philippe I Macron Manent Mendès France Merleau-Ponty de Molinari Montesquieu Poincaré Robespierre Rougier Say Thiers Tocqueville de Tracy Voltaire Parties Active Agir Centrist Alliance The Centrists Democratic European Force Democratic Movement Liberal Alternative Liberal Democratic Party Radical Party Radical Party of the Left Renaissance Union of Democrats and Independents Defunct Democratic Republican Alliance Doctrinaires Independent Radicals Jacobins Girondins Liberal Party Moderate Republicans (1848) Moderate Republicans (1871) Progressive Republicans Radical Movement Republican Union Union for French Democracy Media Active BFM TV La Chaîne Info Courrier International Les Echos Le Figaro Le Monde L'Opinion Le Parisien Defunct L'Aurore Related topics Anti-clericalism Centrism in France Nouveaux Philosophes Political positions of Emmanuel Macron Rally of Republican Lefts Sinistrisme Together (coalition) Liberalism portal France portal v t e Part of a series on Radicalism History Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Belgian Revolution Chartism Progressive Era Ideas Anti-clericalism Civic nationalism Civil liberties Classical liberalism Cultural radicalism Classical radicalism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Freedom of movement Jacobinism Labor movement Laissez-faire Liberal socialism Social democracy Libertarianism left Liberté, égalité, fraternité Modernity Populism left-wing Progressivism Rationalism Reform movement Republicanism Revolution Secularism Laicité Social change Social justice Social liberalism Suffrage women Utilitarianism Utopian socialism Welfare People Alem Alfonsín Atatürk Bentham Bolívar Bonino Bright Bryan Cartwright Castberg Clemenceau Cobbett Cobden Daladier Dewey Dilke Domergue Fox Garibaldi George Godwin Green Hébert Herriot Hobhouse Hunt Jefferson Lacombe La Follette Leclerc Lerroux Lloyd George Mazzini Mendès France Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Mommsen Mossadegh Paine Pannella Papanastasiou Papandreou Plastiras Robespierre Roosevelt Rosselli Roux Sacchi Saint-Just Servan-Schreiber Stevens Varlet Venizelos Videla Virchow Wilkes Wilson Wollstonecraft Yrigoyen Zahle Groups Alfarista Radical Front Association of Radicals for the United States of Europe Authentic Radical Liberal Party Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party European Radical Alliance Independent Radicals Italian Radical Party Italian Radicals Liberals, Democrats and Radicals National Radical Party Partido Ecologista Radical Intransigente People's Radical Party 1881 1919 1990 Political Party of Radicals Radical Cause Radical Change Radical Civic Union Radicales K Radical Democracy Radical Democratic Party Bulgaria Estonia India Spain United States Radical Federative Movement Radical International Radical League Radical Liberal Party Luxembourg Paraguay Radical Movement Radical Movement of Social Democratic Alliance Radical Party Bolivia France Hungary Italy Luxembourg Radical Party of Chile 1863 2018 Radical Party of the Left Radical People's Party Finland Norway Turkey Radical Republican Party Radical Republicans Radical Socialist Party Luxembourg Estonia Radical Socialist Republican Party Radical Whigs Radicals of the Left Radicals (UK) Socialist Radical Party Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club Transnational Radical Party Ultra-radicals By region Bulgaria Chile Denmark Ecuador France Hungary Italy Paraguay Romania Spain Switzerland United States Works Rights of Man (1791) The English Constitution Produced and Illustrated (1824) Related Conservative liberalism History of socialism Irish republicanism Liberalism in Europe History portal Liberalism portal v t e Liberalism and radicalism have played a role in the political history of France . The main line of conflict in France in the long nineteenth century was between monarchists (mainly Legitimists and Orléanists but also Bonapartists ) and republicans ( Radical-Socialists , Opportunist Republicans , and later socialists ). The Orléanists, who favoured constitutional monarchy and economic liberalism , were opposed to the Republican Radicals.

The Radical Party and especially the "republican" parties ( Democratic Republican Alliance , Republican Federation , National Centre of Independents and Peasants , Independent Republicans , Republican Party , and Liberal Democracy ) have since embraced liberalism, including its economic version, and have mostly joined either the Union for a Popular Movement in 2002, later renamed The Republicans in 2015, while a minority are affiliated with the Union of Democrats and Independents , launched in 2012.

Emmanuel Macron , a former member of the Socialist Party , launched En Marche! (later re-named Renaissance ) in 2016 and has served as President of France since 2017.

Background and history [ edit ] The early high points of liberalism in France were: 1790–1792: when Girondins and Feuillants dominated the early French Revolution ; 1848: the French Revolution of 1848 , which ended the Orléans monarchy (since 1830) and led to the creation of the French Second Republic .

In France, as in much of Southern Europe, the term liberal was used during the 19th century either to refer to the traditional liberal anti-clericalism or economic liberalism . Economic liberalism in France was long associated more with the Orléanists and with Opportunist Republicans (whose heir was the Democratic Republican Alliance ), rather than the Radical Party , leading to the use of the term radical to refer to political liberalism. The Radicals tended to be more statist than most European liberals, but shared liberal values on other issues, especially support for individual liberty and secularism, while the Republicans were keener on economic liberalism than secularism.

Intellectuals played a powerful role in all the movements, for example a major spokesman for radicalism was Émile Chartier (1868–1951), who wrote under the pseudonym of "Alain". He was a leading theorist of radicalism, and his influence extended through the Third and Fourth Republics. He stressed individualism, seeking to defend the citizen against the state. He warned against all forms of power – military, clerical, and economic. To oppose them, he exalted the small farmer, the small shopkeeper, the small town, and the little man. He idealized country life and saw Paris as a dangerous font of power.

[ 1 ] After World War II, the Republicans gathered in the liberal-conservative National Centre of Independents and Peasants , from which the conservative-liberal Independent Republicans was formed in 1962. The originally centre-left Radical Party was a declining force and joined the centre-right in 1972, causing the split of the left-wing faction and the foundation of the Radical Party of the Left , closely associated to the Socialist Party . The former was later associated with the Union for a Popular Movement .

In 1978 both the Republican Party (successor of the Independent Republicans) and the Radical Party were founding components, along with the Christian-democratic Centre of Social Democrats , of the Union for French Democracy , an alliance of non- Gaullist centre-right forces. The Republican Party, re-founded as Liberal Democracy and re-shaped as an economic liberal party, left the federation in 1998 and was later merged, along with the Radical Party, into the liberal-conservative Union for a Popular Movement (later The Republicans ) in 2002. The Radicals and several former Republicans launched the Union of Democrats and Independents in 2012.

In 2016 Emmanuel Macron , a former member of the Socialist Party , launched La République En Marche!

, a liberal party, and was elected President of France in the 2017 presidential election . The party formed an alliance with the Democratic Movement , established in 2017 as a successor of the Union for French Democracy, stripped of most former Republicans, who joined the Union for a Popular Movement (later The Republicans) or the Union of Democrats and Independents.

Timeline of parties [ edit ] 19th Century [ edit ] 1815: The Doctrinaires were formed.

1817: Former Feuillants re-united in the Democrats , also known as Liberals .

1848: A radical faction forms the Radicals , supporting the Second Republic in opposition to the Orléanists and the Moderate Republicans emerge 1870: The Third Republic is formed.

1871: The Moderate Republicans split into the Opportunist Republicans , whose official name was Republican Left (GR), and the Republican Union (UR) 1885: The GR and the UR are united in the Democratic Union (UD).

1889: The Progressive Republicans , whose official name was Liberal Republican Union (ULR), are formed. The remaining Opportunist Republicans formed the National Republican Association (ANR).

1894: The Progressive Union (UR) is formed.

The Republican tradition [ edit ] 1901: The centre-right liberal Democratic Republican Alliance (ARD) and the Popular Liberal Action (ALP) are formed.

1902: The Progressive Union (UR) is merged into the ARD.

1903: The more conservative Republican Federation (FR) is founded and the Liberal Republican Union (ULR) and National Republican Association (ANR) are merged into it.

1911: The ARD is renamed Democratic Republican Party (PRD).

1917: The ARD goes back to its original name.

1919: The ALP is merged into the FR.

1920: The ARD is further renamed Social, Democratic and Republican Party (PRDS).

1926: The ARD is finally renamed Democratic Alliance (AD).

1945: The liberal-conservative Republican Party of Liberty (PRL), successor of the FR, is founded.

1948: The liberal-conservative National Centre of Independents and Peasants (CNIP) is founded.

1949: The declining AD and the PRL are absorbed by the CNIP.

1962: A group of splinters from the CNIP, led by Valéry Giscard d'Estaing , oppose the party's decision to withdraw support to President Charles de Gaulle and, in order to continue to be part of the government, form the Independent Republicans (RI).

1974: Giscard d'Estaing is elected President of France in the presidential election .

1976: The RI are a founding member of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party .

1977: The RI are renamed Republican Party (PR).

1978: The PR joins forces with the Centre of Social Democrats , the Radical Party and the Social Democratic Party to form the Union for French Democracy (UDF).

1995: The Popular Party for French Democracy (PPDF) is formed by supporters of Giscard, including several Republicans, within the UDF.

1997: The PR, under the new leader Alain Madelin , is renamed Liberal Democracy (DL).

1998: The DL separates from the UDF, but a group of dissidents form the Independent Republican and Liberal Pole (PRIL) in order to remain loyal to the UDF.

2002: The DL and the PPDF merge with the Gaullist-conservative Rally for the Republic (RPR) to form the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP).  Liberal factions within the new party include The Reformers , the "Liberal Clubs", "Liberal Generation" and the "Free Right", as well as the Radical Party (see below).

2007: The UDF is transformed into the Democratic Movement (see below). Dissidents form the New Centre (NC) and the Civic Alliance for Democracy in Europe (ACDE) to continue the alliance with the UMP.

2009: Former UDF members formed the Centrist Alliance (AC).

2012: The NC, the AC, the ACDE, Modern Left and other minor centre-right or centrist parties form the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI), which aims at becoming a centrist alternative to the UMP, while being in alliance with it.

Democratic European Force splits from the NC.

2014: The UDI and the Democratic Movement form a short-lived alliance named The Alternative .

2015: The UMP is transformed into The Republicans (LR).

2016: The UDI joins the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party . The NC is transformed into The Centrists (LC), which continues to be part of the UDI.

2017: A moderate faction of LR forms Agir .

2021: Centre-right politicians form Horizons .

2021: Agir and Horizons join the ⇒ LREM-led Ensemble Citoyens .

The Radical tradition [ edit ] 1901: The Radicals organise themselves in the Republican, Radical and Radical-Socialist Party (Rad).

1926: Dissident Radicals form the Independent Radicals (RI), later Independent Radical Party (PRI).

1946: The Radicals, along with the PRI, the Democratic and Socialist Union of the Resistance (UDSR) and minor parties, form the Rally of Left Republicans (RGR).

1956: The Radicals and the other components of the RGR join forces with the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), however some dissidents transformed the RGR into a full-fledged party and other Radical dissidents from the Republican Centre (CR).

1959: The RGR merges into the Gaullist Union for the New Republic (UNR).

1961: Pierre Mendès France , a leading Radical and former Prime Minister, joins the Unified Socialist Party (PSU).

1972: A left-wing faction forms the Movement of Left Radicals (MRG).

1978: The Rad becomes an affiliated member of the centrist UDF.

1996: The MRG is renamed Radical-Socialist Party (PRS).

1996: The PRS is renamed Radical Party of the Left (PRG).

2002: The Rad leaves the UDF and becomes an affiliated member of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP).

2011: The Rad cuts its ties with the UMP and joins The Alliance .

2012: The Rad is, along with other parties (see above), a founding member of the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI).

2017: The Rad and the PRG are merged into the Radical Movement (MR).

2017: A group of PRG members founded The Radicals of the Left (LRG).

2019: A group of former members of the PRG re-form the PRG as an independent party.

Classical liberals [ edit ] 2006: A group of classical liberals establish the Liberal Alternative (AL).

2008: A group of dissidents leaves the AL and launches the Liberal Democratic Party (PLD).

2012: The PLD joins the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI).

Democratic Movement [ edit ] 2007: The Democratic Movement (MoDem) is formed by François Bayrou , until then leader of the Union for French Democracy (which has suffered the split of some of its founding components in 1998–2002, see above), on the remnants of the latter party.

2014: The MoDem and the Union of Democrats and Independents form a short-lived alliance named The Alternative .

2017: The MoDem forms an alliance with La République En Marche!

and endorses its leader Emmanuel Macron in the presidential election (see below).

La République En Marche!

[ edit ] 2016: Emmanuel Macron , a former member of the Socialist Party , launches La République En Marche!

(EM!).

2017: Macron is elected President of France in the presidential election .

Liberal leaders [ edit ] 19th century: Lafayette , Benjamin Constant , François Guizot , Adolphe Thiers , Jules Grévy , Léon Gambetta ARD: Émile Loubet , Armand Fallières , Paul Deschanel , Raymond Poincaré , Louis Barthou , Albert Lebrun , André Tardieu , André Maginot , Pierre-Étienne Flandin Rad/MR: Émile Combes , Georges Clemenceau , Gaston Doumergue , Édouard Herriot , Henri Queuille , Édouard Daladier , Camille Chautemps , René Mayer , Gaston Monnerville , Pierre Mendès France , Edgar Faure , Maurice Faure , Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber , Jean-Louis Borloo , Laurent Hénart CNIP: Paul Reynaud (ex-ARD), René Coty (ex-Rad), Joseph Laniel (ex-ARD), Antoine Pinay (ex-ARD), Roger Duchet RI/PR/DL: Raymond Marcellin (ex-CNIP), Michel Poniatowski (ex-CNIP), Valéry Giscard d'Estaing (ex-CNIP), Simone Veil , Jean-Pierre Soisson , Alain Madelin MRS/PRS/PRG: Robert Fabre (ex-Rad), Michel Crépeau (ex-Rad), Émile Zuccarelli , Roger-Gérard Schwartzenberg , Jean-Michel Baylet , Sylvia Pinel UMP: Jean-Claude Gaudin (ex-PR/DL), Patrick Devedjian , Jean-Pierre Raffarin (ex-PR/DL) LREM: Emmanuel Macron (ex- PS ), Sylvie Goulard (ex-MoDem) Liberal thinkers [ edit ] Montesquieu (1689–1755) Voltaire (1694–1778) Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) Marquis de Condorcet (1743–1794) Benjamin Constant (1767–1830) Frédéric Bastiat (1801–1850) Alexis de Tocqueville (1805–1859) Raymond Aron (1905–1983) Raymond Boudon (1934–2013) See also [ edit ] History of France Politics of France List of political parties in France French Republican Left (1871–1885) References [ edit ] ^ Patrick H. Hutton, ed.

Historical Dictionary of the Third French Republic, 1870-1940 (1986) vol 1 pp 12-13.

External links [ edit ] "Le Centre national des indépendants et paysans (CNIP) de 1948 à nos jours": interview with Gilles Richard, Professor of Contemporary history at Rennes Ghins, Arthur (2023). " What Is French Liberalism?

".

Political Studies.

v t e France topics History Overviews History Timeline Political history Military history Language Economic Foreign relations Journalism Liberalism and radicalism Regions History of Brittany History of Normandy Ancient Prehistory Greek colonies Celtic Gaul Roman Gaul Middle Ages Visigothic Kingdom Francia West Francia Middle Ages Kingdom of France Fundamental laws Early Modern Early modern era House of Bourbon Absolute monarchy Ancien Régime Wars of Religion Thirty Years' War Peace of Westphalia Second Hundred Years' War Louis XIV War of the Spanish Succession Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 Seven Years' War Revolution French Revolution Napoleonic era First Republic First Empire Late Modern Long nineteenth century Restoration July Monarchy Revolution of 1848 Second Republic Coup of 2 December 1851 Second Empire Government of National Defense Third Republic Belle Époque World War I Interwar Années folles World War II Vichy France Free France Liberation Provisional Government Contemporary 1900 to present Fourth Republic Algerian War Fifth Republic May 68 2005 riots Great Recession 2015 Paris attacks 2017 presidential election Coronavirus pandemic 2021 labor protests 2022 presidential election Geography Administrative divisions Cities Climate change Borders Islands Lakes Mountains National parks Rivers World Heritage Sites Politics Constitutions Elections presidential Foreign relations Politics Political scandals Human rights Intersex LGBT Judiciary Law history enforcement criminal law Military Parliament Political parties Economy Agriculture Automotive industry Banking Central bank Economic history Energy Euro Exports Franc (former currency) French subdivisions by GDP Mining Stock exchange Science and technology Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Rail Society Abortion Birth control Censorship Corruption Crime Demographics Education Health care Homelessness Immigration Life expectancy People Poverty Religion secularism Racism Social class Welfare Culture Anthem Architecture Art Coat of arms Cinema Cuisine Cultural icons Fashion Flag Gardens Language Literature Media Music Philosophy Public holidays Sport History Symbols Theatre Outline Category Portal WikiProject v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_and_radicalism_in_France&oldid=1298120085 " Categories : Politics of France Liberalism in France Liberalism and radicalism by country Radical parties in France Political history of France Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 16:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism and radicalism in France 5 languages Add topic

