Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Presentation 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Disorganized schizophrenia 25 languages العربية Bosanski Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mental disorder Medical condition Disorganized schizophrenia Other names Hebephrenic schizophrenia, hebephrenia Specialty Psychiatry Disorganized schizophrenia , or hebephrenia , is an obsolete term for a subtype of schizophrenia . It is no longer recognized as a separate condition, following the publication of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition ( DSM-5 ) in 2013, which dropped the concept of subtypes of schizophrenia, and global adoption of the eleventh revision of the International Classification of Diseases ( ICD-11 ) in 2022.

[ 1 ] It was originally proposed by the German psychiatrist Ewald Hecker in the 1870s.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Disorganized schizophrenia was classified up to ICD-10 [ 4 ] as a mental and behavioural disorder , [ 4 ] because the classification was thought to be an extreme expression of the disorganization syndrome that has been hypothesized to be one aspect of a three-factor model of symptoms in schizophrenia, [ 5 ] the other factors being reality distortion (involving delusions and hallucinations) and psychomotor poverty (lack of speech, lack of spontaneous movement and various aspects of blunting of emotion).

Presentation [ edit ] The subtype was named by Hecker as "hebephrenia" ("insanity of youth") after the Greek term for "adolescence" – ἥβη ( hḗbē ) – and possibly the ancient-Greek goddess of youth, Hebe , daughter of Hera .

[ 6 ] The name referred to the ostensibly more prominent appearance of the disorder in persons between the ages of 15 and 25 years).

[ 7 ] The prominent characteristics of the subtype were considered to be disorganized behavior and speech (see formal thought disorder ), including loosened associations and schizophasia ("word salad"), and flat or inappropriate affect , and psychiatrists had to have ruled out any possible sign of catatonic schizophrenia.

Delusions and hallucinations , as in paranoid schizophrenia, were not, although fleeting and fragmentary delusions and hallucinations are present. Behavioral disorganization, which may impair a sufferer's ability to carry out daily activities such as showering or eating, was also included.

[ 8 ] It was considered to have a poor prognosis.

[ 9 ] Individuals with disorganized schizophrenia may present socially inappropriate behaviours. These may include odd facial responses like laughter and grimacing, or not display any emotion at all ( apathy ). Individuals may also experience very little to no pleasure ( anhedonia ) and motivation ( avolition ). The subtype was considered to be one in which these features were more prominent than in other types of schizophrenia.

See also [ edit ] Catatonia Communication deviance Paranoid schizophrenia References [ edit ] ^ "Event Information - Overview" .

rcpsych.ac.uk Royal College of Psychiatrists . Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 24 June 2021 .

^ Hecker, E. (2009). Hebephrenia: A Contribution to Clinical Psychiatry. (Translated and introduced by A. Kraam.) History of Psychiatry 20: 87–106.

^ Yuhas, Daisy (1 March 2013).

"Throughout History, Defining Schizophrenia Has Remained A Challenge (Timeline)" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 2 March 2013 .

^ a b Sartorius, Norman ; Henderson, A.S.; Strotzka, H.; et al.

The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines (PDF) .

World Health Organization . pp. 76, 80– 1 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 – via who.int.

^ Liddle PF (August 1987). "The symptoms of chronic schizophrenia. A re-examination of the positive-negative dichotomy".

Br J Psychiatry .

151 (2): 145– 51.

doi : 10.1192/bjp.151.2.145 .

PMID 3690102 .

S2CID 15270392 .

^ Athanasiadis, Loukas (December 1997).

"Greek mythology and medical and psychiatric terminology" (PDF) .

The Psychiatrist .

21 (12): 781– 782.

doi : 10.1192/pb.21.12.781 .

^ "The very great majority of cases [of dementia præcox] begin in the second or third decade; 57 per cent, of the cases made use of in the clinical description began before the twenty-fifth year. This great predisposition of youth led Hecker to the name hebephrenia, "insanity of youth," for the group delimited by him; Clouston also, who spoke of an " adolescent insanity," had evidently before everything dementia praecox in view. ... Hecker was even inclined to regard the issue of his hebephrenia just as an arrest of the whole psychic life on the developmental stage of the years of puberty. In fact, we find in silly dementia at least many features which are well known to us from the years of healthy development. Among these there is the tendency to unsuitable reading, the naive occupation of the mind with the "highest problems," the crude "readiness" of judgment, the pleasure in catch words and sounding phrases, also sudden changes of mood, depression and unrestrained merriment, occasional irritability and impulsiveness of action. Further the desultoriness of the train of thought, the half-swaggering, boastful, half-embarrassed, shy behaviour, the foolish laughing, the unsuitable jokes, the affected speech, the sought-out coarseness and the violent witticisms are phenomena which in healthy individuals, as in the patients, indicate that slight inward excitement which usually accompanies the changes of sexual development." From Kraepelin, Emil Dementia praecox and paraphrenia , Chapter IX "Frequency and Causes", Chicago Medical Book. Co., ( Text ), 1919 ^ American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th edition). Washington, DC. code 295.10 pp314 ^ McGlashan TH, Fenton WS (1993).

"Subtype progression and pathophysiologic deterioration in early schizophrenia" .

Schizophr Bull .

19 (1): 71– 84.

doi : 10.1093/schbul/19.1.71 .

PMID 8451614 .

External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 10 : F20.1 ICD - 9-CM : 295.1 MeSH : D012562 v t e Mental disorders ( Classification ) Adult personality and behavior Sexual Ego-dystonic sexual orientation Paraphilia Fetishism Voyeurism Sexual anhedonia Sexual anorexia Sexual maturation disorder Sexual relationship disorder Other Factitious disorder Munchausen syndrome Fear of intimacy Gender dysphoria Intermittent explosive disorder Dermatillomania Kleptomania Pyromania Trichotillomania Personality disorder Childhood and learning Emotional and behavioral ADHD Conduct disorder ODD Emotional and behavioral disorders Separation anxiety disorder Movement disorders Stereotypic Social functioning DAD RAD Selective mutism Speech Cluttering Stuttering Tic disorder Tourette syndrome Intellectual disability X-linked intellectual disability Lujan–Fryns syndrome Psychological development ( developmental disabilities ) Pervasive Specific Mood (affective) Bipolar Bipolar I Bipolar II Bipolar NOS Cyclothymia Depression Atypical depression Dysthymia Major depressive disorder Melancholic depression Seasonal affective disorder Mania Neurological and symptomatic Autism spectrum Autism Asperger syndrome High-functioning autism PDD-NOS Savant syndrome Dementia AIDS dementia complex Alzheimer's disease Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Frontotemporal dementia Huntington's disease Mild cognitive impairment Parkinson's disease Pick's disease Sundowning Vascular dementia Wandering Other Delirium Organic brain syndrome Post-concussion syndrome Neurotic , stress -related and somatoform Adjustment Adjustment disorder with depressed mood Anxiety Phobia Agoraphobia Childhood phobia Social anxiety Social phobia Anthropophobia Specific social phobia Specific phobia Claustrophobia Other Generalized anxiety disorder OCD Panic attack Panic disorder Paranoia Stress Acute stress reaction PTSD Dissociative Depersonalization-derealization disorder Dissociative identity disorder Dissociative amnesia Dissociative fugue Dissociative disorder not otherwise specified Other specified dissociative disorder Somatic symptom Body dysmorphic disorder Conversion disorder Ganser syndrome Globus pharyngeus Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures False pregnancy Hypochondriasis Mass psychogenic illness Nosophobia Psychogenic pain Somatization disorder Physiological and physical behavior Eating Anorexia nervosa Bulimia nervosa Rumination syndrome Other specified feeding or eating disorder Nonorganic sleep Hypersomnia Insomnia Parasomnia Night terror Nightmare REM sleep behavior disorder Postnatal Postpartum depression Postpartum psychosis Sexual desire Hypersexuality Hypoactive sexual desire disorder Psychoactive substances, substance abuse and substance-related Drug overdose Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder Intoxication Physical dependence Rebound effect Stimulant psychosis Substance dependence Substance-induced psychosis Withdrawal Schizophrenia , schizotypal and delusional Delusional Delusional disorder Folie à deux Psychosis and schizophrenia-like Brief reactive psychosis Schizoaffective disorder Schizophreniform disorder Schizophrenia Childhood schizophrenia Disorganized (hebephrenic) schizophrenia Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia Simple-type schizophrenia Other Catatonia Symptoms and uncategorized Impulse-control disorder Klüver–Bucy syndrome Psychomotor agitation Stereotypy Caregiver burden Category Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Disorganized_schizophrenia&oldid=1305200805 " Categories : Schizophrenia Obsolete terms for mental disorders Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 17:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Disorganized schizophrenia 25 languages Add topic

