Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geology 2 Civil engineering 3 Military engineering Toggle Military engineering subsection 3.1 Gallery 4 Archaeology 5 Safety 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Trench 38 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Latviešu Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English کوردی Sunda Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Excavated channel in ground For other uses of the word, see Trench (disambiguation) .

A gas main being laid in a trench A trench is a type of excavation or depression in the ground that is generally deeper than it is wide (as opposed to a swale or a bar ditch ), and narrow compared with its length (as opposed to a simple hole or pit ).

[ 1 ] In geology , trenches result from erosion by rivers or by geological movement of tectonic plates . In civil engineering , trenches are often created to install underground utilities such as gas , water , power and communication lines. In construction , trenches are dug for foundations of buildings, retaining walls and dams, and for cut-and-cover construction of tunnels. In archaeology , the "trench method" is used for searching and excavating ancient ruins or to dig into strata of sedimented material. In geotechnical engineering , trench investigations locate faults and investigate deep soil properties. In trench warfare , soldiers occupy trenches to protect them against weapons fire and artillery.

Trenches are dug using manual tools such as shovel and pickaxe or heavy equipment such as backhoe , trencher , and excavator .

For deep trenches, the instability of steep earthen walls requires engineering and safety techniques such as shoring . Trenches are usually considered temporary structures that are backfilled with soil after construction or abandoned after use. Some trenches are stabilized using durable materials such as concrete to create open passages such as canal and sunken roadways.

Geology [ edit ] Depiction of the topography of the Puerto Rico Trench , the deepest part of the Atlantic Ocean Natural trenches are created as a result of erosion by running water or by glaciers (which may have long since disappeared). Others, such as rift valleys or oceanic trenches , are created by geological movement of tectonic plates . Some oceanic trenches include the Mariana Trench and the Aleutian Trench .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The former geoform is relatively deep (approximately 10 kilometres (6.2 mi)), linear and narrow, and is formed by plate subduction when plates converge.

[ 4 ] Civil engineering [ edit ] See also: Utility tunnel Automated trench digging on a street in Baku In the civil engineering fields of construction and maintenance of infrastructure, trenches play a major role. They are used for installation of underground infrastructure or utilities (such as gas mains , water mains , communication lines and pipelines ) that would be obstructive or easily damaged if placed above ground. Trenches are needed later for access to these installations for service. They may be created to search for pipes and other infrastructure whose exact location is no longer known ("search trench" or "search slit"). Finally, trenches may be created as the first step of creating a foundation wall .

Trench shoring is often used in trenchworks to protect workers and stabilise the steep walls.

An alternative to digging trenches is to create a utility tunnel . Such a tunnel may be dug by boring or by using a trench for cut-and-cover construction. The advantages of utility tunnels are the reduction of maintenance manholes, one-time relocation, and less excavation and repair, compared with separate cable ducts for each service. When they are well mapped, they also allow rapid access to all utilities without having to dig access trenches or resort to confused and often inaccurate utility maps.

An important advantage to placing utilities underground is public safety. Underground power lines, whether in common or separate channels, prevent downed utility cables from blocking roads, thus speeding emergency access after natural disasters such as earthquakes , hurricanes, and tsunamis.

[ 5 ] In some cases, a large trench is dug and deliberately preserved (not filled in), often for transport purposes.  This is typically done to install depressed motorways , open railway cuttings , or canals . However, these large, permanent trenches are significant barriers to other forms of travel, and often become de facto boundaries between neighborhoods or other spaces.

Military engineering [ edit ] Main article: Trench warfare Trenches have often been dug for military purposes. In the pre- firearm era, they were mainly a type of hindrance to an attacker of a fortified location, such as the moat around a castle (this is technically called a ditch ). An early example of this can be seen in the Battle of the Trench , a religious war , one of the early battles fought by Muhammad .

[ 6 ] With the advent of accurate firearms, trenches were used to shelter troops. Trench warfare and tactics evolved further in the Crimean War , the American Civil War and World War I , until systems of extensive main trenches, backup trenches (in case the first lines were overrun) and communication trenches often stretched dozens of kilometres along a front without interruption, and some kilometres further back from the front line. The area of land between trenches in trench warfare is known as " No Man's Land " because it often offers no protection from enemy fire. After WW1 had concluded, the trench became a symbol of WW1 and its horrors.

Gallery [ edit ] Allied troops entrenched in the Battle of Tuyutí .

Soldiers in a trench during the Gallipoli Campaign of World War I.

The Boer trench at the Battle of Magersfontein contributed to the surprise defeat of the Highland Brigade on 11 December 1899 during the Second Boer War .

Soldiers in a trench on the Western Front in World War I in winter.

A Ukrainian soldier, equipped with an anti-drone gun , in a trench during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine .

Archaeology [ edit ] Archaeological trench on an English farm site Trenches are used for searching and excavating ancient ruins or to dig into strata of sedimented material to get a sideways (layered) view of the deposits – with a hope of being able to place found objects or materials in a chronological order. The advantage of this method is that it destroys only a small part of the site (those areas where the trenches, often arranged in a grid pattern, are located). However, this method also has the disadvantage of only revealing small slices of the whole volume, and modern archeological digs usually employ combination methods.

[ 7 ] Safety [ edit ] Trenches that are deeper than about 1.5 m present safety risks arising from their steep walls and confined space. These risks are similar those from pits or any steep-walled excavations. The risks include falling, injury from cave-in (wall collapse), inability to escape the trench, drowning and asphyxiation .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Falling into the trench. Mitigation methods include barriers such as railings or fencing.

Injury from cave-in , meaning collapse of a steep wall. Mitigation includes construction of sloped walls ( sloped trench ) or stepped walls ( benched trench ). For vertical walls, trench shoring stabilizes the walls, and trench shielding provides a barrier against collapsed material. The risk of cave-in increases from surcharge load , which is any weight placed outside the trench near its edge. These loads include the spoil pile (soil excavated from the trench) or heavy equipment. These add extra stress to the walls of the trench.

Inability to escape the trench because of steep and unstable walls, which may be difficult to climb. Ladders, stairs, or ramps allow exit.

Cranes may assist rescue.

Drowning in water or mud that has accumulated in the trench from rain, seepage, or leaking water pipes.

Asphyxiation, poisoning, fire and explosion from gasses that are denser than air that have settled in a trench. These may come from nearby industrial processing of these gasses, intentional use within the trench, or leakage from nearby plumbing. These present an asphyxiation hazard and may also be toxic. Burnable gasses such as natural gas present a fire and explosion risk. Oxidizers such as pure oxygen increase the risk of fire from other fuels present in the trench. Gasses such as pure nitrogen and natural gas have densities similar to pure air but are denser when cold, for example when they have evaporated from liquid form, and may creep along the ground and fill the trench. Ventilation fans and ducts reduce the risk.

Oxygen sensors and other gas sensors detect the danger; alarms from the sensors can warn the occupants.

See also [ edit ] Cut and fill Ditch Gully Leat Trench warfare References [ edit ] ^ Code of Federal Regulations, Title 29, Volume 8, Page 374 (Code revised as of July 1, 2003, via Compliance Magazine's website) Archived June 2, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Geonames search" .

geonames.nga.mil . Retrieved 2021-06-06 .

^ Webster's new geographical dictionary . Internet Archive. Merriam-Webster. 1984.

ISBN 978-0-87779-446-2 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "Geologylink - Glossary O" .

college.cengage.com . Retrieved 2021-06-06 .

^ "StackPath" .

www.hydraulicspneumatics.com . Retrieved 2021-06-06 .

^ Sa'd, Ibn (1967).

Kitab al-tabaqat al-kabir . Vol. 2. Pakistan Historical Society. pp.

82– 84.

ASIN B0007JAWMK .

^ "Evaluation Trial Trenching | Archaeological Services | Wessex Archaeology" .

www.wessexarch.co.uk . Retrieved 2021-06-05 .

^ "eTools:Trenching and Excavation" . Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).

^ "Trenching and Excavation" . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Trenches .

Look up trench in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Trenching and Excavation (a NIOSH Safety and Health Topic, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ) Trench Safety Awareness (a NIOSH Publication, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ) v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Authority control databases National Germany United States Spain Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐498xm
Cached time: 20250812000918
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.402 seconds
Real time usage: 0.533 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1679/1000000
Revision size: 12383/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 73331/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5481/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51655/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.239/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7141466/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  425.828      1 -total
 27.88%  118.728      1 Template:Reflist
 20.07%   85.474      6 Template:Cite_web
 18.04%   76.816      5 Template:Navbox
 16.84%   71.725      1 Template:Geotechnical_engineering
 13.88%   59.090      1 Template:Short_description
 10.79%   45.943      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.77%   45.873      2 Template:Sister_project
 10.59%   45.085      1 Template:Authority_control
  9.68%   41.240      2 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:182255:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000918 and revision id 1298522771. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trench&oldid=1298522771 " Categories : Cuts (earthmoving) Earth structures Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 01:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trench 38 languages Add topic

