Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 General characteristics 3 Extent 4 Methods 5 Use of minors as perpetrators 6 Culture 7 Specific triggers of honor killings Toggle Specific triggers of honor killings subsection 7.1 Refusal of an arranged or forced marriage 7.2 Seeking a divorce 7.3 Allegations and rumors about a family member 7.4 Victims of rape 7.5 Homosexuality 7.6 Forbidden male partners 7.7 Outside the caste relations 7.8 Socializing outside the home 7.9 Renouncing or changing religion and interfaith relations 8 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 8.1 Views on women 8.2 Cultures of honor and shame 8.3 Laws and European colonialism 9 Forced suicide as a substitute 10 Restoring honor through a forced marriage 11 In Islam 12 In history 13 By region 14 International response 15 In national legal codes 16 Support and sanction 17 Notable victims 18 Comparison to other forms of murdering 19 See also 20 References 21 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Honor killing 56 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kurdî Latina Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Simple English سنڌي کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon Zazaki Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Class of murder "Honour Killing" redirects here. For the film, see Honour Killing (film) .

Part of a series on Homicide Murder Note: Varies by jurisdiction Assassination Attempted murder Child murder Consensual homicide Contract killing Crime of passion Depraved-heart murder Felony murder rule Foeticide Honor killing Human cannibalism Child cannibalism Human sacrifice Child sacrifice Internet homicide Lonely hearts killer Lust murder Lynching Mass murder Mass shooting Mass stabbing Misdemeanor murder Murder for body parts Murder–suicide Poisoning Proxy murder Pseudocommando Serial killer Angel of mercy Spree killer Thrill killing Torture murder Vehicle-ramming attack Wrongful execution Judicial murder Manslaughter In English law In US law Voluntary manslaughter Negligent homicide Reckless homicide Vehicular homicide Non-criminal homicide Note: Varies by jurisdiction War Assisted suicide Capital punishment Euthanasia Foeticide Justifiable homicide "License to kill" Family Avunculicide/Nepoticide Familicide Mariticide Uxoricide Prolicide Filicide Infanticide Neonaticide Siblicide Fratricide Sororicide Parricide Matricide Patricide Senicide Other Crucifixion Deicide Democide Friendly fire Gendercide Femicide Androcide Genocide Omnicide Regicide Stoning Suspicious death Tyrannicide War crime v t e Part of a series on Violence against women Murder Bride burning Dowry death Honor killing Femicide Infanticide Matricide Pregnant women Sati Sororicide Uxoricide Sexual assault and rape Causes of sexual violence Child sexual initiation Sexual violence statistics Forced prostitution Cybersex trafficking Human trafficking Fetish slaves Sexual slavery Violence against prostitutes Post-assault treatment of victims of sexual assault Rape Acquaintance By deception Corrective Date Effects Factors Gang Genocidal History Laws Marital Pregnancy Prevention Prison Statistics Statutory Threat Unacknowledged Wartime Sexual assault Campus Child In Service Mass Secondary victimisation Sexual violence Virgin cleansing myth Widow cleansing Disfigurement Acid attack Breast ironing Female genital mutilation Gishiri cutting Infibulation Foot binding Other issues Gaslighting Dating abuse Domestic violence outline management and pregnancy Droit du seigneur Eve teasing Forced abortion Force-feeding Forced marriage Forced pregnancy Forced sterilisation Intimate partner violence Marriage by abduction Marry-your-rapist law Online gender-based violence Raptio Sexual bullying Toxic masculinity Witch trials International legal framework DEDAW CEDAW VDPA DEVAW Belém do Pará Maputo Istanbul Related topics Prosecution of gender-targeted crimes Women's shelter 25 November 6 February By country Sex and the law Victimology Violence against LGBT people v t e An honor killing ( American English ), honour killing ( Commonwealth English ), or shame killing [ 1 ] is a type of traditionally sanctioned murder in which a person is killed, typically by members of their family, due to the belief that the victim has brought shame to the family and that the family's reputation must be restored through killing the victim. Typically a form of femicide , it is caused by culturally sanctioned beliefs that homicides or femicides are necessary as retribution for the perceived dishonoring of the family by the victim.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Although these murders are condemned by international conventions, including by legally binding documents such as the Istanbul Convention , and by human rights organizations, various cultural and religious communities continue to justify and encourage honor killings. In cases where the victim is an outsider, not murdering this individual would, in some regions, cause family members to be accused of cowardice or a "moral defect", and subsequently be stigmatized in their community. In cases when the victim is a family member, the murder evolves from the murderers' perception that the victim has brought shame or dishonor upon the entire family, which could lead to social rejection , or by violating the moral norms of a community. Typical reasons for the murders include being in a relationship or having associations with social groups outside the family that may lead to the social exclusion of a family (stigma-by-association). Examples are having premarital , extramarital or postmarital sex (in case of divorce or widowship), refusing to enter into an arranged or forced marriage , seeking a divorce or marital separation , engaging in interfaith , interracial relations or even friendships, having relations with someone from a different caste , disability , being the victim of a sexual crime, dressing in clothing , jewelry , and accessories that are associated with sexual deviance, engaging in a relationship in spite of moral marriage impediments or bans, and homosexuality.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Though both men and women commit and are victims of honor killings, in many communities conformity to moral standards implies different behavior for men and women, including stricter standards for chastity for women. In many families, the honor motive is used by men as a pretext to restrict the rights of women . Honor killings are performed in communities with the intent to punish violations of social, sexual, religious or family norms or hierarchies. In many cases, the honor killings are committed by family members against a female relative considered to have disgraced her family.

[ 13 ] Honor killings are primarily associated with the Middle East , the Maghreb and the Indian subcontinent , but they are also rooted in other societies, such as the Philippines , Northern Caucasus , Latin America , East Africa , and historically in Mediterranean Europe .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 13 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] They are also prevalent in some of their respective diasporas in countries which do not otherwise have societal norms that encourage honor killings.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 13 ] [ 16 ] Honor killings are often associated with rural and tribal areas, but they occur in urban areas as well.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Definitions [ edit ] Human Rights Watch defines "honor killings" as follows: Honor crimes are acts of violence, usually murder, committed by male family members against female family members who are perceived to have brought dishonor upon the family. A woman can be targeted by her family for a variety of reasons including, refusing to enter into an arranged marriage, being the victim of a sexual assault, seeking a divorce—even from an abusive husband—or committing adultery. The mere perception that a woman has acted in a manner to bring "dishonor" to the family is sufficient to trigger an attack.

[ 22 ] Men can also be the victims of honor killings, either committed by members of the family of a woman with whom they are perceived to have an inappropriate relationship; or by the members of their own families, the latter often connected to homosexuality or disability diagnosis.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] General characteristics [ edit ] Many honor killings are planned by multiple members of a family, sometimes through a formal "family council". The threat of murder is used as a means to control behavior, especially concerning sexuality and marriage, which may be seen as a duty for some or all family members to uphold. Family members may feel compelled to act to preserve the reputation of the family in the community and avoid stigma or shunning, particularly in tight-knit communities.

[ 26 ] Perpetrators often do not face negative stigma within their communities, because their behavior is seen as justified.

[ 27 ] Extent [ edit ] One of the world regions with a long tradition of honor-based violence is the Mediterranean The Middle East, a region where many honor killings occur The Indian subcontinent , a region where honor killings also occur, namely by reasons of caste Reliable figures of honor killings are hard to obtain, in large part because "honor" is either improperly defined or is defined in ways other than in Article 12 of the UDHR (block-quoted above) without a clear follow-up explanation. As a result, criteria are hardly ever given for objectively determining whether a given case is an instance of honor killing. Because of the lack of both a clear definition of "honor" and coherent criteria, it is often presupposed that more women than men are victims of honor killings, and victim counts often contain women exclusively.

[ 28 ] Honor killings occur in many parts of the world, but are most widely reported in the Middle East , South Asia and North Africa .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Historically, honor killings were also common in Southern Europe , until relatively recently. Generational family feuds resulting in murders continue to take place in Sardinia in the 21st century.

[ 32 ] In French culture , stories about such homicides were romanticized and featured prominently in French literature of the 19th century, and "In literature as in life, unconventional women needed to be severely punished lest their defiant attitudes inspire further acts of rebellion".

[ 33 ] In Corsica , there was a strong custom of vendetta , which required Corsicans to murder anyone who wronged their family honor. Between 1821 and 1852 approximately 4,300 vendetta killings were perpetrated in Corsica.

[ 34 ] France also had a strong culture of dueling meant to uphold honor, and France was called by the National Geographic "the dueling capital of Europe".

[ 35 ] Honor is a common theme in classical Spanish literature , being an integral part of the traditional Spanish culture ; one of the most well known Spanish literary works dealing with the concept of honor is El médico de su honra by Pedro Calderón de la Barca . The short story The Point of Honour by English writer W. Somerset Maugham makes reference to El médico de su honra and discusses the role of honor in Spanish society at the end of the 19th century. The concept of honor was studied extensively by anthropologists from the Mediterranean culture, where women's chastity played a major role in those cultures of honor.

[ 36 ] Methods [ edit ] Methods of murdering include stoning, stabbing, beating, burning, beheading, hanging, throat slashing, lethal acid attacks , shooting, and strangulation.

[ 37 ] Sometimes, communities perform murders in public to warn others in the community of the possible consequences of engaging in what is seen as illicit behavior.

[ 37 ] Use of minors as perpetrators [ edit ] Often, minor girls and boys are selected by the family to act as the murderers, so that the murderer may benefit from the most favorable legal outcome. Boys and sometimes women in the family are often asked to closely control and monitor the behavior of their siblings or other members of the family, to ensure that they do not do anything to tarnish the 'honor' and 'reputation' of the family. The boys are often asked to carry out the murder, and if they refuse, they may face serious repercussions from the family and community for failing to perform their "duty".

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Culture [ edit ] Further information: Namus The cultural features which lead to honor killings are complex. Honor killings involve violence and fear as tools for maintaining control. Honor killings are argued to have their origins among nomadic peoples and herdsmen: such populations carry all their valuables with them and risk having them stolen, and they do not have proper recourse to law. As a result, inspiring fear, using aggression, and cultivating a reputation for violent revenge to protect property is preferable to other behaviors. In societies where there is a weak rule of law, people must build fierce reputations.

[ 39 ] In many cultures where honor is of a central value, men are sources, or active generators/agents, of that honor, while the only effect that women can have on honor is to destroy it.

[ 39 ] Once the family's or clan's honor is considered to have been destroyed by a woman, there is a need for immediate revenge to restore it, for the family to avoid losing face in the community. An Amnesty International statement notes: The regime of honor is unforgiving: women on whom suspicion has fallen are not allowed to defend themselves, and family members have no socially acceptable alternative but to remove the stain on their honor by attacking the woman.

[ 40 ] The relation between social views on female sexuality and honor killings are complex. The way through which women in honor-based societies are considered to bring dishonor to men is often through their sexual behavior. Indeed, violence related to female sexual expression has been documented since Ancient Rome, when the pater familias had the right to murder an unmarried sexually active daughter or an adulterous wife. In medieval Europe, early Jewish law mandated stoning for an adulterous wife and her partner.

[ 39 ] Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban , an anthropology professor at Rhode Island College , writes that an act, or even alleged act, of any female sexual misconduct, upsets the moral order of the culture, and bloodshed is the only way to remove any shame brought by the actions and restore social equilibrium.

[ 41 ] However, the relation between honor and female sexuality is a complicated one, and some authors argue that it is not women's sexuality per se that is the 'problem', but rather women's self-determination in regard to it, as well as fertility . Sharif Kanaana, professor of anthropology at Birzeit University , says that honor killing is: A complicated issue that cuts deep into the history of Islamic society. .. What the men of the family, clan, or tribe seek control of in a patrilineal society is reproductive power. Women for the tribe were considered a factory for making men. Honor killing is not a means to control sexual power or behavior. What's behind it is the issue of fertility or reproductive power.

[ 42 ] In some cultures, honor killings are considered less serious than other murders simply because they arise from long-standing cultural traditions and are thus deemed appropriate or justifiable.

[ 41 ] Additionally, according to a poll done by the BBC's Asian network, 1 in 10 of the 500 young South Asians surveyed said they would condone any murder of someone who threatened their family's honor.

[ 43 ] Nighat Taufeeq of the women's resource center Shirkatgah in Lahore , Pakistan says: "It is an unholy alliance that works against women: the killers take pride in what they have done, the tribal leaders condone the act and protect the killers and the police connive the cover-up." [ 44 ] The lawyer and human rights activist Hina Jilani says, "The right to life of women in Pakistan is conditional on their obeying social norms and traditions." [ 45 ] A July 2008 Turkish study by a team from Dicle University on honor killings in the Southeastern Anatolia Region , the predominantly Kurdish area of Turkey, has so far shown that little if any social stigma is attached to honor killing. It also comments that the practice is not related to a feudal societal structure, "there are also perpetrators who are well-educated university graduates. Of all those surveyed, 60 percent are either high school or university graduates or at the very least, literate." [ 46 ] [ 47 ] In contemporary times, the changing cultural and economic status of women has also been used to explain the occurrences of honor killings. Women in largely patriarchal cultures who have gained economic independence from their families go against their male-dominated culture. Some researchers argue that the shift towards greater responsibility for women and less for their fathers may cause their male family members to act in oppressive and sometimes violent manners to regain authority.

[ 48 ] Fareena Alam , former editor of the British Muslim magazine Q-News , writes that honor killings which arise in Western cultures such as Britain are a tactic for immigrant families to cope with the alienating consequences of urbanization. Alam argues that immigrants remain close to the home culture and their relatives because it provides a safety net. She writes that In villages "back home", a man's sphere of control was broader, with a large support system. In our cities full of strangers, there is virtually no control over who one's family members sit, talk or work with.

Alam argues that it is thus the attempt to regain control and the feelings of alienation that ultimately leads to an honor killing.

[ 49 ] Specific triggers of honor killings [ edit ] Refusal of an arranged or forced marriage [ edit ] Main article: Forced marriage Refusal of an arranged marriage or forced marriage is often a cause of an honor killing. The family that has prearranged the marriage risks disgrace if the marriage does not proceed, [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] and the betrothed is indulged in a relationship with another individual without prior knowledge of the family members.

Seeking a divorce [ edit ] A woman attempting to obtain a divorce or separation without the consent of the husband/extended family can also be a trigger for honor killings. In cultures where marriages are arranged and goods are often exchanged between families, a woman's desire to seek a divorce is often viewed as an insult to the men who negotiated the deal.

[ 53 ] By making their marital problems known outside the family, the women are seen as exposing the family to public dishonor.

[ 26 ] Allegations and rumors about a family member [ edit ] In certain cultures, an allegation against a woman can be enough to tarnish her family's reputation, and to trigger an honor killing: the family's fear of being ostracized by the community is enormous.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Victims of rape [ edit ] Main article: Victim blaming In many cultures, victims of rape face severe violence, including honor killings, from their families and relatives. In many parts of the world, women whom men have raped are considered to have brought 'dishonor' or 'disgrace' to their families.

[ 57 ] This is especially the case if the victim becomes pregnant .

[ 58 ] Central to the code of honor, a woman's virginity , in many societies must be preserved until marriage.

[ 59 ] Homosexuality [ edit ] Further information: Violence against LGBT people There is evidence that homosexuality can also be perceived as grounds for honor killing by relatives. It is not only same-sex sexual acts that trigger violence—behaviors that are regarded as inappropriate gender expression (e.g. male acting or dressing in a "feminine way") can also raise suspicion and lead to honor violence.

[ 38 ] In one case, a gay Jordanian man was shot and wounded by his brother.

[ 60 ] In another case, in 2008, a homosexual Turkish -Kurdish student, Ahmet Yıldız , was shot outside a cafe and later died in the hospital. Sociologists have called this Turkey 's first publicized gay honor killing.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] In 2012, a 17-year-old gay youth was murdered by his father in Turkey in the southeastern province of Diyarbakır .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees states that "claims made by LGBT persons often reveal exposure to physical and sexual violence, extended periods of detention , medical abuse, the threat of execution and honor killing." [ 68 ] A 2019 study found that antigay "honor" abuse found more support in four surveyed Asian countries (India, Iran, Malaysia, and Pakistan) and among Asian British people than in a White British sample. The study also found that women and younger people were less likely to support such "honor" abuse. Muslims and Hindus were substantially more likely to approve of "honor" abuse than Christians or Buddhists, who scored lowest of the examined religious groups.

[ 69 ] Forbidden male partners [ edit ] In many honor-based cultures, a woman maintains her honor through her modesty. If a man disrupts a woman's modesty—such as through dating or having sex with her, especially if she was a virgin—the man has dishonored the woman, even if the relationship is consensual. Thus to restore the woman's lost honor, the male members of her family will often beat and murder the offender. Sometimes, violence extends to the offender's family members, since honor feud attacks are seen as family conflicts. In one case, a 16-year-old British Bangladeshi schoolboy from Blackburn , Lancashire was abducted and attacked by his Pakistani girlfriend's uncle, father, cousin and brother for dating her in an 'Honour Beating'.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Outside the caste relations [ edit ] Further information: Caste Some cultures have very strong caste social systems, based on social stratification characterized by endogamy , hereditary transmission of a style of life which often includes an occupation, ritual status in a hierarchy, customary social interaction, and exclusion based on cultural notions of purity and pollution. The caste system in India is such an example. In such cultures, it is often expected that one marries and forms closed associations only within one's caste, and avoids lower castes. When these rules are violated, this can result in violence, including honor killings.

[ 72 ] [ 11 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] Socializing outside the home [ edit ] Further information: Purdah In some cultures, women are expected to have a primarily domestic role. Such ideas are often based on practices like purdah . Purdah is a religious and social practice of female seclusion prevalent among some Muslim (especially South Asian) and Hindu communities; it often requires having women stay indoors, the avoiding of socialization between men and women, and full body covering of women, such as burqa and hijab . When these rules are violated, including by dressing in a way deemed inappropriate or displaying behavior seen as disobedient, the family may respond with violence up to honor killings.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] Renouncing or changing religion and interfaith relations [ edit ] Further information: Apostasy , Blasphemy , Heresy , and Interfaith marriage Violating religious dogma, such as changing or renouncing religion can trigger honor killings.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] Such ideas are supported by laws in some countries: blasphemy is punishable by death in Afghanistan, Iran, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Somalia; and punishable by prison in many other countries.

[ 83 ] Apostasy is also illegal in 25 countries, [ 84 ] in some punishable with the death penalty.

[ 85 ] Refusing to wear clothes associated with a culture or a religion, such as burqa , or otherwise choosing to wear what is seen as 'foreign' or 'western' types of clothing can trigger honor killings.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Marriage or relations between people of different religions can result in violence and murder.

[ 11 ] Causes [ edit ] There are multiple causes for which honor killings occur, and numerous factors interact with each other.

Views on women [ edit ] Honor killings are often a result of strongly misogynistic views towards women and the position of women in society. In these traditionally male-dominated societies, women are dependent first on their father and then on their husbands, whom they are expected to obey. Women are viewed as property and not as individuals with their own agency. As such, they must submit to male authority figures in the family—failure to do so can result in extreme violence as punishment. Violence is seen as a way of ensuring compliance and preventing rebellion.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] According to Shahid Khan, a professor at the Aga Khan University in Pakistan: "Women are considered the property of the males in their family irrespective of their class, ethnic, or religious group. The owner of the property has the right to decide its fate. The concept of ownership has turned women into a commodity which can be exchanged, bought and sold".

[ 90 ] In such cultures, women are not allowed to take control over their bodies and sexuality: these are the property of the males of the family, the father (and other male relatives) who must ensure virginity until marriage; and then the husband to whom his wife's sexuality is subordinated—a woman must not undermine the ownership rights of her guardian by engaging in premarital sex or adultery.

[ 38 ] Cultures of honor and shame [ edit ] The concept of family honor is extremely important in many communities worldwide. The UN estimates that 5,000 women and girls are murdered each year in honor killings, which are widely reported in the Middle East and South Asia, but they occur in countries as varied as Brazil, Canada, Iran, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Egypt, Sweden, Syria, Uganda, United Kingdom, the United States, and other countries.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] In honor cultures, managing reputation is an important social ethic. Men are expected to act tough and be intolerant of disrespect and women are expected to be loyal to the family and be chaste.

[ 93 ] An insult to one's personal or family honor must be met with a response, or the stain of dishonor can affect many others in the family and the wider community. Such acts often include female behaviors that are related to sex outside marriage or way of dressing, but may also include male homosexuality (like the emo killings in Iraq ). The family may lose respect in the community and may be shunned by relatives. The only way they perceive that shame can be erased is through an honor killing.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] The cultures in which honor killings take place are usually considered " collectivist cultures ", where the family is more important than the individual, and individual autonomy is seen as a threat to the family and its honor.

[ 94 ] Though it may seem in a modern context that honor killings are tied to certain religious traditions, the data does not support this claim.

[ 95 ] [ 93 ] Research in Jordan found that teenagers who strongly endorsed honor killings in fact did not come from more religious households than teens who rejected it.

[ 93 ] The ideology of honor is a cultural phenomenon that does not appear to be related to religion, be it Middle Eastern or Western countries, and honor killings likely have a long history in human societies which predate many modern religions.

[ 96 ] In the US, a rural trend known as the "small-town effect" exhibits elevated incidents of argument-related homicides among white males, particularly in honor-oriented states in the South and the West, where everyone "knows your name and knows your shame." This is similarly observed in rural areas in other parts of the world.

[ 93 ] Honor cultures pervade in places of economic vulnerability and with the absence of the rule of law, where law enforcement cannot be counted on to protect them. People then resort to their reputations to protect them from social exploitation and a man must "stand up for himself" and not rely on others to do so.

[ 96 ] To lose your honor is to lose this protective barrier. Possessing honor in such a society can grant social status and economic and social opportunities. When honor is ruined, a person or family in an honor culture can be socially ostracized, face restricted economic opportunities, and have a difficult time finding a mate.

[ 93 ] [ 96 ] A 2025 study in the American Sociological Review , using data from Turkey, found that honor killings were most common when honor norms are contested.

[ 97 ] Laws and European colonialism [ edit ] Imperial powers in 1898 Legal frameworks can encourage honor killings. Such laws include on one side leniency towards such murdering, and on the other side criminalization of various behaviors, such as extramarital sex, "indecent" dressing in public places, or homosexual sexual acts, with these laws acting as a way of reassuring perpetrators of honor killings that people engaging in these behaviors deserve punishment.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] In the Roman Empire the Roman law Lex Julia de adulteriis coercendis implemented by Augustus Caesar permitted the murder of daughters and their lovers who committed adultery at the hands of their fathers and also permitted the murder of the adulterous wife's lover at the hand of her husband.

[ 100 ] Provocation in English law and related laws on adultery in English law , as well as Article 324 of the French penal code of 1810 were legal concepts which allowed for reduced punishment for the murder committed by a husband against his wife and her lover if the husband had caught them in the act of adultery.

[ 101 ] On 7 November 1975, Law no. 617/75 Article 17 repealed the 1810 French Penal Code Article 324. The 1810 penal code Article 324 passed by Napoleon was copied by Middle Eastern Arab countries. It inspired Jordan 's Article 340 which permitted the murder of a wife and her lover if caught in the act at the hands of her husband (today the article provides for mitigating circumstances).

[ 102 ] France's 1810 Penal Code Article 324 also inspired the 1858 Ottoman Penal Code's Article 188, both the French Article 324 and Ottoman article 188 were drawn on to create Jordan's Article 340 which was retained even after a 1944 revision of Jordan's laws which did not touch public conduct and family law; [ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] article 340 still applies to this day in a modified form.

[ 102 ] France's Mandate over Lebanon resulted in its penal code being imposed there in 1943–1944, with the French-inspired Lebanese law for adultery allowing the mere accusation of adultery against women resulting in a maximum punishment of two years in prison while men have to be caught in the act and not merely accused, and are punished with only one year in prison.

France's Article 324 inspired laws in other Arab countries such as: Algeria's 1991 Penal Code Article 279 Egypt's 1937 Penal Code no. 58 Article 237 Iraq 's 1966 Penal Code Article 409 Jordan's 1960 Penal Code no. 16 Article 340 Kuwait's Penal Code Article 153 Lebanon's Penal Code Articles 193, 252, 253 and 562 These were amended in 1983, 1994, 1995, 1996, and 1999 and were eventually repealed by the Lebanese Parliament on 4 August 2011 Libya's Penal Code Article 375 Morocco's 1963 amended Penal Code Article 418 Oman's Penal Code Article 252 Palestine, which had two codes: Jordan's 1960 Penal Code 1960 in the West Bank and British Mandate Criminal Code Article 18 in the Gaza Strip These were respectively repealed by Article 1 and Article 2 and both by Article 3 of the 2011 Law no. 71 which was signed on 5 May 2011 by president Mahmoud Abbas into the 10 October 2011 Official Gazette no. 91 applying in the Criminal Code of Palestine's Northern Governorates and Southern Governorates Syria 's 1953 amended 1949 Penal Code Article 548 Tunisia's 1991 Penal Code Article 207 (which was repealed) United Arab Emirate's law no.3/1978 Article 334 Yemen's law no. 12/1994 Article 232 In Pakistan , the law was based upon on the 1860 Indian Penal Code (IPC) implemented by the colonial authorities in British India , which allowed for mitigation of punishment for charges of assault or criminal force in the case of a "grave and sudden provocation". This clause was used to justify the legal status of honor killing in Pakistan, although the IPC makes no mention of it.

[ 106 ] In 1990, the Pakistani government reformed this law to bring it in terms with the Shari'a , and the Pakistani Federal Shariat Court declared that "according to the teachings of Islam, provocation, no matter how grave and sudden it is, does not lessen the intensity of crime of murder". However, Pakistani judges still sometimes hand down lenient sentences for honor killings, justified by still citing the IPC's mention of a "grave and sudden provocation." [ 107 ] [ 108 ] Forced suicide as a substitute [ edit ] Main article: Forced suicide A forced suicide may be a substitute for an honor killing. In this case, the family members do not directly murder the victim themselves, but force him or her to commit suicide, in order to avoid punishment. Such suicides are reported to be common in southeastern Turkey.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] It was reported that in 2001, 565 women lost their lives in honor-related crimes in Ilam, Iran , of which 375 were reportedly staged as self-immolation .

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] In 2008, self-immolation "occurred in all the areas of Kurdish settlement (in Iran), where it was more common than in other parts of Iran".

[ 111 ] It is claimed that in Iraqi Kurdistan many deaths are reported as "female suicides" in order to conceal honor-related crimes.

[ 113 ] Restoring honor through a forced marriage [ edit ] Main article: Forced marriage In the case of an unmarried woman or girl associating herself with a man, losing virginity, or being raped, the family may attempt to restore its honor with a " shotgun wedding ". The groom will usually be the man who has 'dishonored' the woman or girl, but if this is not possible the family may try to arrange a marriage with another man, often a man who is part of the extended family of the one who has committed the acts with the woman or girl. This being an alternative to an honor killing, the woman or girl has no choice but to accept the marriage. The family of the man is expected to cooperate and provide a groom for the woman.

[ 39 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] In Islam [ edit ] Widney Brown, the advocacy director of Human Rights Watch , said that the practice "goes across cultures and religions".

[ 53 ] Resolution 1327 (2003) of the Council of Europe states that: [ 116 ] The Assembly notes that whilst so-called "honor crimes" emanate from cultural and not religious roots and are perpetrated worldwide (mainly in patriarchal societies or communities), the majority of reported cases in Europe have been among Muslim or migrant Muslim communities (although Islam itself does not support the death penalty for honor-related misconduct).

Many Muslim commentators and organizations condemn honor killings as an un-Islamic cultural practice.

[ 117 ] There is no mention of honor killing ( extrajudicial killing by a woman's family) in the Qur'an , [ 118 ] and the practice violates Islamic law .

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Tahira Shaid Khan, a professor of women's issues at Aga Khan University , blames such murdering on attitudes (across different classes, ethnic, and religious groups) that view women as property with no rights of their own as the motivation for honor killings.

[ 53 ] Ali Gomaa , Egypt 's former Grand Mufti , has also spoken out forcefully against honor killings.

[ 117 ] As a more generic statement reflecting the wider Islamic scholarly trend, Jonathan A. C. Brown says that "questions about honor killings have regularly found their way into the inboxes of muftis like Yusuf Qaradawi or the late scholar Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah . Their responses reflect a rare consensus . No Muslim scholar of any note, either medieval or modern, has sanctioned a man killing his wife or sister for tarnishing her or the family's honor. If a woman or man found together were to deserve the death penalty for fornication, this would have to be established by the evidence required by the Qur'an: either a confession or the testimony of four male witnesses, all upstanding in the eyes of the court, who actually saw penetration occur." [ 120 ] Further, while honor killings are common in Muslim countries like Pakistan , [ citation needed ] it is a practically unknown practice in other countries, such as Indonesia , Bangladesh (despite happening in some of its diasporas), Senegal , Qatar , and the United Arab Emirates .  This fact supports the idea that honor killings are to do with society culture rather than religion.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] The late Yemeni Muslim scholar Muḥammad Shawkānī wrote that one reason the Shari'a stipulates execution as a potential punishment for men who murder women is to counter honor killings for alleged slights of honor. He wrote, "There is no doubt that laxity on this matter is one of the greatest means leading to women's lives being destroyed, especially in the Bedouin regions, which are characterized by harsh-hardheartedness and a strong sense of honor and shame stemming from Pre-Islamic times".

[ 124 ] [ 95 ] In history [ edit ] Matthew A. Goldstein , J.D. (Arizona), has noted that honor killings were encouraged in ancient Rome , where male family members who did not take action against the female adulterers in their families were "actively persecuted".

[ 125 ] The origin of honor killings and the control of women is evidenced throughout history in the cultures and traditions of many regions. The Roman law of pater familias gave complete control to the men of the family over both their children and wives. Under these laws, the lives of children and wives were at the discretion of the men in their families. Ancient Roman Law also justified honor killings by stating that women who were found guilty of adultery could be killed by their husbands. During the Qing dynasty in China , fathers and husbands had the right to kill daughters who were deemed to have dishonored the family.

[ 126 ] Among the Indigenous Aztecs and Incas , adultery was punishable by death.

[ 125 ] During John Calvin 's rule of Geneva , women found guilty of adultery were punished by being drowned in the Rhône river.

[ 126 ] Honor killings have a long tradition in Mediterranean Europe .

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] According to the Honour Related Violence – European Resource Book and Good Practice (page 234): "Honor in the Mediterranean world is a code of conduct, a way of life and an ideal of the social order, which defines the lives, the customs and the values of many of the peoples in the Mediterranean moral".

[ 129 ] By region [ edit ] Main article: Honor killings by region According to the UN in 2002: The report of the Special Rapporteur ... concerning cultural practices in the family that are violent towards women (E/CN.4/2002/83), indicated that honor killings had been reported in Egypt , Jordan , Lebanon (the Lebanese Parliament abolished the Honor killing in August 2011), Morocco , Pakistan , the Syrian Arab Republic , Turkey , Yemen , and other Mediterranean and Persian Gulf countries, and that they had also taken place in western countries such as France , Germany and the United Kingdom , within migrant communities.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] In addition, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights gathered reports from several countries and considering only the countries that submitted reports it was shown that honor killings have occurred in Bangladesh , the United Kingdom , Brazil , Ecuador , Egypt , India , Israel , Italy , Jordan , Pakistan , Morocco , Sweden , Turkey , and Uganda .

[ 53 ] [ 132 ] According to Widney Brown, advocacy director for Human Rights Watch , the practice of honor killing "goes across cultures and religions." [ 53 ] International response [ edit ] The Istanbul Convention , the first legally binding international instrument on violence against women, prohibits honor killings. Countries listed in blue on the map are members to this convention, and, as such, have the obligation to outlaw honor killings.

Honor killings are condemned as a serious human rights violation and are addressed by several international instruments.

Honor killings are opposed by United Nations General Assembly Resolution 55/66 (adopted in 2000) and subsequent resolutions, which have generated various reports.

[ 133 ] The Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence addresses this issue. Article 42 reads: [ 134 ] Article 42 – Unacceptable justifications for crimes, including crimes committed in the name of so-called honor 1. Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that, in criminal proceedings initiated following the commission of any of the acts of violence covered by the scope of this Convention, culture, custom, religion, tradition, or so-called honor shall not be regarded as justification for such acts. This covers, in particular, claims that the victim has transgressed cultural, religious, social, or traditional norms or customs of appropriate behavior.

2. Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that incitement by any person of a child to commit any of the acts referred to in paragraph 1 shall not diminish the criminal liability of that person for the acts committed.

The World Health Organization (WHO) addressed the issue of honor killings and stated: "Murders of women to 'save the family honor' are among the most tragic consequences and explicit illustrations of embedded, culturally accepted discrimination against women and girls." [ 135 ] According to the UNODC : "Honour crimes, including killing, are one of history's oldest forms of gender-based violence. It assumes that a woman's behavior casts a reflection on the family and the community. ... In some communities, a father, brother, or cousin will publicly take pride in a murder committed to preserving the 'honor' of a family. In some such cases, local justice officials may side with the family and take no formal action to prevent similar deaths." [ 136 ] In national legal codes [ edit ] Legislation on this issue varies, but today the vast majority of countries no longer allow a husband to legally murder a wife for adultery (although adultery itself continues to be punishable by death in some countries) or to commit other forms of honor killings. However, in many places, adultery and other "immoral" sexual behaviors by female family members can be considered mitigating circumstances in the case when they are murdered, leading to significantly shorter sentences.

Contemporary laws which allow for mitigating circumstances or acquittals for men who murder female family members due to sexual behaviors are, for the most part, inspired by the French Napoleonic Code (France's crime of passion law, which remained in force until 1975).

[ 137 ] The Middle East, including the Arab countries of North Africa, Iran and non-Arab minorities within Arabic countries, have high recorded level of honor crimes, and these regions are the most likely to have laws offering complete or partial defenses to honor killings. However, with the exception of Iran, laws which provide leniency for honor killings are not derived from Islamic law, but from the penal codes of the Napoleonic Empire.

[ 138 ] French culture shows a higher level of toleration of such crimes among the public, compared to other Western countries; and indeed, recent surveys have shown the French public to be more accepting of these practices than the public in other countries. One 2008 Gallup survey compared the views of the French, German and British public and those of French, German and British Muslims on several social issues: 4% of the French public said "honor killings" were "morally acceptable" and 8% of the French public said "crimes of passion" were "morally acceptable"; honor killings were seen as acceptable by 1% of German public and also 1% of the British public; crimes of passion were seen as acceptable by 1% of German public and 2% of the British public. Among Muslims, 5% in Paris, 3% in Berlin, and 3% in London saw honor killings as acceptable, and 4% in Paris (less than the French public), 1% in Berlin, and 3% in London saw crimes of passion as acceptable.

[ 139 ] The traditional culture of family honor was also connected to duel culture. The duel tradition survived well into the 20th century in France, [ 140 ] with France being called by the National Geographic "the dueling capital of Europe".

[ 141 ] According to the report of the United Nations Special Rapporteur submitted to the 58th session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in 2002 concerning cultural practices in the family that reflect violence against women (E/CN.4/2002/83): The Special Rapporteur indicated that there had been contradictory decisions with regard to the honor defense in Brazil , and that legislative provisions allowing for partial or complete defence in that context could be found in the penal codes of Argentina , Ecuador , Egypt , Guatemala , Iran , Israel , Jordan , Peru , Syria , Venezuela and the Palestinian National Authority .

[ 130 ] As of 2022, most countries with complete or partial defenses for murdering due to sexual behaviors or parental disobedience are MENA countries , but there are some notable exceptions, namely Philippines . The legal aspects of honor killings in different countries are discussed below: Yemen : laws effectively exonerate fathers who murder their children; [ 142 ] also the blood money paid for murdered women is less than that for murdered males.

[ 143 ] Iran : Article 630 exempts a husband from punishment if he murders his wife or her lover upon discovering them in the act of adultery; article 301 stipulates that a father and paternal grandfather are not to be retaliated against for murdering their child/grandchild.

[ 144 ] Jordan : In recent years, Jordan has amended its Code to modify its laws, which used to offer a complete defense for honor killings.

[ 145 ] Syria : In 2009, Article 548 of the Syrian Law code was amended. Beforehand, the article waived any punishment for males who murdered a female family member for inappropriate sexual acts.

[ 146 ] Article 548 states that "He who catches his wife or one of his ascendants, descendants or sister committing adultery ( flagrante delicto ) or illegitimate sexual acts with another and he killed or injured one or both of them benefits from a reduced penalty, that should not be less than two years in prison in case of killing." Article 192 states that a judge may opt for reduced punishments (such as short-term imprisonment) if the murder was done with an honorable intent. In addition to this, Article 242 says that a judge may reduce a sentence for murders that were done in rage and caused by an illegal act committed by the victim.

[ 146 ] In Brazil , an explicit defense to murder in case of adultery has never been part of the criminal code, but a defense of "honor" (not part of the criminal code) has been widely used by lawyers in such cases to obtain acquittals. Although this defense has been generally rejected in urbanized areas since the 1950s, it has been very successful in the interior of the country. In 1991 Brazil's Supreme Court explicitly rejected the "honor" defense as having no basis in Brazilian law.

[ 147 ] Turkey : In Turkey, persons found guilty of this crime are sentenced to life in prison.

[ 148 ] In practice however, younger male family members are sometimes pushed to murder because their sentences are much shorter. There are well documented cases, where Turkish courts have sentenced whole families to life imprisonment for an honor killing. The most recent was on 13 January 2009, where a Turkish Court sentenced five members of the same Kurdish family to life imprisonment for the honor killing of Naile Erdas, 16, who got pregnant as a result of rape.

[ 149 ] Pakistan : Honor killings are known as karo kari ( Sindhi : ڪارو ڪاري ) ( Urdu : کاروکاری ). The practice is supposed to be prosecuted as an ordinary killing, but in practice police and prosecutors often ignore it.

[ 150 ] Often, a man who has committed murder must simply claim it was for his honor and he will avoid punishment.

Nilofar Bakhtiar , an advisor to Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz , stated that as many as 1,261 women were murdered in honor killings in 2003.

[ 151 ] The Hudood Ordinances , enacted in 1979 by President Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq , had the effect of reducing legal protections for women, especially regarding sex outside marriage. This law made it much riskier for women to come forward with accusations of rape. On 8 December 2004, under international and domestic pressure, Pakistan enacted a new law that made honor killings punishable by a prison term of seven years, or by the death penalty in the most extreme cases.

[ 152 ] In 2006, the Women's Protection Bill amended the Hudood Ordinances.

[ 153 ] In 2016, Pakistan repealed a loophole which allowed the perpetrators of honor killings to avoid punishment by seeking forgiveness for the crime from another family member, and thus be legally pardoned.

[ 154 ] Hundreds of women are murdered by family members in Pakistan each year in so-called "honour" killings for violating conservative norms governing women's relationships.

[ 155 ] Egypt : Several studies on honor crimes by The Centre of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law, at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London, includes one which reports on Egypt's legal system, noting a gender bias in favor of men in general, and notably article 17 of the Penal Code: judicial discretion to allow reduced punishment in certain circumstance, often used in honor killings case.

[ 156 ] Haiti : In 2005, the laws were changed, abolishing the right of a husband to be excused for murdering his wife due to adultery. Adultery was also decriminalized.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] Uruguay : until December 2017, [ 159 ] article 36 of the Penal Code provided for the exoneration for murder of a spouse due to "the passion provoked by adultery".

[ 160 ] The case of violence against women in Uruguay has been debated in the context that it is otherwise a liberal country; [ 161 ] nevertheless, domestic violence is a very serious problem; according to a 2018 United Nations study, Uruguay has the second-highest rate of killings of women by current or former partners in Latin America, after the Dominican Republic.

[ 162 ] Despite having a reputation of being a progressive country, Uruguay has lagged behind with regard to its approach to domestic violence; [ 163 ] for example, in Chile , considered one of the most socially conservative countries of the region, similar legislation permitting such honor killings was repealed in 1953.

[ 164 ] Uruguay's honor culture has been prominent well into the 20th century, as exemplified by the culture of duels , which survived in Uruguay until the 1970s, [ 165 ] long after it had been abandoned in other parts of the Western world. Duels in Uruguay were widespread in the early 20th century, were legalized in 1920, in an unusual political move; and remained legal until 1992.

[ 166 ] Philippines : murdering one's spouse upon being caught in the act of adultery or one's daughter upon being caught in the act of premarital sex is punished by destierro (Art. 247 [ 167 ] ) (destierro is banishment from a geographical area for a period of time). The penalty for a woman killing her own child less than three days old also carries a reduced penalty if the killing is done in order to conceal her dishonor under Article 255 of the Revised Penal Code.

[ 168 ] Normally, the act of killing one's spouse or child is punishable by reclusion perpetua or imprisonment from 20 years and 1 day to 40 years under Article 246 of the Revised Penal Code for the crime of parricide, [ 168 ] although any homicide may benefit from the general mitigating circumstances provided for crimes (see Article 13 [ 169 ] ) Philippine maintains several other traditionalist laws: it is the only country in the world (except Vatican City) that bans divorce; it is one of 20 countries that still has a marry-your-rapist law (that is, a law that exonerates a rapist from punishment if he marries the victim after the attack); [ 170 ] [ 171 ] and the Philippines is also one of the few non-Muslim majority countries to have a criminal law against adultery (Philippine's adultery law also differentiates by gender defining and punishing adultery more severely if committed by women – see articles 333 and 334) [ 167 ] These laws are based on old Spanish laws that were repealed in Spain in 1963 (the honor killing law) [ 172 ] and in 1978 (the adultery law).

[ 173 ] The origin of Philippine's "marry-your-rapist law" can be traced to the Napoleonic French Code (the "marry-your-rapist law" was in force in France until 1994 [ 174 ] ), a code which has influenced directly or indirectly many legal codes of the world, because at the time of its enactment it was associated with modernization. In addition to honor killings, Philippine has also received international criticism for extrajudicial killings and forced disappearances in the Philippines , which have been openly encouraged by the government.

[ 175 ] Support and sanction [ edit ] Actions of Pakistani police officers and judges (particularly at the lower level of the judiciary [ 176 ] ) have, in the past, seemed to support the act of honor killings in the name of family honor. Police enforcement, in situations of admitted murder, does not always take action against the perpetrator. Also, judges in Pakistan (particularly at the lower level of the judiciary [ 176 ] ), rather than ruling cases with gender equality in mind, also seem to reinforce inequality and in some cases sanction the murder of women considered dishonorable.

[ 176 ] Often, a suspected honor killing never even reaches court, but in cases where they do, the alleged killer is often not charged or is given a reduced sentence of three to four years in jail. In a case study of 150 honor killings, the proceeding judges rejected only eight claims that the women were murdered for the honor. The rest were sentenced lightly.

[ 177 ] In many cases in Pakistan, one of the reasons honor killing cases never make it to the courts, is because, according to some lawyers and women's right activists, Pakistani law enforcement do not get involved. Under the encouragement of the killer, police often declare the killing as a domestic case that warrants no involvement. In other cases, the women and victims are too afraid to speak up or press charges. Police officials, however, claim that these cases are never brought to them, or are not major enough to be pursued on a large scale.

[ 178 ] The general indifference to the issue of honor killing within Pakistan is due to a deep-rooted gender bias in law, the police force, and the judiciary. In its report, "Pakistan: Honor Killings of Girls and Women", [ 179 ] published in September 1999, Amnesty International criticized governmental indifference and called for state responsibility in protecting human rights of female victims. To elaborate, Amnesty strongly requested the Government of Pakistan to take 1) legal, 2) preventive, and 3) protective measures. First of all, legal measures refer to a modification of the government's criminal laws to guarantee equal legal protection of females. On top of that, Amnesty insisted the government assure legal access for the victims of crime in the name of honor. When it comes to preventive measures, Amnesty underlined the critical need to promote public awareness through the means of media, education, and public announcements. Finally, protective measures include ensuring a safe environment for activists, lawyers, and women's groups to facilitate the eradication of honor killings. Also, Amnesty argued for the expansion of victim support services such as shelters.

Kremlin-appointed Chechen president Ramzan Kadyrov said that honor killings were perpetrated on those who deserved to die. He said that those who are killed have "loose morals" and are rightfully shot by relatives in honor killings. He did not vilify women alone but added that "If a woman runs around and if a man runs around with her, both of them are killed." [ 180 ] [ 181 ] In 2007, Tor Erling Staff (1933 - 2018), a lawyer who worked for the Supreme Court of Norway , stated that he wanted the punishment reduced from 17 years in prison to 15 years in the case of honor killings that took place in Norway . He explained that the Norwegian public did not understand other cultures who practiced honor killings, or understand their thinking, and that Norwegian culture "is self-righteous".

[ 182 ] In 2008, Israr Ullah Zehri , a Pakistani politician in Balochistan , defended the honor killings of five women belonging to the Umrani tribe by a relative of a local Umrani politician.

[ 183 ] Zehri defended the murdering in Parliament and asked his fellow legislators not to make a fuss about the incident. He said, "These are centuries-old traditions, and I will continue to defend them. Only those who indulge in immoral acts should be afraid." [ 184 ] [ 185 ] Nilofar Bakhtiar , who was Minister for Tourism and Advisor to Pakistan Prime Minister on Women's Affairs, campaigned against honor killings in Pakistan while in office.

[ 186 ] Notable victims [ edit ] This is an incomplete list of notable victims of Honor killing.

See also Victims of honor killing Tursunoy Saidazimova , an Uzbek actress in the Uzbek SSR and one of the first to sing onstage without a face-veil. She was murdered by her husband shortly after her career took off.

Nurkhon Yuldashkhojayeva , one of the first Uzbek actresses and one of the first Uzbek women to dance onstage without a paranja . She was stabbed to death by her brother.

Tina Isa , a 16-year-old American teenager stabbed and murdered by her parents for having an affair with an African American man.

Rukhsana Naz , a 19-year-old British Pakistani woman and mother-of-two from Normanton, Derby , who was murdered by family members.

Surjit Athwal , a 27-year-old British-Indian woman murdered in India. Her murder was instigated by her mother-in-law and in collusion with Surjit's husband.

Tulay Goren , a 15-year-old Kurdish schoolgirl from Woodford Green , East London who went missing in January 1999. In December 2009, her father Mehmet Goren was convicted of her murder. Mehmet killed Tulay because of she was in a relationship with an older man, from a different branch of the Islamic faith.

Samia Sarwar , a Pakistani woman who was shot dead in her lawyers' office in Lahore by an assassin hired by her own parents.

Jaswinder Kaur Sidhu , an Indo-Canadian beautician who was kidnapped, tortured, and killed in India on orders of her mother and uncle as punishment for her secret marriage.

Nitish Katara , a 23-year-old Indian business executive in Delhi who was murdered by Vikas Yadav because the latter's family did not approve of the former's relationship with Bharti Yadav, sister of Vikas Yadav.

Fadime Şahindal , a Kurdish immigrant moved to Sweden who was murdered by her father in front of her mother and two sisters.

Heshu Yones , a 16-year-old Iraqi Kurd teenager from Acton , London who was murdered by her father for becoming too " westernised " and for engaging in a relationship against his orders. Heshu's case was the first in the United Kingdom to be legally recognised and prosecuted as an honour killing.

Shafilea Ahmed , a 17-year-old British Pakistani girl who was murdered by her parents due to her refusal to accept an arranged marriage .

Hatun Sürücü , a Kurdish-Turkish woman living in Germany was murdered by her youngest brother. Sürücü had divorced the cousin she was forced to marry at the age of 16, and was reportedly dating a German man.

Samaira Nazir , a 25-year-old British Pakistani woman who was murdered by her brother and cousin for refusing to enter into an arranged marriage and for rejecting her parents' choices of suitors from Pakistan.

Ghazala Khan , a Danish woman of Pakistani descent, who was shot and killed in Denmark by her brother after she had married against the will of her family.

Banaz Mahmod , a 20-year-old Iraqi Kurdish woman who lived in Mitcham , South London murdered on the orders of her family because she ended a violent and abusive forced marriage and started a relationship with someone of her own choosing. Her story was chronicled in the 2012 documentary film Banaz: A Love Story .

Hina Saleem , a Pakistani woman resident in Italy who was killed by her father due to her Western boyfriend and her father instead wanted her in an arranged marriage .

Manoj and Babli , two Indian newlyweds kidnapped and murdered. The accused in the murder included relatives of Babli, like her grandfather, brother, two cousins, maternal and paternal uncles.

Sadia Sheikh , a 20-year-old Belgian woman of Pakistani heritage was fatally shot by her brother in Lodelinsart , Charleroi after her parents pressured her to marry a cousin who she had never met. The case has been called Belgium's first honour killing trial.

Aqsa Parvez , a high school student strangled and murdered by her brother and father in Mississauga , Ontario , Canada.

Morsal Obeidi , a German-Afghan girl who was killed by her brother in Hamburg , Germany .

Rand Abdel-Qader , a student at Basra University killed by her father because she had formed a friendship with a British soldier stationed in the city.

Sandeela Kanwal , a Pakistani woman living in the Atlanta metropolitan area in Clayton County, Georgia , who was murdered by her father .

Aasiya Zubair , a Muslim Pakistani American MBA student was stabbed and decapitated by her ex-husband Muzzammil Hassan in Bridges TV station in Orchard Park, New York .

Coty Beavers , a 28-year-old man killed by his wife's father.

Qandeel Baloch , a 26-year-old Pakistani model who was strangled to death while she slept in her parents' house in Multan . Her brother confessed to the murder saying she was "bringing disrepute" to the "family's honour".

Rahaf Mohammed , a 24-year-old Saudi Canadian survivor whose family tried to kill her for leaving Islam .

Noor Almaleki Afzal Kohistani , a Pakistani Honour Killing activist who was murdered by three other men in his family village.

Comparison to other forms of murdering [ edit ] Honor killings, along with dowry killings (most of which are committed in South Asia ), gang-related murderings of women as revenge (killings of female members of rival gang members' families—most of which are committed in Latin America ) and witchcraft accusation killings (most of which are committed in Africa and Oceania ) are some of the most recognized forms of femicide .

[ 37 ] [ 135 ] Human rights advocates have compared "honor killings" to " crimes of passion " in Latin America (which are sometimes treated extremely leniently) and the murdering of women for lack of dowry in India .

[ 53 ] Some commentators have stressed the point that the focus on honor killings should not lead people to ignore other forms of gender-based murdering of women, in particular, those which occur in Latin America ( femicides such as "crimes of passion" and gang-related killings); the murder rate of women in this region is extremely high, with El Salvador being reported as the country with the highest rate of murders of women in the world.

[ 187 ] In 2002, Widney Brown, advocacy director for Human Rights Watch , stated that "crimes of passion have a similar dynamic in that the women are murdered by male family members and the crimes are perceived as excusable or understandable".

[ 53 ] See also [ edit ] Blood atonement Child abuse Child murder Chronicle of a Death Foretold Convention on the Rights of the Child Corrective rape Crime of passion Crimes against humanity Domestic violence Extramarital sex Face (sociological concept) Femicide Child neglect Filicide Fornication Gender apartheid Gendercide Guilt–shame–fear spectrum of cultures Hate crime Honor suicide Human rights Human sacrifice Infanticide Izzat (honour) Ka-Mer Kiri-sute gomen Krvna osveta LGBT rights by country or territory Lynching Memini Namus Premarital sex Religious violence Sati (practice) Slut-shaming Universal Declaration of Human Rights Violence against LGBT people Violence against women Women's rights Youth rights Homophobia Ableism Racism References [ edit ] ^ Annan, Kofi (5 June 2000).

"Secretary-General. In Address to "Women 2000" Special Session, Says Future of Planet Depends Upon Women" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 6 August 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2017 .

^ "Definition of HONOR KILLING" .

www.merriam-webster.com .

^ "Honour killing" .

^ "Dictionary.com | Meanings & Definitions of English Words" .

Dictionary.com .

^ "Ethics: Honour Crimes" . BBC. 1 January 1970 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ "Honor killing: Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary" . merriam-webster.com. 31 August 2012.

Archived from the original on 22 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ "Shocking gay honor killing inspires movie" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 29 September 2013 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 .

^ "Iraqi immigrant convicted in Arizona 'honor killing' awaits sentence" .

CNN . 23 February 2011. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 .

^ "Why do families kill their daughters?" .

BBC News . 29 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 23 June 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 23 May 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ a b c Team, Delhi City (12 February 2018).

"Love in the time of honour killings" .

The Hindu .

Archived from the original on 11 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 June 2021 .

^ "Torus - Honour Based Abuse – Day of Memory 2024" .

^ a b c "BBC - Ethics - Honour crimes" .

^ "India 'honour killings': Paying the price for falling in love" .

BBC News . 20 September 2013.

^ De Guzman, Joseph; Jamias, Janica Keiths (January 2016).

The daughter clause: A study of Article 247 of the Revised Penal Code of the Philippines (Bachelor's thesis). De La Salle University.

^ a b "Honour Killings by Region" . Archived from the original on 8 December 2013.

^ "What is honour-based abuse and how does it affect men?" .

Respect .

^ " 'Honour-based' offences soared by 81% in last five years" .

the Guardian . 31 October 2021 . Retrieved 11 April 2022 .

^ Grzyb, Magdalena A. (2016).

"An explanation of honour-related killings of women in Europe through Bourdieu's concept of symbolic violence and masculine domination" .

Current Sociology .

64 (7): 1036– 1053.

doi : 10.1177/0011392115627479 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 June 2021 . Retrieved 23 May 2021 .

^ " 'Honour killings increasing in urban areas' " . 22 December 2016.

Archived from the original on 23 May 2021 . Retrieved 23 May 2021 .

^ "Urban honour killings: Backlash against change - Times of India" .

The Times of India . 23 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 23 May 2021 . Retrieved 23 May 2021 .

^ "Violence Against Women and "Honor" Crimes" .

Human Rights Watch .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2004 . Retrieved 6 April 2001 .

^ Razzall, Katie; Khan, Yasminara (11 April 2017).

"Male 'honour' cases 'underreported' " .

Archived from the original on 28 January 2019 . Retrieved 28 January 2019 .

^ Afghan couple stoned to death – Central & South Asia Archived 4 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Al Jazeera English (16 August 2010). Retrieved 1 October 2011.

^ "Honour Based Abuse and Violence" .

Derby and Derbyshire Safeguarding Children Partnership . Retrieved 13 August 2024 .

^ a b "FAQ" . Hbv-awareness.com.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ "Introduction – Preliminary Examination of so-called Honour Killings in Canada" . Justice.gc.ca. 24 September 2013.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ Malik, I.H. (2005). Culture and Customs of Pakistan. Greenwood Press, Westport; Çakır, R., Yavuz, M. F., and Demircan, T. (2004). Türkiye'de, Namus Saikiyle İşlenen Adam Öldürme Suçlarının Değerlendirilmesi [Evaluation of Honor Related Homicides in Turkey] Adli Tıp Dergisi [Journal of Forensic Medicine], 18(3-4):27–33. Öztürk, M.and Demirdağ, M.A. (2013). Namusunu Kanla Temizleyenler: Mardin Cezaevi'nde Namus Davası Nedeniyle Yatan Mahkûmlar Üzerine bir Araştırma [The Ones Who Restored Their Honour With Blood: A Sociological Research On Prisoners Convicted for Honour Related Issues in the Mardin Jailhouse]. Sosyal Politika Çalışmaları, 7(30):117–135. See also Ermers, R., 2018. Honor Related Violence. A New Social Psychological Perspective, Routledge, p. 196-197.

^ "The Horror of 'Honor Killings', Even in US" . 10 April 2012.

Archived from the original on 27 June 2020 . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

^ " 'Honor killings': 5 things to know" .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Honor killings – UAB Institute for Human Rights Blog" .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ Rome, Tom Kington (14 September 2023).

"Ten killed in two-decade family feud" .

^ Lieberman, L. (1999). "Crimes of reason, crimes of passion: Suicide and the adulterous woman in nineteenth-century France".

Journal of Family History .

24 (2): 131– 147.

doi : 10.1177/036319909902400201 .

PMID 11623654 .

S2CID 10012012 .

^ Willsher, Kim (20 October 2012).

"On Corsica, the intrigue of crime and politics claims another life" .

The Guardian .

^ "Why France was the dueling capital of Europe" .

National Geographic Society . 19 August 2020. Archived from the original on 20 March 2021.

^ "Honor in Latin America, to 1900" .

^ a b c d "Femicide: A Global Issue that demands Action" (PDF) .

Genevadeclaration.org . Academic Council on the United Nations System. p. 60.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 June 2014 . Retrieved 20 May 2018 .

^ a b c "Honour Related Violence" (PDF) .

Humanrights.ch . Kvinnoforum. 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 20 May 2018 .

^ a b c d "Historical Context – Origins of Honour Killing / Honour Killing – Worldwide / Honour Killing – In Countries with Islamic Law – Preliminary Examination of so-called Honour Killings in Canada" . Justice.gc.ca. 24 September 2013.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ "Broken bodies, shattered minds: Torture and ill-treatment of women" . Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 15 February 2008 . Retrieved 6 March 2001 .

^ a b Fluehr-Lobban, Carolyn.

"Cultural Relativism and Universal Rights" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 June 2012 . Retrieved 2 December 2011 .

^ Ruggi, Suzanne (8 June 1998).

"Commodifying Honor in Female Sexuality: Honor Killings in Palestine" .

Middle East Research and Information Project . Retrieved 8 February 2008 .

^ "One in 10 'backs honor killings' " .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 30 November 2008 . Retrieved 8 December 2001 .

^ Culture of Discrimination: A Fact Sheet on "Honor" Killings Archived 19 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Amnesty International. Retrieved 1 October 2011.

^ "PAKISTAN Honour killings of girls and women" . Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 13 September 2016 . Retrieved 15 April 2008 .

^ Gezer, Murat.

"Honor killing perpetrators welcomed by society, study reveals" .

Today's Zaman . Archived from the original on 19 July 2008 . Retrieved 15 July 2008 .

^ SEV'ER, AYSAN.

"Feminist Analysis of Honor Killings in Rural Turkey" (PDF) . University of Toronto . Retrieved 2 January 2015 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Ince, Hilal Onur; Yarali, Aysun; Ozsel, Dogancan (2009). "Customary Killings in Turkey and Turkish Modernization".

Middle Eastern Studies .

45 (4): 537– 551.

doi : 10.1080/00263200903009593 .

S2CID 144871658 .

^ Alam, Fareena (6 July 2004).

"Take the Honor Out of Killing" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 28 August 2013 . Retrieved 2 December 2011 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 June 2017 . Retrieved 20 September 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Ethics: Honour crimes" . BBC. 1 January 1970.

Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 20 September 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ a b c d e f g Mayell, Hillary (12 February 2002).

"Thousands of Women Killed for Family "Honor" " .

National Geographic News .

National Geographic Society . Archived from the original on 19 October 2015 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 .

Pdf via unl.edu Archived 13 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Ethics: Honour crimes" . BBC. 1 January 1970.

Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ Dasgupta, Bhaskar (21 February 2004).

"No Honour in Honour Killings" . countercurrents.org.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 21 September 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Ethics – Honour crimes" . BBC. 1 January 1970.

Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 .

^ Harter, Pascale (14 June 2011).

"Libya rape victims 'face honour killings' " . BBC.

Archived from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2020 . Retrieved 16 June 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Jimenez, Marina.

"Gay Jordanian now 'gloriously free' in Canada" .

The Globe and Mail . Toronto. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007 . Retrieved 20 May 2004 .

^ Bilefsky, Dan (25 November 2009).

"Soul-Searching in Turkey After a Gay Man Is Killed" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2011 . Retrieved 16 February 2017 .

^ Yücel, Deniz (7 September 2009).

"Ehrenmord in der Türkei: "Jeder soll wissen, ich bin schwul" " .

die Tageszeitung .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2016 . Retrieved 16 April 2016 .

^ The German Democratic Turkey Forum (DTF) has prepared a report with details on the killing Archived 8 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine and the subsequent court case. Retrieved 31 March 2011.

^ Bilefsky, Dan (26 November 2009).

"Soul-Searching in Turkey After a Gay Man Is Killed" .

The New York Times . pp. A16.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2011 . Retrieved 26 November 2009 .

^ Birch, Nicholas (19 July 2008).

"Was Ahmet Yildiz the victim of Turkey's first gay honor killing?" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on 25 June 2011 . Retrieved 27 September 2008 .

^ "Father confesses to killing his own son in landmark homosexual murder case – LOCAL" .

Hürriyet Daily News . 13 September 2011.

Archived from the original on 2 May 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ "Father gets life imprisonment for murdering gay son in Turkey – LGBTQ Nation" . Lgbtqnation.com. 2 July 2012. Archived from the original on 24 April 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ UNHCR Guidance Note on Refugee Claims Relating to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity, II, B. para 14 Archived 7 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine . United Nations High Commission for Refugees.org (21 November 2008). Retrieved 1 October 2011.

^ Lowe, Michelle; Khan, Roxanne; Thanzami, Vanlal; Barzy, Mahsa; Karmaliani, Rozina (2021).

"Anti-gay "Honor" Abuse: A Multinational Attitudinal Study of Collectivist- Versus Individualist-Orientated Populations in Asia and England" (PDF) .

Journal of Interpersonal Violence .

36 ( 15– 16): 7866– 7885.

doi : 10.1177/0886260519838493 .

PMID 30924715 .

S2CID 85566154 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 November 2021 . Retrieved 25 August 2021 .

^ "Male Asylum Applicants Who Fear Becoming the Victims of Honor Killings: The Case for Gender Equality" .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2019 . Retrieved 12 February 2019 .

^ "Blackburn men jailed for 'honour attack' on boy, 16" .

BBC News . 22 December 2017.

^ "In south India, a 20-year-old survivor of honor killing turns crusader" .

Reuters . 29 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 11 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 June 2021 – via www.reuters.com.

^ "In Tamil Nadu, anatomy of a caste crime: Families devastated by honour killings speak of the scourge" . August 2019.

Archived from the original on 22 August 2020 . Retrieved 10 July 2020 .

^ "Caste kills more in India than coronavirus" . 15 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 11 June 2021 .

^ "India killing: 'My father ordered my husband's murder' " .

BBC News . 20 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 11 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 June 2021 .

^ "In Pakistan, five girls were killed for having fun. Then the story took an even darker twist" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2020 . Retrieved 11 June 2021 .

^ "Pakistani women murdered after leaked video circulates online" . 18 May 2020.

Archived from the original on 2 June 2020 . Retrieved 2 June 2020 .

^ "Why do families kill their daughters?" .

BBC News . 29 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 23 June 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ "About – Stop Honour Killings" . Stophonourkillings.com.

Archived from the original on 5 May 2021 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Honor Killings Fuel Tensions in Iraq's Kurdish North" . Voice of America. 27 October 2009.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Honour killing: Couple who converted to Islam 'killed by family' " . Tribune.com.pk. 21 October 2012.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ Deutsche Welle (www.dw.com).

"When Muslims renounce their faith | Germany | News and in-depth reporting from Berlin and beyond | DW | 17.04.2014" . DW.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ Text by: Sophie GORMAN (31 October 2018).

"Blasphemy is a crime not only in Pakistan, but Europe too" . France24.com.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ Villa, Virginia (30 September 2021).

"40% of world's countries and territories had blasphemy laws in 2019 | Pew Research Center" . Pewresearch.org.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2016 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Sharia law and the death penalty" (PDF) .

Penal Reform International .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ McKee, Brianna (19 August 2021).

"Afghan Woman killed for not wearing a burqa after Taliban pledge to uphold women's rights" .

Skynews.com.au . Retrieved 11 March 2023 .

^ "Man convicted of killing daughter in clash over hijab dies in Ontario prison" .

CBC . 28 February 2017 . Retrieved 11 March 2023 .

^ a b "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 20 September 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ a b Krishan Bir Singh (1 January 1970).

"Honour Killing – A Study of the Causes and Remedies in its SocioLegal Aspect" .

Academia .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2020 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ "International Domestic Violence Issues" . Sanctuary for Families. 15 October 2008. Archived from the original on 16 October 2014 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ "The Horror of 'Honor Killings', Even in US" .

Amnesty International USA . 10 April 2012.

Archived from the original on 27 June 2020 . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

^ "Indian Society and Ways of Living" .

Asia Society .

Archived from the original on 22 August 2019 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 .

^ a b c d e Brown, Ryan.

"How to Understand Honor Killings" .

Psychology Today .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

^ "FAQ" . Hbv-awareness.com.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ a b Brown, Jonathan (25 October 2016).

"Islam is not the Cause of Honor Killings. It's part of the Solution" .

Yaqeen Institute for Islamic Research .

Archived from the original on 20 May 2020 . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

^ a b c Cooney, Mark.

"Honor Cultures and Violence" .

Oxford Bibliographies .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2020 . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

^ Aksoy, Ozan; Szekely, Aron (2025).

"Making Sense of Honor Killings" .

American Sociological Review .

90 (3): 427– 454.

doi : 10.1177/00031224251324504 .

ISSN 0003-1224 .

^ Women of the Jordan: Islam, Labor, and the Law . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ 'Honour': Crimes, Paradigms and Violence Against Women . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ Woolf, Greg (2007).

Ancient civilizations: the illustrated guide to belief, mythology, and art . Barnes & Noble. p. 386.

ISBN 978-1-4351-0121-0 .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 19 October 2020 .

^ "France: Penal Code of 1810" .

napoleon-series.org .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2016 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ a b "Until When?! Honor Killings and Other Domestic Violence Against Women in Jordan – POMED" .

Pomed . Pomed.org.

Archived from the original on 22 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Secular Islam – Center for Inquiry" .

centerforinquiry.net . Archived from the original on 10 April 2016 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ "Archived copy" .

Archived from the original on 28 January 2016 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Section 352 in The Indian Penal Code" .

indiankanoon.org .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2020 . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

^ Welchman, Lynn; Hossain, Sara (2013).

'Honour': Crimes, Paradigms, and Violence Against Women . Zed Books Ltd. pp.

84– 97.

ISBN 978-1-84813-698-4 .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

^ Idzikowski, Lisa (2017).

Honor Killings . Greenhaven Publishing LLC. p. 74.

ISBN 978-1-5345-0133-1 .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2021 . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

^ "UNICEF Turkey: Protective Environment for Children; Honour Crimes and Forced Suicides" . unicef.org.tr. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ "UN probes Turkey 'forced suicide' " .

BBC News . 24 May 2006.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ a b Amnesty International (July 2008). Human Rights Abuses against the Kurdish Minority. London: Amnesty International.

Archived 8 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine Available at www.amnesty.org [downloaded 15 July 2009] ^ "Document" . Amnesty International. 30 July 2008.

Archived from the original on 8 January 2016 . Retrieved 16 April 2016 .

^ Kurdish Human Rights Project European Parliament Project: The Increase in Kurdish Women Committing Suicide Final Report Archived 27 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 December 2008 . Retrieved 18 December 2008 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "United Nations Population Fund | Publications" (PDF) . UNFPA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2009 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ "FAQ" . Hbv-awareness.com.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 .

^ "Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly" .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 .

^ a b John Esposito (2011), What Everyone Needs to Know About Islam , p. 177.

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-979413-3 .

^ a b "Preliminary Examination of so-called 'Honour Killings' in Canada" . Ottawa: Department of Justice of Canada. 24 September 2013. § Honour Killing – In Countries with Islamic Law.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2019 .

^ Clarke, Donald C.; et al.

"Punishment" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . § Punishment in Islamic law.

Archived from the original on 5 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2019 .

^ Jonathan A.C. Brown, Misquoting Muhammad: The Challenge and Choices of Interpreting the Prophet's Legacy , Oneworld Publications (2014), p. 180 ^ "The History of Honor Killings in Asia" .

www.thoughtco.com .

Archived from the original on 22 August 2019 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 .

^ "Preliminary Examination of so-called "Honour Killings" in Canada" . 24 September 2013.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2021 . Retrieved 3 May 2021 .

^ "Honour Killings By Region" . Honour Based Violence Awareness Network.

^ Muḥammad b.ʿAlī al-Shawkānī, Nayl al-Awṭār, ed. ʿIzz al-Dīn Khaṭṭāb, 8 vols. (Beirut: Dār Iḥyā' al-Turāth al-ʿArabī, 2001), 7:24 ^ a b Goldstein, Matthew A. (September 2002).

"The biological roots of heat-of-passion crimes and honor killings" (PDF) .

Politics and the Life Sciences .

21 (2): 29.

PMID 16859346 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 September 2012 . Retrieved 21 July 2012 .

^ a b c "Historical Overview" .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2014 . Retrieved 11 October 2014 .

^ "How the West should treat 'honor' killings" .

Reuters . 3 February 2012. Archived from the original on 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 20 April 2015 .

^ Recknagel, Charles (30 May 2014).

"Explainer: Why Is It So Hard To Stop 'Honor Killings'?" .

RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2015 . Retrieved 20 April 2015 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 October 2014 . Retrieved 11 October 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ a b "Working towards the elimination of crimes against women committed in the name of honour" (PDF) .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 March 2009 . Retrieved 8 February 2008 .

^ "Abu-Ghanem women speak out against serial 'honor killings' " .

Haaretz . Archived from the original on 25 February 2007 . Retrieved 23 February 2007 .

^ "International Domestic Violence Issues" . Sanctuary For Families. Archived from the original on 16 October 2014 . Retrieved 5 December 2011 .

^ "UN Division for the Advancement of Women - Reports and resolutions on violence against women" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 23 April 2020 . Retrieved 24 January 2020 .

^ "Council of Europe – Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence (CETS No. 210)" .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2015 . Retrieved 20 April 2015 .

^ a b "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 March 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 May 2015 . Retrieved 13 March 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 May 2019 . Retrieved 23 January 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Honour Killings By Region" . Hbv-awareness.com. 18 March 2012.

Archived from the original on 8 December 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Common Ground for Europeans and Muslims Among Them" . Gallup.com. 28 May 2008.

Archived from the original on 7 September 2008 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 .

^ "The last sword duel in history, France, 1967 - Rare Historical Photos" . 8 May 2019.

^ "Why France was the dueling capital of Europe" .

History . 19 August 2020. Archived from the original on 20 March 2021 . Retrieved 13 November 2023 .

^ " "Honour" Killings in Yemen: Tribal Tradition and the Law" . Daraj. 19 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ " "Honour" Killings in Yemen: Tribal Tradition and the Law" . Daraj. 19 December 2019. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Iranian women campaign to stop the rise in "honor killings" | Middle East Institute" . Mei.edu.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Belief that honour killings are 'justified' still prevalent among Jordan's next generation, study shows" . University of Cambridge. 20 June 2013. Archived from the original on 14 December 2019 . Retrieved 20 April 2015 .

^ a b "Syria: No Exceptions for Honor Killings" . Human Rights Watch. 28 July 2009.

Archived from the original on 6 January 2012 . Retrieved 8 December 2011 .

^ "Decriminalization of adultery and defenses" . Endvawnow.org.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2014 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 .

^ Bilefsky, Dan.

" 'Virgin suicides' save Turks' 'honor' " .

International Herald Tribune . Archived from the original on 17 July 2006 . Retrieved 12 July 2006 .

^ Daughter pregnant by rape, killed by family – World Archived 12 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine . BrisbaneTimes (13 January 2009). Retrieved 1 October 2011.

^ "Pakistan's honor killings enjoy high-level support" .

Taipei Times . 24 July 2004.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2004 . Retrieved 24 July 2004 .

^ Masood, Salman (27 October 2004).

"Pakistan Tries to Curb 'Honor Killings' " .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 22 July 2016 . Retrieved 27 October 2004 .

^ Qazi, Shahid; Grisanti, Carol.

"Honor Killings Persist in 'Man's World' " .

MSNBC . Archived from the original on 22 September 2008 . Retrieved 12 September 2008 .

^ Kwame Anthony Appiah.

The Honor Code: How Moral Revolutions Happen . W.W. Norton and Company.

^ " 'Honour killings': Pakistan closes loophole allowing killers to go free" .

BBC News . 6 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 30 June 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ "Man who murdered Pakistani model in 'honor killing' to be freed after parents' pardon" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved 22 August 2023 .

^ "Honour: Crimes, Paradigms and Violence Against Women" .

School of Oriental and African Studies . Archived from the original on 7 October 2009 . Retrieved 27 September 2008 .

^ "The Secretary General's database on violence against women" . Sgdatabase.unwomen.org. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 .

^ "Le Moniteur: Journal Official de la Republique D'Haiti" (PDF) . Sgdatabase.unwomen.org. 11 August 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 .

^ "Ley N° 19580" .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ "Uruguay no condena el homicidio por adulterio - Infobae" .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2017 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ "Uruguay's 'shadow pandemic' of violence against women is out of control | openDemocracy" .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ "Muerte de mujeres ocasionada por su pareja o ex-pareja íntima | Observatorio de Igualdad de Género" . 11 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ "Uruguay's 'shadow pandemic' of violence against women is out of control" .

openDemocracy .

^ Ratiboo (20 May 2022).

"Noticiero Judicial: El origen del delito – Femicidio | Poder Judicial" . Poderjudicialtv.cl . Retrieved 25 June 2022 .

^ "Los Últimos Duelos" . 28 November 2011.

^ " "Gentlemanly Jurisprudence and the Rule of Law: Why Dueling was Legal in Uruguay from 1920 to 1992" a talk with David S. Parker" . 10 March 2023.

^ a b "Archived copy" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 23 January 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ a b "Act No. 3815, s. 1930 | GOVPH" .

Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines . 8 December 1930. Archived from the original on 8 June 2023 . Retrieved 6 June 2023 .

^ "Act No. 3815, s. 1930 | Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines" . Archived from the original on 8 June 2023 . Retrieved 6 June 2023 .

^ Ordinario, Cai (16 April 2021).

" 'Marry-your-rapist' practice, laws exist in PHL, 20 other nations – UNFA report" .

BusinessMirror .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 January 2022 .

^ " 'Marry your rapist' laws in 20 countries still allow perpetrators to escape justice" .

TheGuardian.com . 14 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 January 2022 .

^ "Las leyes de Franco ampararon el derecho del marido a asesinar a su mujer por infidelidad" . 7 November 2021.

^ "El adulterio fue delito en España hasta 1978, castigado con hasta 6 años de cárcel - Confilegal" . 14 May 2016.

^ "Lebanon: Reform Rape Laws | Human Rights Watch" . 19 December 2016.

^ "Philippines drugs war: UN report criticises 'permission to kill' " .

BBC News . 4 June 2020 . Retrieved 13 November 2023 .

^ a b c "Honor Killings in Pakistan" Archived 13 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Amnesty International. Retrieved 10/19/11.

^ Goldberg, Suzanne (27 May 1999).

"A Question of Honor" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 24 August 2013 . Retrieved 9 December 2011 .

^ Constable, Pamela .

"In Pakistan, Women Pay the Price of Honor" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2012 . Retrieved 8 December 2011 .

^ "Honor Killings in Pakistan Amnesty.org Retrieved 06/03/12" . Archived from the original on 13 September 2016 . Retrieved 1 October 2012 .

^ "Chechen leader imposes strict brand of Islam" . Archived from the original on 4 March 2009 . Retrieved 11 November 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) . Associated Press.

^ "President Kadyrov defends honour killings" .

The Belfast Telegraph . 1 March 2009. Archived from the original on 7 March 2009 . Retrieved 1 March 2009 .

^ "Staff vil gi strafferabatt for æresdrap" .

Aftenposten (in Norwegian). 29 November 2007. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011 . Retrieved 23 November 2011 .

^ "PAKISTAN: Five women buried alive, allegedly by the brother of a minister" .

Asian Human Rights Commission .

Archived from the original on 2 March 2011 . Retrieved 31 March 2011 .

^ Hussain, Zahid (5 September 2008).

"Three teenagers buried alive in 'honour killings' " .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011 . Retrieved 31 March 2011 .

^ "Pakistani women buried alive 'for choosing husbands' " .

The Telegraph . London. 1 September 2008. Archived from the original on 18 March 2011 . Retrieved 31 March 2011 .

^ David, Ruth (10 April 2007).

"Hug Sparks Fatwa Against Pakistani Minister" .

Forbes . Archived from the original on 25 May 2007 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

^ "Femicide in Latin America" .

headQuarters . 4 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2017 . Retrieved 20 April 2015 .

Further reading [ edit ] Keiner, Robert (2012). "Honor Killings".

Issues in Comparative Politics . 2300 N Street, NW, Suite 800, Washington DC 20037 United States: CQ Press. pp.

397– 424.

doi : 10.4135/9781483349275.n14 .

ISBN 9781608718313 .

S2CID 267273836 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) NDTV .

Honour killing in Delhi 4 Sep 2012.

Archived 3 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine Burke, Jason.

The Guardian .

Triple murder in India highlights increase in 'honour killings' Archived 20 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine . 25 June 2010.

Emery, James.

Reputation is Everything: Honor Killing among the Palestinians Archived 11 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine . 2003.

"Jordan Parliament Supports Impunity for Honor Killing", Washington, D.C.

: Human Rights Watch news release, January 2000.

Burned Alive: A Victim of the Law of Men . ( ISBN 0-446-53346-7 ) Alleged first-person account of Souad , a victim of an attempted honor killing. The authenticity of this work has been questioned, as it is based on a repressed memory report.

[ citation needed ] Knox, Malcolm (13 April 2005).

"Historian challenges Palestinian bestseller" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 13 April 2005 .

Schulze, Kirsten, Martin Stokes and Colm Campbell (1996) (eds.), Nationalism, Minorities and Diasporas: Identities and Rights in the Middle East (London: I.B. Tauris) Tintori, Karen, 2007.

Unto the Daughters: The Legacy of an Honor Killing in a Sicilian-American Family . St. Martin's Press.

Wikan, Unni, 2002.

Generous Betrayal: Politics of Culture in the New Europe . University of Chicago Press.

Yavuz, Ercan.

"Honor killings a misunderstood concept, study finds" .

Today's Zaman . 1 August 2010.

Sanghera, Jasvinder, 2009. "Daughters of shame" Ermers Robert. 2018. "Honor Related Violence. A New Social Psychological Perspective", Routledge.

Honor Related Violence: A New Social Psychological Perspective Archived 9 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine Ercan, Selen A., 2014. 'Same Problem, Different Solutions: The Case of 'Honour Killing' in Germany and Britain', In: Gill, Aisha K., Carolyn Strange, and Karl Roberts, 'Honour' Killing and Violence. Theory, Policy and Practice, London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 199–218.

Ercan, Selen A., 2014. Dangerous silence: Debating ' honor killings'. Open Democracy, 1 July 2014 Robert Fisk The crimewave that shames the world Archived 19 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine The Independent , v t e Honor killing events chronological, incomplete list Events Isabella di Morra (1545/1546) Beauchamp–Sharp Tragedy (1825) Ernesto Balmaceda Bello (1906) Tursunoy Saidazimova (1928) Nurkhon Yuldashkhojayeva (1929) Tina Isa (1989) Rukhsana Naz (1998) Surjit Athwal (1998) Tulay Goren (1999) Samia Sarwar (1999) Pela Atroshi (1999) Jaswinder Kaur Sidhu (2000) Fadime Şahindal (2002) Nitish Katara (2002) Anooshe Sediq Ghulam (2002) Heshu Yones (2002) Shafilea Ahmed (2003) Hatun Sürücü (2005) Samaira Nazir (2005) Gazala Khan (2005) Banaz Mahmod (2006) Hina Saleem (2006) Du'a Khalil Aswad (2007) Manoj and Babli (2007) Sadia Sheikh (2007) Aqsa Parvez (2007) Amina and Sarah Said (2008) Morsal Obeidi (2008) Shailendra Prasad (2008) Shafia family murders (2009) Sandeela Kanwal (2008) Ahmet Yıldız (2008) Ayman Udas (2009) Noor Almaleki (2009) Gelareh Bagherzadeh and Coty Beavers (2012) Kohistan honour killings (2012) Rania Alayed (2013) Farzana Parveen Iqbal (2014) Qandeel Baloch (2016) Samia Shahid (2016) Pranay Kumar (2018) Israa Ghrayeb (2019) Romina Ashrafi (2020) Ali Fazeli Monfared (2021) Babak Khorramdin (2021) Mona Heydari (2022) Tiba al-Ali (2023) Related topics List of honor killings in Iran Honour killing in Pakistan Honor-related violence in Sweden Honor killings in the United States Un delitto d'onore (1960 novel) Guarding the Secrets (1995 book) Forbidden Love ( Honor Lost ) (2003 book) Forbidden Lies (2007 film) In the Name of the Family (2010 film) When We Leave (2010 film) Zenne Dancer (2011 film) Banaz: A Love Story (2012 film) Honor Diaries (2013 film) Honour (2014 film) A Girl in the River: The Price of Forgiveness (2015 film) Honour Killing (2015 film) Murdered by My Father (2016 film) A Wedding (2016 film) Baaghi The Sensational Life & Death of Qandeel Baloch (2018 book) A Regular Woman (2019 film) v t e Domestic violence General Outline Abuse Controlling behavior Conflict tactics scale Cycle of abuse Cycle of violence Epidemiology Traumatic bonding Forms Sexual Genital modification and mutilation Marital rape Birth control sabotage Reproductive coercion Sexual violence by intimate partners Physical Acid attack Bride burning Domestic violence and pregnancy Dowry death Honor killing Murder of pregnant women Sati Situational couple violence Psychological Bullying Deny, attack, and reverse victim and offender (DARVO) Economic abuse Embarrassment / Humiliation Emotional blackmail False accusation Gaslighting Intimidation Major depressive disorder Mind games Nagging Narcissistic abuse Passive-aggressive behavior Setting up to fail Silent treatment Stalking Verbal abuse Victims Adults Bride buying Domestic violence against men Domestic violence and pregnancy Elder abuse Intimate partner violence Lesbian Mariticide Misandry Misogyny Parental abuse by children Same-sex relationships Social emotional development Uxoricide Children Adverse childhood experiences Child abuse Effects of domestic violence on children Narcissistic parent Parental bullying of children Sibling abuse Stress in early childhood Prevention Domestic violence hotlines Duluth model Management of domestic violence Women's shelter Prevention initiatives Country Argentina Armenia Albania Australia Bangladesh Bolivia Brazil Chile China Colombia Ecuador Ghana Guyana India Iran Mexico Kenya Lithuania New Zealand Norway Nigeria Norway Pakistan Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Romania Russia Samoa Saudi Arabia South Africa South Korea Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Uganda United Kingdom United States Religion Domestic violence in Christian culture Domestic violence in Islamic culture Experts Academics Jacquelyn Campbell Kenneth Dodge Emily Douglas Mary Ellsberg David Finkelhor Nicola Graham-Kevan Denise Hines Linda Saltzman Murray Straus Activists Ruahine Albert Angela Barker Sarah Buel Elizabeth Celi Anne Cools Donna Ferrato Karen Ingala Smith Ellen Pence Erin Pizzey Deborah Tucker Media Documentaries A Better Man The Conspiracy of Silence Defending Our Lives Power and Control: Domestic Violence in America Silent Voices Sin by Silence Other films American Tragedy Black and Blue Blinded Bordertown The Burning Bed Our Mother's Murder Enough Looking for Angelina Once Were Warriors One Minute to Nine Provoked Sleeping with the Enemy Submission What's Love Got to Do with It Books Life with Billy Mommie Dearest The War on Women Periodicals Contemporary Family Therapy Family Process Family Relations Journal of Family Issues Journal of Interpersonal Violence Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society Trauma, Violence, & Abuse Violence Against Women Organizations Gulabi Gang ManKind Initiative National Coalition Against Domestic Violence National Domestic Violence Hotline Nia Refuge Respect Legal Battered woman defense Domestic violence court v t e Violence against women Issues Abuse during childbirth Acid attack Breast ironing Bride burning Bride buying Child marriage Dating abuse Domestic violence outline management and pregnancy Dowry death Eve teasing Honor killing Female genital mutilation Gishiri cutting Infibulation Husband stitch Female infanticide Femicide Foot binding Force-feeding Forced abortion Forced marriage Forced pregnancy Forced prostitution Human trafficking Misogyny Murder of pregnant women Raptio Sati Sharia Islamic religious police Guidance Patrol Kano State Hisbah Corps Polisi Syariat Islam Violence against prostitutes Sexual assault, rape Sexual assault Campus sexual assault Mass sexual assault Rape and pregnancy laws Types of rape by deception corrective date gang genocidal halala in war marital prison statutory Cybersex trafficking Sex trafficking Sexual slavery Sexual violence Related topics Istanbul Convention Prosecution of gender-targeted crimes November 25th February 6th Serial rapist Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cnbjw
Cached time: 20250817110203
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.845 seconds
Real time usage: 2.093 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11010/1000000
Revision size: 144359/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 452406/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7197/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 709359/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.203/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17442330/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1734.920      1 -total
 64.59% 1120.598      1 Template:Reflist
 38.85%  673.969    121 Template:Cite_web
 13.02%  225.834     42 Template:Cite_news
  5.59%   96.977      2 Template:Langx
  4.99%   86.610      2 Template:Sidebar
  4.87%   84.467      1 Template:Homicide
  4.83%   83.873      1 Template:Short_description
  3.35%   58.089      7 Template:Navbox
  2.86%   49.652      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9437868:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817110203 and revision id 1306313041. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Honor_killing&oldid=1306313041 " Categories : Honor killing Honour Homicide Domestic violence Gender-related violence Violence against women Violence against LGBTQ people Crimes against women Killings by type Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 Use American English from August 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles containing Sindhi-language text Articles containing Urdu-language text CS1 maint: location Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 03:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Honor killing 56 languages Add topic

