Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Members Toggle Members subsection 2.1 Bukhtishu I 2.2 Jibrail I 2.3 Jurjis 2.4 Bukhtishu II 2.5 Jabril ibn Bukhtishu 2.6 Bukhtishu III 2.7 Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu 2.8 Ubeidullah ibn Bukhtishu 2.9 Jibrail III 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Bukhtishu 9 languages العربية Español Esperanto فارسی Italiano മലയാളം پنجابی Русский اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 7–9th-century family of physicians Ibn Bakhtishu's Manafi' al-Hayawan ( منافع الحيوان ), dated 12th century. Captions appear in Persian language.

The Bukhtīshūʿ (or Boḵtīšūʿ ) were a family of either Persian [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] or Syrian Eastern Christian [ 4 ] [ 5 ] physicians from the seventh, eighth, and ninth centuries, spanning six generations and 250 years. The Middle Persian - Syriac name which can be found as early as at the beginning of the 5th century refers to the eponymous ancestor of this "Syro-Persian Nestorian family".

[ 6 ] Some members of the family served as the personal physicians of Caliphs .

[ 7 ] Jurjis son of Bukht-Yishu was awarded 10,000 dinars by al-Mansur after attending to his malady in 765AD.

[ 8 ] It is even said that one of the members of this family was received as physician to Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin , the Shia Imam , during his illness in the events of Karbala .

[ 9 ] Like most physicians in the early Abbasid courts , they came from the Academy of Gondishapur in what is now southwest Iran. They were well versed in the Greek and Indian sciences, including those of Plato , Aristotle , Pythagoras , and Galen , which they aided in translating while working in Gondishapur .

[ 10 ] In the course of their integration into the changing society after the Muslim conquest of Persia , the family acquired Arabic while preserving Persian as oral language for about 200 years.

[ 6 ] The family was originally from Ahvaz , near Gondeshapur, however they eventually moved to the city of Baghdad and later on to Nsibin in Syria .

[ 11 ] Yahya ibn Khalid , the vizier and mentor to Harun al-Rashid , provided patronage to the Hospital and Academy of Gondeshapur and helped assure the promotion and growth of astronomy, medicine and philosophy, not only in Persia but also in the Abbasid Empire in general.

[ 12 ] Etymology [ edit ] Consisting of a first, Middle Persian [ 13 ] term meaning "redeemed" and a Syriac component for Yeshua / Jesus , the name can be translated as "Redeemed by Jesus" or "Jesus has redeemed".

[ 6 ] However, in his book Kitāb ʿUyūn al-anbāʿ fī ṭabaqāt al-aṭibbāʿ (كتاب عيون الأنباء في طبقات الأطباء), the Arab , 12th century historian Ibn Abi Usaibia renders the meaning as "Servant of Jesus" (في اللغة السريانية البخت العبد ويشوع عيسى عليه السلام) in Syriac language.

Members [ edit ] There are no known remaining records of the first two members of the family. And the remaining records of the chain start from Jurjis . But the genealogical sequence follows as: [ citation needed ] Bukhtishu I [ edit ] Jibrail I [ edit ] Jurjis [ edit ] Jurjis, the father of Bukhtishu II and grandfather of Jibril ibn Bukhtishu, was a scientific writer and was the director of the hospital in Gondeshapur, which supplied physicians to courts in Iraq, Syria, and Persia.

[ 14 ] He was called to Baghdad in 765 AD to treat the stomach complaint of the Caliph al-Mansur . After successfully curing the caliph, he was asked to remain in attendance in Baghdad, which he did until he fell ill in 769 CE.

[ 15 ] Before allowing him to return to Gondeshapur, the caliph invited him to convert to Islam but he declined, saying that he wanted to be with his fathers when he died. Amused by his obstinacy, the caliph sent an attendant with Jurjis to ensure he reached his destination. In exchange for the attendant and a 10,000 dinar wage, Jurjis promised to send his pupil Isa ibn Shahla to the caliph, since his son, Bukhtishu II, could not be spared from the hospital at Gondeshapur.

[ 16 ] Bukhtishu II [ edit ] Bukhtishu II was the son of Jurjis ibn Bukhtishu and the father of Jibril ibn Bukhtishu. He was left in charge of the hospital at Gondeshapur when his father was summoned to treat the stomach complaints of Caliph al-Mansur. Jurjis never intended for Bukhtishu II to go to Baghdad and tend to the caliphs and had offered to send one of his pupils in his stead. Nevertheless, Bukhtishu II was in turn called to the city to treat the Caliph al-Hadi , who was gravely ill. He was unable to establish himself in Baghdad until 787 AD, when Caliph Harun al-Rashid was suffering violently painful headaches. He successfully treated Harun al-Rashid and in gratitude the caliph made him physician-in-chief, a post he held onto until his death in 801 C.E.

[ 17 ] Jabril ibn Bukhtishu [ edit ] Alternate Spellings: Djibril b. Bukhtishu’, [ 17 ] Jibril ibn Bakhtishu', [ 18 ] Jibra’il ibn Bukhtyishu, [ 19 ] Djabra’il b. Bakhtishu [ 20 ] Jibril ibn Bukhtishu was the son of Bukhtishu II, who served the caliphs in Baghdad from 787 AD until his death in 801 AD. In 791 AD, Bukhtishu II recommended Jibril as a physician to Jafar the Barmakid , the vizier of the Caliph Harun al-Rashid. Despite the recommendation, Jibril did not succeed his father until 805 AD, after he successfully treated one of Harun al-Rashid's slaves, thereby winning the confidence of the caliph.

[ 17 ] During Jibril's time in Baghdad, he advised Harun al-Rashid in the building of its first hospital.

[ 21 ] The hospital and connected observatory was modeled after the one in Gondeshapur where Jibril had studied medicine and served as the director.

[ 22 ] Jibril also served as the director of this new hospital, which Harun al-Rashid named after himself.

[ 21 ] The Abbasid court physicians gained high standing and trust once accepted and employed by the caliph, as illustrated by the anecdote in which Harun al-Rashid used Jibril to try to humble his vizier Yahya al-Barmaki on an occasion when Yahya entered the caliph's presence without first gaining permission. In his collection of prose, Tha'alibi cites a story he heard from al-Babbagha: "Bakhtishu’ ibn Jibril relates from his father…Then al-Rashid turned to me and said, ‘Jibril, is there anyone who would come before you without your permission in your own house?’ I said: ‘No, nor would anyone hope to do that.’ He said: ‘So what is the matter with us that people come in here without permission?’" After this exchange, Yahya skillfully reminds Harun al-Rashid that he had been granted the privilege of entering his presence without permission by asking the caliph if a change had been made in court etiquette.

[ 23 ] Being a part of such court interactions, Jibril would occasionally approach the caliph with a level of frankness not allowed most attendants. During Harun al-Rashid's final illness, Jibril's matter-of-fact responses to the caliph won him disgrace and soon after he was condemned to death. He was saved from execution by Fadl ibn al-Rabi and subsequently became the physician of al-Amin . After al-Ma'mun gained power, Jibril again faced imprisonment, but was needed to treat Hasan ibn Sahl and thus was released in 817 AD. Three years later he was replaced by his son-in-law, Mikha’il, but was again called to Baghdad in 827 AD when Mikha’il was unable to treat the caliph. He died in the favor of the caliph sometime between 827 and 829 AD and, being Christian, was buried in the Monastery of St. Sergius in Ctesiphon which is in modern-day Iraq, on the east bank of the Tigris.

[ 17 ] During the ninth and tenth century, the Bukhtishus had a virtual monopoly on the practice of medicine in Baghdad.

[ 24 ] Jibril is estimated to have a career income of 88,800,000 dirhams for serving Harun al-Rashid for 23 years and the Barmakids for 13, which does not include his fees from lesser patients.

[ 25 ] Hunayn ibn Ishaq gained Jibril's his recommendation after studying Greek for several years, which allowed him to become known in later centuries in both the Near East and in Europe for his translations.

[ 26 ] Bukhtishu III [ edit ] Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu [ edit ] Ubeidullah ibn Bukhtishu [ edit ] Jibrail III [ edit ] Jibrail III was the son of Ubayd Allah ibn Bukhtishu , a finance official for the Caliph al-Muktadir. After his father's death, his mother married another physician. Jibrail III began studying medicine exclusively in Baghdad, where he went penniless after the death of his mother. After treating an envoy from Kirman , he was called to Shiraz by the Buyid ruler 'Adud al-Dawla but soon after he returned to Baghdad. He only left Baghdad for short consultations, even declining an offer from the Fatimid al-Aziz who wished to establish him in Cairo . Jibrail III died on June 8, 1006.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] List of Iranian scientists References [ edit ] ^ Frye, R.N., ed. (1975).

The Cambridge history of Iran (Repr. ed.). London: Cambridge U.P. p. 415.

ISBN 978-0-521-20093-6 .

Among the Christians also there were some of Persian origin or at least of immediate Persian background, among whom the most important are the Bukhtyishu' and Masuya (Masawaih) families. The members of the Bukhtyishu* family were directors of the Jundishapur hospital and produced many outstanding physicians. One of them, Jirjls,  was called to Baghdad by the 'Abbasid caliph al-Mansur, to cure his dyspepsia.

^ Philip Jenkins.

The Lost History of Christianity . Harper One. 2008.

ISBN 0061472808 .

^ Richard Nelson Frye.

Heritage of Persia . Mazda Publishers. 2004.

^ Bonner, Bonner; Ener, Mine; Singer, Amy (2003).

Poverty and charity in Middle Eastern contexts . SUNY Press. p. 97.

ISBN 978-0-7914-5737-5 .

^ Ruano, Eloy Benito; Burgos, Manuel Espadas (1992).

17e Congrès international des sciences historiques: Madrid, du 26 août au 2 septembre 1990 . Comité international des sciences historiques. p. 527.

ISBN 978-84-600-8154-8 .

^ a b c Lutz Richter-Bernburg.

BOḴTĪŠŪʿ . Encyclopaedia Iranica. Volume IV, Fasc. 3. 1990.

ISBN 978-0-7100-9132-1 ^ Islamic Culture and the Medical Arts: Greek Influences ^ Edward Granville Browne , Islamic Medicine , Goodword pub., 2002, ISBN 81-87570-19-9 ,  p23 ^ Imam Hossayn va Iran (امام حسین و ایران), by Zabihullah Mansouri (ذبیح الله منصوری). Tehran. Also: [1] ^ Max Meyerhof, "An Arabic Compendium of Medico-Philosophical Definitions," Isis 10, no. 2(1928): 348.

^ Donald R. Hill, Islamic Science and Engineering . 1993. Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 0-7486-0455-3 p.4 ^ Maz Meyerhof, "An Arabic Compendium" ^ D. N. MacKenzie. A Concise Pahlavi Dictionary. Routledge Curzon, 2005, ISBN 0-19-713559-5 .

^ Majid Fakhry, "Philosophy and Theology," The Oxford History of Islam, ed. by John L. Esposito. Oxford Islamic Studies Online, http://www.oxfordislamicstudies.com/article .

^ H.A.R Gibb, J.H. Kramers, E. Levi-Provencal, and J. Schacht, eds. Encyclopedia of Islam, New Edition, vol. 1, (Leiden, Netherlands: E.J. Brill, 1960), s.v. "Bukhtishu." ^ Edward G. Browne, Arabian Medicine (Cambridge: University Press, 1921), 23.

^ a b c d e H.A.R. Gibb, ed. Encyclopedia of Islam ^ Andras Hamori, "A Sampling of Pleasant Civilities," Studia Islamica, no. 95(2002): 9.

^ De Lacy O'Leary , How Greek Science Passed to the Arabs (London: William Clowes and Sons, Lmtd, 1957), 151.

^ Timothy S. Miller, "The Knights of Saint John and the Hospitals of the Latin West," Speculum 53, no. 4(1978):725.

^ a b Timothy S. Miller, "The Knights" ^ Majid Fahkry, "Philosophy" ^ Andras Hamori, "A Sampling" ^ P.M. Holt, Ann K.S. Lambton, and Bernard Lewis, eds. The Cambridge History of Islam, vol. 2, The Further Islamic Lands, Islamic Society and Civilization (Cambridge: University Press, 1970), 767.

^ Edward G. Browne, Arabian Medicine, 57 ^ Edward G. Browne, Arabian Medicine, 24 Further reading [ edit ] Contadini, Anna (2011).

A World of Beasts: A Thirteenth-Century Illustrated Arabic Book on Animals (the Kitāb Na't al-Ḥayawān) in the Ibn Bakhtīshū' Tradition . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 9789004201002 .

British library, Bukhtishu's family books [ permanent dead link ] National Library of Medicine of The United States v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bukhtishu&oldid=1298339007 " Categories : Medieval Assyrian physicians Church of the East Christians History of Khuzestan province Iranian Assyrian people People from Khuzestan province Assyrian families Church of the East Christians from the Abbasid Caliphate Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 21:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bukhtishu 9 languages Add topic

