Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Academic conference 2 Academic assessment 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Poster session 10 languages Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia עברית 日本語 Polski தமிழ் 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of academic conference Poster session at the 111th American Society for Microbiology General Meeting, New Orleans, LA.

A poster presentation , at a congress or conference with an academic or professional focus, is the presentation of research information in the form of a paper poster that conference participants may view. A poster session is an event at which many such posters are presented. Poster sessions are particularly prominent at scientific conferences such as medical and engineering congresses.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Academic conference [ edit ] To participate in a poster session, an abstract is submitted to the academic or professional society for consideration and on occasion may include peer-reviewed material qualified for journal publication. Selected poster abstracts are then designated for oral presentation or poster presentation. Quite often, poster content is embargoed from release to the public until the commencement of the poster session. Typically a separate hall or area of a convention floor is reserved for the poster session where researchers accompany a paper poster , illustrating their research methods and outcomes. Each research project is usually presented on a conference schedule for a period ranging from 10 minutes to several hours. Very large events may feature thousands of poster presentations over a number of days.

[ 4 ] Presentations usually consist of affixing the research poster to a portable board with the researcher in attendance answering questions posed by passing colleagues.

[ 3 ] The poster boards are often 4 by 6 feet (1.2 m × 1.8 m) or 4 by 8 feet (1.2 m × 2.4 m) and the size of the poster itself varies according to whether the conference organizers decide to have one, two, or more posters on each board face.

[ 3 ] Posters are often created using a presentation program such as PowerPoint and may be printed on a large format printer. Glossy paper, matte paper (with or without gloss or matte lamination), satin paper, vinyl, and printable fabric are common substrates for poster presentations.

On occasion, poster sessions are displayed digitally on large monitors and this allows for features such as embedded videos, narrations and external links.

Collections of digital posters can successfully be viewed on desktop monitors with sufficient resolution and pixel density. This provides a means for academic and professional societies to create digital archives of current and past poster sessions.

Organizers of digital poster sessions are challenged with managing the logistics of presenting hundreds, if not thousands, of posters on a limited number of monitors. With the traditional printed poster session, attendees can spend as much, or as little, time at each poster depending on interest, and the posters are continuously on display. They can interact with authors and discuss the research without time constraints. With a digital poster session, presentations are usually timed, with a limited amount of exposure, and follow a set schedule.

Academic assessment [ edit ] Poster sessions are used as an alternative to oral presentations as a form of academic assessment.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Abstract management Academic conference References [ edit ] ^ Writing@CSU, Colorado State University, Definition of a Poster Session .

^ Department of Biology, George Mason University, A Guide to Writing in the Biological Sciences , The Poster Session.

Archived 2009-04-12 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c Purrington, Colin (February 19, 2010).

"Designing conference posters" . Colin Purrington . Retrieved 2010-03-05 .

^ See, for example, the American College of Rheumatology Annual Meeting, November 2018, Annual Meeting Abstracts.

^ Hughes, A (2005).

"A Poster Project for an Undergraduate Sensation and Perception Course" .

Teaching of Psychology .

32 (1): 58– 59.

^ Using Poster Presentation Activities for Assessment in Higher Education . ICERI2023 Proceedings. IATED. 2023. pp.

1758– 1764.

doi : 10.21125/iceri.2023.0518 .

^ Miller, C T (2023).

"Classroom Trade Show: An Alternative to Traditional Classroom Presentations in an Undergraduate Plant Identification Course" .

HortTechnology .

33 : 111– 117.

doi : 10.21273/HORTTECH05148-22 .

External links [ edit ] Creating Effective Poster Presentations , North Carolina State University Media related to Poster sessions at Wikimedia Commons v t e Academic publishing Journals Academic journal Public health Papers Paper Abstract Review article Position paper Literature review Grey literature Working paper White paper Technical report Annual report Pamphlet Essay Lab notes Other publication types Thesis Collection of articles Patent Biological Chemical Book Monograph Chapter Treatise Poster session Proceedings Impact and ranking Acknowledgment index Altmetrics Article-level metrics Author-level metrics Bibliometrics C-score Journal ranking Eigenfactor g-index h -index Impact factor Rankings of academic publishers Science-wide author databases of standardized citation indicators Scientometrics SCImago Journal Rank Citation cartel Reform and access Academic journal publishing reform Open access Citation advantage Serials crisis Sci-Hub #ICanHazPDF Versioning Preprint Postprint Version of record Erratum Retraction Indexes and search engines Google Scholar AMiner BASE CORE Semantic Scholar Scopus Web of Science Paperity OpenAlex Index Copernicus ERIH PLUS Sherpa Romeo OpenAIRE Related topics Imprint Scientific writing Peer review Scholarly communication Scientific literature Learned society Open research Open scientific data ORCID Electronic publishing Ingelfinger rule Least publishable unit " Publish or perish " Lists Academic databases and search engines Academic journals Copyright policies Highly Cited Researchers Open-access journals Preprint policies Scientific journals Style/formatting guides University presses Authority control databases : National Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Poster_session&oldid=1195972153 " Categories : Academic conferences Presentation Research Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 January 2024, at 23:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Poster session 10 languages Add topic

