Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 In Vienna 3 Death 4 Ideas and legacy 5 In popular culture 6 Works 7 Gallery 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Rigas Feraios 36 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek writer, political thinker and revolutionary (1757–1798) This article is about Greek writer and revolutionary. For other uses, see Rigas Feraios (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rigas Feraios" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rigas Feraios Rigas Feraios. Portrait by Andreas Kriezis ( Benaki Museum , Athens) Born 1757 Feres (Velestino) , Ottoman Empire (now Greece ) Died 24 June 1798 (1798-06-24) (aged 40–41) Belgrade , Sanjak of Smederevo , Ottoman Empire (now Serbia ) Philosophical work Era Age of Enlightenment Region Western philosophy School Modern Greek Enlightenment Main interests Popular sovereignty , civil liberties , constitutional state , freedom of religion , civic nationalism Signature Rigas Feraios ( Greek : Ρήγας Φεραίος pronounced [ˈriɣas fɛˈrɛɔs] , sometimes Rhegas Pheraeos ; Aromanian : Riga Fereu [ 1 ] ) or Velestinlis (Βελεστινλής pronounced [vɛlɛstinˈlis] , also transliterated Velestinles ; 1757 – 24 June 1798), born as Antonios Rigas Velestinlis ( Greek : Αντώνιος Ρήγας Βελεστινλής ), [ 2 ] was a Greek writer, political thinker and revolutionary, active in the Modern Greek Enlightenment . A victim of the Balkan uprising against the Ottoman Empire and a pioneer of the Greek War of Independence , Rigas Feraios is today remembered as a national hero in Greece .

Early life [ edit ] Rigas Feraios was born in 1757 as Antonios Rigas Velestinlis [ 2 ] into a wealthy family in the village of Velestino in the Sanjak of Tirhala , Ottoman Empire (modern Thessaly , Greece ). His father's name is believed to have been originally Georgios Kyratzis or Kyriazis.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] He later was at some point nicknamed Pheraeos or Feraios , by scholars, after the nearby ancient Greek city of Pherae , but he does not seem ever to have used this name himself; he is also sometimes known as Konstantinos or Constantine Rhigas ( Greek : Κωνσταντίνος Ρήγας ). He is often described as being of Aromanian ancestry, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] with his native village of Velestino being predominantly Aromanian.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Although his family usually overwintered in Velestino, [ 12 ] it had its roots in Perivoli , [ 13 ] another Aromanian-inhabited village.

[ 14 ] Rigas' grandfather Konstantinos Kyriazis or Kyratzis relocated with his family to Velestino which had been transformed into a Perivoli parish.

[ 15 ] Some historians state that Rigas was a Greek , [ 16 ] as Leandros Vranoussis, who assumes that his Greek family was long-time residing in Velestino.

[ 17 ] According to his compatriot Christoforos Perraivos , Rigas was educated at the school of Ampelakia, Larissa . Perhaps Rigas took lower education there, because  it is historically documented that Rigas was educated at the upper school "Ellinomouseion" in the village of Zagora on the mountain Pelion , where it still exists the old building of this school and it is widely known in the region as the "School of Riga". Later he became a teacher in the near to Zagora village of Kissos , and he fought the local Ottoman presence. At the age of twenty he killed an important Ottoman figure, and fled to the uplands of Mount Olympus , where he enlisted in a band of soldiers led by Spiros Zeras .

Flag proposed by Rigas for his envisioned pan-Balkan Federation Rigas kindling the Greeks' love of freedom , by Peter von Hess He later went to the monastic community of Mount Athos , where he was received by Cosmas, hegumen of the Vatopedi monastery ; from there to Constantinople ( Istanbul ), where he became a secretary to the Phanariote Alexander Ypsilantis (1725–1805) .

Arriving in Bucharest , the capital of Wallachia , Rigas returned to school, learned several languages and eventually became a clerk for the Wallachian Prince Nicholas Mavrogenes . When the Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792) broke out, he was charged with the inspection of the troops in the city of Craiova .

Here he entered into friendly relations with an Ottoman officer named Osman Pazvantoğlu , afterwards the rebellious Pasha of Vidin , whose life he saved from the vengeance of Mavrogenes.

[ 18 ] He learned about the French Revolution , and came to believe something similar could occur in the Balkans , resulting in self-determination for the Christian subjects of the Ottomans; he developed support for an uprising by meeting Greek Orthodox bishops and guerrilla leaders.

After the death of his patron Rigas returned to Bucharest to serve for some time as dragoman at the French consulate . At this time he wrote his famous Greek version of La Marseillaise , the anthem of French revolutionaries , a version familiar through Lord Byron 's paraphrase as "sons of the Greeks, arise".

[ 18 ] In Vienna [ edit ] Portrait of Alexander the Great , published by Rigas in his Pamphlet (1797) Around 1793, Rigas went to Vienna , the capital of the Holy Roman Empire and home to a large Greek community, as part of an effort to ask the French general Napoleon Bonaparte for assistance and support. 
While in the city, he edited a Greek-language newspaper, Efimeris (i.e.

Daily ), and published a proposed political map of Great Greece which included Constantinople and many other places, including a large number of places where Greeks were minority.

He printed pamphlets based on the principles of the French Revolution, including Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and New Political Constitution of the Inhabitants of Rumeli , Asia Minor , the Islands of the Aegean , and the principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia —these he intended to distribute in an effort to stimulate a Pan-Balkan uprising against the Ottomans.

[ 18 ] He also published Greek translations of three stories by Retif de la Bretonne, and many other foreign works, and he collected his poems in a manuscript (posthumously printed in Iaşi , 1814).

Death [ edit ] The Nebojša Tower , where Rigas was executed Memorial plaque in front of Nebojša Tower in Belgrade , where Rigas Feraios was strangled He entered into communication with general Napoleon Bonaparte, to whom he sent a snuff-box made of the root of a Bay Laurel taken from a ruined temple of Apollo , and eventually he set out with a view to meeting the general of the Army of Italy in Venice . While traveling there, he was betrayed by Demetrios Oikonomos Kozanites , a Greek businessman, had his papers confiscated, and was arrested at Trieste by the Austrian authorities (an ally of the Ottoman Empire, Austria was concerned the French Revolution might provoke similar upheavals in its realm and later formed the Holy Alliance ).

He was handed over with his accomplices to the Ottoman governor of Belgrade , where he was imprisoned and tortured. From Belgrade, he was to be sent to Constantinople to be sentenced by Sultan Selim III . While in transit, he and his five collaborators were strangled to prevent their being rescued by Rigas's friend Osman Pazvantoğlu . Their bodies were thrown into the Danube River .

His last words are reported as being: "I have sown a rich seed; the hour is coming when my country will reap its glorious fruits".

Ideas and legacy [ edit ] Rigas, using demotikì ( Demotic Greek ) rather than puristic ( Katharevousa ) Greek, aroused the patriotic fervor of his Greek contemporaries. His republicanism was given an aura of heroism by his martyrdom, and set liberation of Greece in a context of political reform. As social contradictions in Ottoman Empire grew sharper in the tumultuous Napoleonic era the most important theoretical monument of Greek republicanism, the anonymous Hellenic Nomarchy , was written, its author dedicating the work to Rigas Ferraios, who had been sacrificed for the salvation of Hellas .

[ 19 ] His grievances against the Ottoman occupation of Greece regarded its cruelty, the drafting of children between the ages of five and fifteen into military service ( Devshirmeh or Paedomazoma ), the administrative chaos and systematic oppression (including prohibitions on teaching Greek history or language, or even riding on horseback), the confiscation of churches and their conversion to mosques .

Rigas wrote enthusiastic poems and books about Greek history and many became popular. One of the most famous (which he often sang in public) was the Thourios or battle-hymn (1797), in which he wrote, "It's finer to live one hour as a free man than forty years as a slave and prisoner" («Καλύτερα μίας ώρας ελεύθερη ζωή παρά σαράντα χρόνια σκλαβιά και φυλακή»).

In "Thourios" he urged the Greeks ( Romioi ) and other Orthodox Christian peoples living at the time in the area of Greece ( Arvanites / Albanians , Bulgarians , etc.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] ) and generally in the Balkans, to leave the Ottoman-occupied towns for the mountains, where they could find freedom, organize and fight against the Ottoman tyranny. His call included also the Muslims of the empire, who disagreed and reacted against the Sultan's governance.

It is noteworthy that the word "Greek" or "Hellene" is not mentioned in "Thourios"; instead, Greek populations are still referred to as "Romioi" (i.e. Romans, citizens of the Christian or Eastern Roman Empire), which is the name that they proudly used for themselves at that time.

[ 22 ] Statues of Rigas Feraios stand at the entrance to the University of Athens and in Belgrade at the beginning of the street that bears his name ( Ulica Rige od Fere ). The street named after Rigas Feraios in Belgrade was the only street in Belgrade named after a non-Serb until World War I .

[ 23 ] Rigas Feraios was also the name taken by the youth wing of the Communist Party of Greece (Interior) , and a split of this youth wing was Rigas Feraios - Second Panhellenic .

His political vision was influenced by the French Constitution (i.e. democratic liberalism) [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Feraios' portrait was printed on the obverse of the Greek ₯ 200 banknote of 1996–2001.

[ 27 ] A ₯50 commemorative coin was issued in 1998 for the 200th anniversary of his death.

[ 28 ] His portrait appears on the Greek 10 lepta (cent) euro coin.

In popular culture [ edit ] Nikos Xydakis and Manolis Rasoulis wrote a song called Etsi pou les, Riga Feraio (Έτσι που λες, Ρήγα Φεραίο; "That's how it is, Rigas Feraios"), which was sung by Rasoulis himself. Also, composer Christos Leontis wrote music based upon the lyrics of "Thourio" and Cretan Nikos Xylouris performed the song in the 1970s.

Works [ edit ] Anthology of Physics (Vienna, 1790) School for Delicate Lovers (Vienna, 1790; repr. 1971) Pamphlet , New Map of Wallachia and General Map of Moldavia (Vienna, 1797) Charta (Map) of Greece (Vienna, 1797) New Political Constitution of the Inhabitants of Roumeli, Asia Minor, the Islands of the Aegean and the Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia , Vienna, 1797, included: Thourios or Patriotic hymn (poem) Man's Rights (35 articles) Revolutionary Declaration for Laws and Fatherland Constitution of Hellenic Republic (124 articles) New Anacharsis , Vienna, 1797 Gallery [ edit ] Frontispiece of the Charta of Rigas ("Map of Greece") "Thourios" print Rigas by Peter von Hess ( National Historical Museum, Athens ) Rigas and Adamantios Korais helping Greece to stand up. Work by Theophilos Hatzimihail (19th century) Commemorative plaque for Rigas in Vienna Statue of Rigas Feraios, Belgrade Statue of Rigas outside the University of Athens (by Ioannis Kossos ) Notes [ edit ] ^ Caracota, Nicolas (October–December 2009).

"Di iu, di cându, di cari?" .

Fârshârotu (in Aromanian). Vol. 6, no. 30. p. 3.

^ a b Ρήγας Βελεστινλής ^ Ρήγας Βελεστινλής: Περιπέτειες ενός ονόματος Archived 2010-07-15 at the Wayback Machine , Δημ. Καραμπερόπουλος, 
Πρακτικά Διεθνούς Συνεδρίου: Ο Ρήγας Φεραίος
Βελεστινλής και οι Βαλκάνιοι λαοί, (Belgrade, 7–9 May 1998) ^ Σταύρος Π. Τσώνης, « Γριζόκαμπος: Ένα παράξενο χωριό [ dead link ] . (Ιστορία - Κοινωνικός βίος - ήθη - μνημεία - γειτονικά χωριά - γριζοκαμπίτικα διηγήματα - γενεαλογικό δένδρο)», (pdf), Athens 2010, pp. 86-90.

^ Europe and the Historical Legacies in the Balkans, Raymond Detrez, Barbara Segaert, Peter Lang, 2008, ISBN 9052013748 , p. 43.

^ A Concise History of Greece, Richard Clogg, Cambridge University Press, 2013, ISBN 110703289X , p. 28.

^ Entangled Histories of the Balkans: Volume One, Roumen Daskalov, Tchavdar Marinov, BRILL, 2013, ISBN 900425076X , p. 159.

^ Culture and customs of Greece, Artemis Leontis, Greenwood Press, 2009, ISBN 0313342962 , p. 13.

^ Encyclopædia Britannica Premium Service,  History of Greece, Rigas Velestinilis .

^ Modern Greece: A Cultural Poetics, Vangelis Calotychos, Berg, 2003, ISBN 1859737161 p. 44.

^ Standard Languages and Multilingualism in European History, Matthias Hüning, Ulrike Vogl, Olivier Moliner, John Benjamins Publishing, 2012, ISBN 9027200556 , p. 158.

^ The Vlachs: Metropolis and Diaspora, Studies on the Vlachs, Asterios I. Kukudēs, Zitros Publ., 2003, ISBN 9607760867 , p. 250.

^ "Περιβόλι Γρεβενών, Η ιστορία" (in Greek). Archived from the original on 2012-05-03 . Retrieved 2024-02-04 .

^ The Mountains of the Mediterranean World, Studies in Environment and History, J. R. McNeill, Cambridge University Press, 2003, ISBN 0521522889 , p. 55.

^ "Περιβόλι Γρεβενών, Η ιστορία" (in Greek). Archived from the original on 2012-05-03 . Retrieved 2024-07-20 .

^ Peter Mackridge: Language and National Identity in Greece, 1766-1976.

Oxford University Press, 2010, ISBN 019959905X , p. 57.

Rigas came from an area in Thessaly inhabited by mixed Greek- and Aromanian-speaking populations...While it has been claimed...that Rigas was of Aromanian origin...there is no sure evidence to support it and many...scholars today reject it ^ Vangelis Calotychos: Modern Greece: A Cultural Poetics.

Berg, 2003, ISBN 1859737161 p. 44.

^ a b c Chisholm 1911 .

^ Kitromilides, Paschalis M. (2011). "From Republican Patriotism to National Sentiment: A Reading of Hellenic Nomarchy".

European Journal of Political Theory .

5 (1): 50– 60.

doi : 10.1177/1474885106059064 .

ISSN 1474-8851 .

S2CID 55444918 .

^ [1] Archived 2014-03-16 at the Wayback Machine Thourios Translation to English ^ [2] Article on Thourios and the modern Greek ethnicity ^ Greeks#Modern ^ Stojanović, Dubravka (2017).

Kaldrma i asfalt: urbanizacija i evropeizacija Beograda 1890-1914 (4 ed.). Beograd: Udruženje za društvenu istoriju. p. 79.

^ [3] Rigas Feraios ^ [4] A concise history of Greece ^ "Rigas Feraios" . Archived from the original on 2010-05-30 . Retrieved 2010-04-13 .

Another Rigas Feraios bio ^ Bank of Greece Archived March 28, 2009, at the Wayback Machine . Drachma Banknotes & Coins: 200 drachmas Archived 2007-10-05 at the Wayback Machine . – Retrieved on 27 March 2009.

^ Bank of Greece Archived March 28, 2009, at the Wayback Machine . Drachma Banknotes & Coins: 50 drachmas Archived January 1, 2009, at the Wayback Machine . – Retrieved on 27 March 2009.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Rhigas, Constantine ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 23 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

; In turn, it cites as references: I. C. Bolanachi, Hommes illustres de la Gréce moderne ( Paris , 1875).

E. M. Edmonds, Rhigas Pheraios ( London , 1890).

Rizos Neroulos, Histoire de la révolution grecque (Paris, 1829).

Gianni A. Papadrianou, Ο Ρήγας Βελεστινλής και οι Βαλκανικοί λαοί ("Rigas Velestinlis and the Balkan peoples").

Woodhouse, C. M. (1995).

Rhigas Velestinlis: The Proto-martyr of the Greek Revolution . Denise Harvey.

ISBN 960-7120-09-4 .

ISBN 960-7120-08-6 External links [ edit ] Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Original works of Rigas Feraios Scanned original draft of the New Political Constitution from the collection of the Hellenic Parliament Collection of papers dedicated to Rigas Charta, e-Perimetron , Vol. 3, No.3, 2008 Nebojša Tower will become a historical monument Archived 2004-11-17 at the Wayback Machine Chalcography of Alexander the Great by Rigas Feraios, Vienna 1797 History of Modern Greek Literature by C. T. Dimaras v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Rigas Feraios Main Ideas Modern Greek Enlightenment Greek Independence Civic nationalism Liberalism Constitutionalism Education Rule of law Civil liberties Popular sovereignty Demotic Greek Freedom of religion Publications School for Delicate Lovers Ephimeris Map of Greece Pamphlet of Rigas Feraios New Map of Wallachia and part of Transylvania General Map of Moldavia New Political Constitution Thourios Patriotic Hymn New Anacharsis Partners Christoforos Perraivos Osman Pazvantoğlu Georgios Theocharis Markides Pouliou brothers Emmanuel brothers Related Hellenic Nomarchy Nebojša Tower Rigas Feraios Square, Larissa Greek Communist Youth – Rigas Feraios v t e Modern Greek Enlightenment Main ideas Greek Independence Nationalism Liberalism Constitutionalism Education Westernization Hellenization Freedom of religion Greek language Publications Asma Polemistirion Salpisma Polemistirion Adelphiki Didaskalia Geographia Neoteriki Hellenic Nomarchy Hellenic Library Ephimeris Calliope Rossaglogallos Hermes o Logios Politika Parallela Thourios or Patriotic hymn Pamphlet of Rigas Feraios Map of Greece New Map of Wallachia and part of Transylvania Real Bliss General Map of Moldavia Gnostike, Stoicheia Philosophias Academies Ottoman Empire : Athonite Academy Evangelical School Kaplaneios Maroutsaia New Academy Phanar Greek Orthodox College Phrontisterion of Trapezous Diaspora : Flanginian School Princely Academy of Bucharest Princely Academy of Iași Representatives Methodios Anthrakites Kosmas Balanos Athanasios Christopoulos Neophytos Doukas Vikentios Damodos Theoklitos Farmakidis Rigas Feraios Anthimos Gazis Georgios Gennadios Theophilos Kairis Theodore Kavalliotis Grigorios Konstantas Adamantios Korais Konstantinos Koumas Stefanos Kanellos Sevastos Leontiadis Benjamin of Lesbos Iosipos Moisiodax Minas Minoidis Konstantinos Michail Konstantinos Nikolopoulos Michail Papageorgiou Christodoulos Pablekis Daniel Philippidis Athanasios Psalidas Theoklitos Polyeidis Athanasios Stageiritis Konstantinos Tzechanis Neophytos Vamvas Ioannis Vilaras Eugenios Voulgaris Related Philomuse Society Filiki Eteria Ionian Academy Orphanage of Kairis Moscopole printing house v t e Greek War of Independence (1821–1829) Background Ottoman Greece People Armatoles Proestoi Klephts Dionysius the Philosopher Daskalogiannis Panagiotis Benakis Nikolaos Galatis Konstantinos Kolokotronis Lambros Katsonis Cosmas of Aetolia Ali Pasha Maniots Phanariots Rum Millet Souliotes Gregory V of Constantinople Events Orlov Revolt Souliote War (1789–1793) Souliote War (1803) Greek Enlightenment People John Caradja Athanasios Christopoulos Theoklitos Farmakidis Rigas Feraios Anthimos Gazis Theophilos Kairis Adamantios Korais Eugenios Voulgaris Organizations Ellinoglosso Xenodocheio Filiki Eteria Nikolaos Skoufas Athanasios Tsakalov Emmanuil Xanthos Panagiotis Anagnostopoulos Philomuse Society Society of the Phoenix Publications Adelphiki Didaskalia Asma Polemistirion Hellenic Nomarchy Pamphlet of Rigas Feraios Salpisma Polemistirion Thourios or Patriotic hymn European intervention and Greek involvement in the Napoleonic Wars Russo-Turkish war (1768–1774) Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca Greek Plan of Catherine the Great Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792) French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars Fall of the Republic of Venice Republican French rule in the Ionian Islands Septinsular Republic Greek Legion Imperial French rule in the Ionian Islands Albanian Regiment Adriatic campaign of 1807–1814 1st Regiment Greek Light Infantry United States of the Ionian Islands Ideas Greek nationalism Eastern Orthodox Christianity Liberalism Constitutionalism Monarchism Events Sieges Patras Salona Navarino Livadeia 1st Acropolis Tripolitsa Arta Acrocorinth Nauplia 1st Messolonghi 2nd Messolonghi 3rd Messolonghi 2nd Acropolis Battles Kalamata Wallachian uprising Alamana Gravia Valtetsi Doliana Lalas Vasilika Drăgășani Sculeni Vasilika Trench Peta Dervenakia Karpenisi Greek civil wars Sphacteria Maniaki Morea Lerna Mills Mani Distomo Arachova Kamatero Phaleron Chios expedition Martino Koronisia Petra Massacres Constantinople Thessaloniki Navarino Tripolitsa Naousa Samothrace Chios Psara Kasos Cyprus Naval conflicts Eresos Chios Nauplia Samos Andros Sphacteria Gerontas Souda Alexandria Volos Itea Navarino Ships Agamemnon Aris Hellas Karteria Greek regional councils and statutes Messenian Senate Directorate of Achaea Peloponnesian Senate Senate of Western Continental Greece Areopagus of Eastern Continental Greece Provisional Regime of Crete Military-Political System of Samos Greek national assemblies First (Epidaurus) ( Executive of 1822 ) Second (Astros) Third (Troezen) Fourth (Argos) Fifth (Nafplion) International Conferences, treaties and protocols Congress of Laibach Congress of Verona Protocol of St. Petersburg (1826) Treaty of London Conference of Poros London Protocol of 1828 London Protocol of 1829 Treaty of Adrianople London Protocol of 1830 London Conference Treaty of Constantinople Proposals for the monarch of Greece Related Greek expedition to Syria (1825) Russo-Turkish War (1828–29) Personalities Greece Chian Committee Odysseas Androutsos Fotos Bomporis Kostas Botsaris Markos Botsaris Notis Botsaris Tousias Botsaris Laskarina Bouboulina Constantin Denis Bourbaki Stefanos Chalis Sotiris Charalampis Giannis Chondrogiannis Dimitrios Christidis Panagiotis Danglis Hatzimichalis Dalianis Dimitrios Deligeorgis Dimitrakis Deligiannis Kanellos Deligiannis Athanasios Diakos Dionysis Diakos Konstantinos Dimidis Ioannis Dimoulitsas Adam Doukas Georgios Drakos Yiannis Dyovouniotis Georgios Filippopoulos Asimakis Fotilas Panagiotakis Fotilas Angelis Gatsos Antonios Georgantas Germanos III of Old Patras Georgios Gevidis Konstantinos Gofas Vasileios Goudas Ioannis Gouras Dimitrios Gouvelis Konstantinos Gouvelis Angelis Govios Dimitrios Indares Isaiah of Salona Antonios Kalamogdartis George Kalaras Dimitrios Kallergis Athanasios Kampetis Athanasios Kanakaris Konstantinos Kanaris Stefanos Kanellos Ioannis Kapodistrias Viaros Kapodistrias Stamatios Kapsas Georgakis Kapsokalyvas Anastasios Karatasos Panagiotis Karatzas Georgios Karaiskakis Aristeidis Karnalis Nikolaos Kasomoulis Ioannis Kolettis Apostolis Kolokotronis Ioannis Kolokotronis Panos Kolokotronis Theodoros Kolokotronis Michail Komninos Afentoulief Alexandros Kontostavlos Panos Koronaios Georgios Kountouriotis Lazaros Kountouriotis Michalis Kourmoulis Ioannis Krestenitis Lykourgos Krestenitis Stamatis Krestenitis Antonios Kriezis Nikolaos Kriezotis Kyprianos of Cyprus Konstantinos Lagoumitzis Georgios Lassanis Georgios Lechouritis Leonardos Leonardopoulos Georgios Liologlou Lykourgos Logothetis Andreas Londos Yiannis Makriyiannis Ioannis Mamouris Anastasios Manakis Manto Mavrogenous Alexandros Mavrokordatos Antonios Mavromichalis Demetrios Mavromichalis Georgios Mavromichalis Konstantinos Mavromichalis Kyriakoulis Mavromichalis Petrobey Mavromichalis Dimitrios Meletopoulos Andreas Metaxas Konstantinos Metaxas Hatzigiannis Mexis Andreas Miaoulis Antonios Miaoulis Panagiotis Michanidis Spyros Milios Nikolaos Mykonios Zachos Milios Alexander Negris Konstantinos Negris Theodoros Negris Diamantis Nikolaou Konstantinos Nikolopoulos Ioannis Notaras Antonis Oikonomou Ioannis Orlandos Andronikos Paikos Georgios Panou Dimitrios Panourgias Nakos Panourgias Grigorios Papaflessas Anagnostis Papageorgiou Dimitrios Papanikolis Emmanouel Pappas Christoforos Perraivos Nikolaos Petimezas Vasileios Petimezas Dionysios Petrakis Andreas Pipinos Kyriakos Pittakis Anastasios Polyzoidis Konstantinos Rados Ioannis Rangos Panagiotis Rodios Dionysios Romas Georgios Sachtouris Georgios Sekeris Theofanis Siatisteus Georgios Sisinis Ioannis Skandalidis Zisis Sotiriou Nikitas Stamatelopoulos Georgios Stavros Joseph Stephanini Ioannis Stratos Sotirios Theocharopoulos Zafeirakis Theodosiou Emmanouil Tombazis Iakovos Tombazis Ioannis Trikoupis Anastasios Tsamados Melchisedek Tsouderos Kitsos Tzavellas Theodoros Tzinis Loukas Vagias Thanasoulas Valtinos Dimitrios Varis Meletis Vasileiou Domna Visvizi Alexakis Vlachopoulos Konstantinos Vlachopoulos Pieros Voidis Liolios Xirolivaditis Demetrios Ypsilantis Christoforos Zachariadis Andreas Zaimis Germanos Zapheiropoulos Evangelos Zappas Marigo Zarafopoula Nikolaos Zervas Philhellenes António Figueira d'Almeida Joseph Balestra Samuel Barff Paul Marie Bonaparte Karl Rudolf Brommy Lord Byron François-René de Chateaubriand Richard Church Giuseppe Chiappe Lord Cochrane Giacinto Collegno Charles Fabvier Adam Friedel Vincenzo Gallina Thomas Gordon Constantin Guys Emmanuel Han Frank Abney Hastings Carl von Heideck Samuel Gridley Howe George Jarvis Karl Krazeisen Henrik Nikolai Krøyer Ludwig I of Bavaria Ernst Michael Mangel Sophie de Marbois-Lebrun, Duchess of Plaisance Vasos Mavrovouniotis Johann Jakob Meyer Ellinika Chronika Jonathan Miller Julius Michael Millingen August Myhrberg Karl von Normann-Ehrenfels Hadži-Prodan Maurice Persat Theobald Piscatory Maxime Raybaud Auguste Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély Giuseppe Rosaroll Annibale Santorre di Rossi de Pomarolo, Count of Santarosa Friedrich Thiersch Auguste Hilarion Touret Edward John Trelawny German Legion [ el ] Serbs David Urquhart Olivier Voutier James Jakob Williams Moldavia and Wallachia ( Danubian Principalities ) Sacred Band Athanasios Agrafiotis Anastasios Christopoulos Diamandi Djuvara Stefanos Kanellos Alexandros Kantakouzinos Georgios Kantakouzinos Rallou Karatza Stamatios Kleanthis Georgios Lassanis Constantine Levidis Dimitrie Macedonski Anastasios Manakis Giorgakis Olympios Yiannis Pharmakis Michael Soutzos Roxani Soutzos Athanasios Tsakalov Tudor Vladimirescu Konstantinos Xenokratis Alexander Ypsilantis Demetrios Ypsilantis Nikolaos Ypsilantis Christoforos Zachariadis Ottoman Empire , Algeria , and Egypt Sultan Mahmud II Hurshid Pasha Nasuhzade Ali Pasha Ismael Gibraltar Omer Vrioni Kara Mehmet Mahmud Dramali Pasha Koca Hüsrev Mehmed Pasha Reşid Mehmed Pasha Yussuf Pasha Ibrahim Pasha Soliman Pasha al-Faransawi Britain , France and Russia George Canning Stratford Canning Edward Codrington Henri de Rigny Lodewijk van Heiden Alexander I of Russia Nicholas I of Russia Financial aid London Philhellenic Committee Ludwig I of Bavaria Jean-Gabriel Eynard Lazaros Kountouriotis Ioannis Papafis Georgios Stavros Ioannis Varvakis Rothschild & Co Morea expedition Military Nicolas Joseph Maison Antoine Simon Durrieu Antoine Virgile Schneider Auguste Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély Camille Alphonse Trézel Scientific Jean Baptiste Bory de Saint-Vincent Léon-Jean-Joseph Dubois Pierre Peytier Stamatis Voulgaris Guillaume-Abel Blouet Gabriel Bibron Prosper Baccuet Eugène Emmanuel Amaury Duval Pierre-Narcisse Guérin Charles Lenormant Edgar Quinet Historians/Memoirists Dimitrios Ainian Fotis Chrysanthopoulos Ioannis Filimon George Finlay Ambrosios Frantzis Lambros Koutsonikas Konstantinos Metaxas Panoutsos Notaras Panagiotis Papatsonis Anastasios Polyzoidis Georgios Tertsetis Spyridon Trikoupis Art Eugène Delacroix Louis Dupré Peter von Hess Victor Hugo François Pouqueville Alexander Pushkin Karl Krazeisen Andreas Kalvos Dionysios Solomos Theodoros Vryzakis Hellas The Reception of Lord Byron at Missolonghi Greece on the Ruins of Missolonghi Le siège de Corinthe The Massacre at Chios The Free Besieged Hymn to Liberty The Archipelago on Fire Loukis Laras The Apotheosis of Athanasios Diakos Remembrance 25 March (Independence Day) Hymn to Liberty Eleftheria i thanatos Pedion tou Areos Propylaea (Munich) Garden of Heroes (Missolonghi) Royal Phalanx Evzones ( Presidential Guard ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France 2 BnF data 2 Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece 2 Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rigas_Feraios&oldid=1302789637 " Categories : Rigas Feraios 1757 births 1798 deaths Journalists from the Ottoman Empire People from Feres Dragomans Greek journalists Greek cartographers Greek translators Modern Greek poets 18th-century Greek philosophers Greek nationalists Greek political writers Greek people of Aromanian descent Aromanians from the Ottoman Empire Aromanian writers Aromanian people of the Greek War of Independence Eastern Orthodox Christians from Greece People of the Modern Greek Enlightenment Greek revolutionaries Balkan federalists 18th-century executions by the Ottoman Empire Greek people imprisoned in the Ottoman Empire Assassinated revolutionaries Greek torture victims Greeks from the Ottoman Empire 18th-century Greek poets Greek male poets 18th-century male writers Greek independence activists 18th-century Greek writers 18th-century Greek educators People assassinated in the 18th century Greek republicans Hidden categories: CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 CS1 Greek-language sources (el) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2021 All articles needing additional references Biography with signature Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text Pages with Greek IPA Articles containing Aromanian-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 13:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rigas Feraios 36 languages Add topic

