Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Seminal publications 3 Core journals 4 Academic programs 5 Public policy impact 6 Developments after 1980 Toggle Developments after 1980 subsection 6.1 New economic geography 6.2 Criticisms 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Regional science 15 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of the social sciences Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Regional science is a field of economics concerned with analytical approaches to problems that are related specifically to regional and international issues. Topics in regional science include, but are not limited to location theory or spatial economics, location modeling, transportation, trade and migration flows, economic geography, land use and urban development , inter-industry analysis such as input-output analysis , environmental and ecological analysis, resource management , urban and regional policy analysis, and spatial data analysis . In the broadest sense, any social science analysis that has a spatial dimension is embraced by regional scientists.

Origins [ edit ] Regional science was founded in the late 1940s when some economists began to become dissatisfied with the low level of regional economic analysis and felt an urge to upgrade it. But even in this early era, the founders of regional science expected to catch the interest of people from a wide variety of disciplines. Regional science's formal roots date to the aggressive campaigns by Walter Isard and his supporters to promote the "objective" and "scientific" analysis of settlement, industrial location, and urban development. Isard targeted key universities and campaigned tirelessly. Accordingly, the Regional Science Association was founded in 1954, when the core group of scholars and practitioners held its first meetings independent from those initially held as sessions of the annual meetings of the American Economics Association.

[ 1 ] A reason for meeting independently undoubtedly was the group's desire to extend the new science beyond the rather restrictive world of economists and have natural scientists, psychologists, anthropologists, lawyers, sociologists, political scientists, planners, and geographers join the club.

[ 2 ] Now called the Regional Science Association International (RSAI), it maintains subnational and international associations, journals, and a conference circuit (notably in North America, continental Europe, Japan , and South Korea ). Membership in the RSAI continues to grow.

Seminal publications [ edit ] Topically speaking, regional science took off in the wake of Walter Christaller 's book Die Zentralen Orte in Sűddeutschland (Verlag von Gustav Fischer, Jena, 1933; transl.

Central Places in Southern Germany , 1966), soon followed by Tord Palander 's (1935) Beiträge zur Standortstheorie ; August Lösch 's Die räumliche Ordnung der Wirtschaft (Verlag von Gustav Fischer, Jena, 1940; 2nd rev. edit., 1944; transl.

The Economics of Location , 1954); and Edgar M. Hoover 's two books-- Location Theory and the Shoe and Leather Industry (1938) and The Location of Economic Activity (1948). Other important early publications include: Edward H. Chamberlin 's (1950) The Theory of Monopolistic Competition ; François Perroux 's (1950) Economic Spaces: Theory and Application ; Torsten Hägerstrand 's (1953) Innovationsförloppet ur Korologisk Synpunkt ; Edgar S. Dunn 's (1954) The Location of Agricultural Production ; Martin J. Beckmann , C.B McGuire, and Clifford B. Winston's (1956) Studies in the Economics of Transportation ; Melvin L. Greenhut 's (1956) Plant Location in Theory and Practice ; Gunnar Myrdal 's (1957) Economic Theory and Underdeveloped Regions ; Albert O. Hirschman 's (1958) The Strategy of Economic Development ; and Claude Ponsard 's (1958) Histoire des Théories Économiques Spatiales . Nonetheless, Walter Isard's first book in 1956, Location and Space Economy , apparently captured the imagination of many, and his third, Methods of Regional Analysis , published in 1960, only sealed his position as the father of the field.

As is typically the case, the above works were built on the shoulders of giants. Much of this predecessor work is documented well in Walter Isard's Location and Space Economy [ 3 ] as well as Claude Ponsard's Histoire des Théorie Économique Spatiales .

[ 4 ] Particularly important was the contribution by 19th century German economists to location theory . The early German hegemony more or less starts with Johann Heinrich von Thünen and runs through both Wilhelm Launhardt and Alfred Weber to Walter Christaller and August Lösch .

Core journals [ edit ] See also: Category:Urban studies and planning journals If an academic discipline is identified by its journals, then technically regional science began in 1955 with the publication of the first volume of the Papers and Proceedings, Regional Science Association (now Papers in Regional Science published by Springer ). In 1958, the Journal of Regional Science followed. Since the 1970s, the number of journals serving the field has exploded. The RSAI website displays most of them.

Most recently the journal Spatial Economic Analysis has been published by the RSAI British and Irish Section with the Regional Studies Association . The latter is a separate and growing organisation involving economists, planners, geographers, political scientists, management academics, policymakers, and practitioners.

[ 5 ] Academic programs [ edit ] Walter Isard 's efforts culminated in the creation of a few academic departments and several university-wide programs in regional science. At Walter Isard's suggestion, the University of Pennsylvania started the Regional Science Department in 1956. It featured as its first graduate William Alonso and was looked upon by many to be the international academic leader for the field. Another important graduate and faculty member of the department is Masahisa Fujita . The core curriculum of this department was microeconomics , input-output analysis , location theory , and statistics . Faculty also taught courses in mathematical programming , transportation economics , labor economics , energy and ecological policy modeling, spatial statistics , spatial interaction theory and models, benefit/cost analysis , urban and regional analysis, and economic development theory, among others. But the department's unusual multidisciplinary orientation undoubtedly encouraged its demise, and it lost its department status in 1993.

[ 6 ] With a few exceptions, such as Cornell University which awards graduate degrees in Regional Science [ 7 ] and where Walter Isard had spent the rest of his life after UPENN, most practitioners hold positions in departments such as economics, geography, civil engineering , agricultural economics , rural sociology , urban planning, public policy, or demography . The diversity of disciplines participating in regional science have helped make it one of the most interesting and fruitful fields of academic specialization, but it has also made it difficult to fit the many perspectives into a curriculum for an academic major. It is even difficult for authors to write regional science textbooks, since what is elementary knowledge for one discipline might be entirely novel for another.

[ 8 ] Public policy impact [ edit ] Part of the movement was, and continues to be, associated with the political and economic realities of the role of the local community. On any occasion where public policy is directed at the sub-national level, such as a city or group of counties, the methods of regional science can prove useful. Traditionally, regional science has provided policymakers with guidance on the following issues: [ 9 ] Determinants of industrial location (both within the nation and region) Regional economic impact of the arrival or departure of a firm Determinants and patterns of intra-national and inter-national trade(commodity) and migration(people) flows Regional specialization and exchange Environmental impacts of social and economic change Geographic association of economic and social conditions By targeting federal resources to specific geographic areas the Kennedy administration realized that political favors could be bought.

[ 10 ] This is also evident in Europe and other places where local economic areas do not coincide with political boundaries. In the more current era of devolution knowledge about "local solutions to local problems" has driven much of the interest in regional science. Thus, there has been much political impetus to the growth of the discipline.

Developments after 1980 [ edit ] Regional science has enjoyed mixed fortunes since the 1980s. While it has gained a larger following among economists and public policy practitioners, the discipline has fallen out of favor among more radical and post-modernist geographers. In an apparent effort to secure a larger share of research funds, geographers had the National Science Foundation 's Geography and Regional Science Program renamed "Geography and Spatial Sciences".

New economic geography [ edit ] In 1991, Paul Krugman , as a highly regarded international trade theorist, put out a call for economists to pay more attention to economic geography in a book entitled Geography and Trade , focusing largely on the core regional science concept of agglomeration economies. Krugman's call renewed interest by economists in regional science and, perhaps more importantly, founded what some term the "new economic geography", which enjoys much common ground with regional science. Broadly trained "new economic geographers" combine quantitative work with other research techniques, for example at the London School of Economics . The unification of Europe and the increased internationalization of the world's economic, social, and political realms has further induced interest in the study of regional, as opposed to national, phenomena.  The new economic geography appears to have garnered more interest in Europe than in America where amenities, notably climate, have been found to better predict human location and re-location patterns, as emphasized in recent work by Mark Partridge.

[ 11 ] In 2008 Krugman won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences and his Prize Lecture has references both to work in regional science's location theory as well as economic's trade theory.

[ 12 ] Criticisms [ edit ] Today there are dwindling numbers of regional scientists from academic planning programs and mainstream geography departments. Attacks on regional science's practitioners by radical critics began as early as the 1970s, notably David Harvey who believed it lacked social and political commitment. Regional science's founder, Walter Isard, never envisioned regional scientists would be political or planning activists. In fact, he suggested that they will seek to be sitting in front of a computer and surrounded by research assistants.

Trevor J. Barnes suggests the decline of regional science practice among planners and geographers in North America could have been avoided. He says "It is unreflective, and consequently inured to change, because of a commitment to a God’s eye view. It is so convinced of its own rightness, of its Archimedean position, that it remained aloof and invariant, rather than being sensitive to its changing local context." [ 13 ] However, such critics have failed to provide empirical evidence for their claims and ended up criticizing for the sake of criticizing.

See also [ edit ] Regional scientists (category) Economic geography Regional economics List of planning journals Regional development Regional planning Rural economics Spatial planning Unified settlement planning Urban economics Urban planning Walter Isard - founder of regional science Regional Studies Association References [ edit ] ^ Isard, Walter. 1975.

Introduction to Regional Science.

New York: Prentice Hall.

^ Isard, Walter. 1975.

Introduction to Regional Science.

New York: Prentice Hall, p. 6.

^ Isard, Walter. 1956.

Location and Space-Economy: A General Theory Relating to Industrial Location, Market Areas, Land Use, Trade and Urban Structure Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

^ Ponsard, Claude. 1958.

Histoire des Théories Économiques Spatiales . Paris: Librairie Armand Colin (Translated in 1983 by Benjamin H. Stevens, Margaret Chevallier and Joaquin P. Pujol as History of Spatial Economic Theory . Springer-Verlag: New York.) ^ Regional Studies Association – Home Archived 2008-12-19 at the Wayback Machine . Regional-studies-assoc.ac.uk. Retrieved on 2011-06-04.

^ Boyce, David. 2004. "A Short History of the field of Regional Science," Papers in Regional Science, 83, 31–57. The source for a few dates in this paragraph.

^ Cornell College of Architecture, Art, and Planning, Department of City and Regional Planning: About Regional Science ^ Scott Loveridge discusses the pros and cons of a multidisciplinary field.

link Archived June 24, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ Classical regional science questions.

link Archived June 24, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ Hoover, Edgar M.; Giarratani, Frank (2020) [1999].

An Introduction to Regional Economics . Morgantown, WV: Regional Research Institute, West Virginia University. pp.

272– 273.

^ Partridge, Mark D. (2010).

"The duelling models: NEG vs amenity migration in explaining US engines of growth" .

Papers in Regional Science .

89 : 513– 536.

doi : 10.1111/j.1435-5957.2010.00315.x .

^ Paul Krugman's Nobel Prize Lecture 2008 . Nobelprize.org (2008-12-08). Retrieved on 2011-06-04.

^ Barnes in Canadian J of Reg. Sci .

1 Archived March 10, 2005, at the Wayback Machine Further reading [ edit ] Boyce, David. (2004). A Short History of the Field of Regional Science.

Papers in Regional Science.

, 83 pp. 31–57.

Short history . (PDF) . Retrieved on 2011-06-04.

Durlauf, Steven N., and Lawrence E. Blume, ed. (2008).

The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition: "new economic geography" by Anthony J. Venables .

Abstract.

"regional development, geography of" by Jeffrey D. Sachs and Gordon McCord.

Abstract.

"spatial economics" by Gilles Duranton.

Abstract.

"urban agglomeration"  by William C. Strange.

Abstract.

Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony Venables. (1999).

The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions and International Trade (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT press). ( ISBN 0-262-06204-6 ) Fujita, Masahisa. (1989).

Urban Economic Theory: Land Use and City Size (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press). ( ISBN 0-521-34662-2 ) Fritsch, Michael und Mueller, Pamela (2006), The Effect of New Business Formation on Regional Development over Time. The Case of Germany, Discussion Papers on Entrepreneurship, Growth and Public Policy, Jena Krumm, Ronald J.; Tolley, George S.

(1987). "Regional economics".

The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics .

4 : 116– 20.

Scott, A. J. (2000). "Economic Geography: The Great Half-Century".

Cambridge Journal of Economics .

24 : 504.

Web Book of Regional Science v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category Authority control databases : National Germany France BnF data Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐f5bmn
Cached time: 20250812003946
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.407 seconds
Real time usage: 0.517 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1586/1000000
Revision size: 17325/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 73627/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7129/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61166/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.261/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6132908/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  421.837      1 -total
 32.98%  139.135      1 Template:Economics_sidebar
 32.56%  137.368      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 24.50%  103.338      1 Template:Reflist
 18.03%   76.065      1 Template:Cite_book
 16.13%   68.022      2 Template:Hlist
 15.89%   67.015      1 Template:Short_description
  8.92%   37.613      2 Template:Navbox
  8.60%   36.289      1 Template:Environmental_social_science
  8.09%   34.124      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:50712:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003946 and revision id 1299176973. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Regional_science&oldid=1299176973 " Categories : Regional science Regional economics Economic geography Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 23:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Regional science 15 languages Add topic

