Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Designation 2 Insular decoration 3 Background 4 Metalwork 5 Illuminated manuscripts Toggle Illuminated manuscripts subsection 5.1 Other books 5.2 Movement to Anglo-Saxon art 6 Sculpture 7 Pictish standing stones 8 Legacy 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 9.2 Sources 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Insular art 20 languages العربية Български Dansk Español Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Post-Roman British and Irish style of art This page (folio 292r) of the Book of Kells contains the lavishly decorated text that opens the Gospel of John .

David from the Durham Cassiodorus , early 8th century (?), Jarrow [ 1 ] Insular art , also known as Hiberno-Saxon art , was produced in the post-Roman era of Great Britain and Ireland . The term derives from insula , the Latin term for "island"; in this period Britain and Ireland shared a largely common style different from that of the rest of Europe. Art historians usually group Insular art as part of the Migration Period art movement as well as Early Medieval Western art, and it is the combination of these two traditions that gives the style its special character.

[ 2 ] Most Insular art originates from the Irish monastic movement of Celtic Christianity , or metalwork for the secular elite, and the period begins around 600 with the combining of Celtic and Anglo-Saxon styles. One major distinctive feature is interlace decoration, in particular the interlace decoration as found at Sutton Hoo , in East Anglia .  This is now applied to decorating new types of objects mostly copied from the Mediterranean world, above all the codex or book.

[ 3 ] The finest period of the style was brought to an end by the disruption to monastic centres and aristocratic life caused by the Viking raids which began in the late 8th century.  These are presumed to have interrupted work on the Book of Kells ; no later Gospel books are as heavily or finely illuminated as the masterpieces of the 8th century.

[ 4 ] In England the style merged into Anglo-Saxon art around 900, whilst in Ireland the style continued until the 12th century, when it merged into Romanesque art .

[ 5 ] Ireland, Scotland and the kingdom of Northumbria in Northern England are the most important centres, but examples were found also in southern England , Wales [ 6 ] and in Continental Europe, especially Gaul (modern France), in centres founded by the Hiberno-Scottish mission and Anglo-Saxon missions. The influence of Insular art affected all subsequent European medieval art, especially in the decorative elements of Romanesque and Gothic manuscripts.

[ 7 ] Surviving examples of Insular art are mainly illuminated manuscripts , metalwork and carvings in stone, especially stone crosses .  Surfaces are highly decorated with intricate patterning, with no attempt to give an impression of depth, volume or recession.  The best examples include the Book of Kells , Lindisfarne Gospels , Book of Durrow , brooches such as the Tara Brooch and the Ruthwell Cross .

Carpet pages are a characteristic feature of Insular manuscripts, although historiated initials (an Insular invention), canon tables and figurative miniatures, especially Evangelist portraits , are also common.

Designation [ edit ] This sense of the term as Insular (relating to one or more islands) derives from the phrase Insular script , first cited by the OED in 1908, [ 8 ] though it seems clear from their 1908 quotation that the usage was already established; Carola Hicks dates the first use to 1901.  It is also used by linguists for the Insular Celtic languages [ 9 ] Initially used mainly to describe the style of decoration of illuminated manuscripts, which are certainly the most numerous type of major surviving objects using the style, the term is now used more widely across all the arts, and indeed for peoples, as in " Insular Celts " .  It has the advantage of recognising the unity of styles across Britain and Ireland, while avoiding the use of the term British Isles , a sensitive topic in Ireland, and also circumventing arguments about the origins of the style, and the place of creation of specific works, which were often fierce in the 20th century [ 10 ] and may be reviving in the 21st.

[ 11 ] Some sources distinguish between a "wider period between the 5th and 11th centuries, from the departure of the Romans to the beginnings of the Romanesque style" and a "more specific phase from the 6th to 9th centuries, between the conversion to Christianity and the Viking settlements".

[ 12 ] C. R. Dodwell , on the other hand, says that in Ireland "the Insular style continued almost unchallenged until the Anglo-Norman invasion of 1170 ; indeed examples of it occur even as late as the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries".

[ 13 ] Insular decoration [ edit ] One of hundreds of small initials from the Book of Kells The Insular style is most famous for its highly dense, intricate and imaginative decoration, which takes elements from several earlier styles.  Late Iron Age Celtic art or "Ultimate La Tène ", gave the love of spirals, triskeles , circles and other geometric motifs. These were combined with animal forms probably mainly deriving from the Germanic version of the general Eurasian animal style , though also from Celtic art, where heads terminating scrolls were common.

Interlace was used by both these traditions, as well as Roman art (for example in floor mosaics ) and other possible influences such as Coptic art , and its use was taken to new levels in Insular art, where it was combined with the other elements already mentioned.

There is no attempt to represent depth in manuscript painting, with all the emphasis on a brilliantly patterned surface.  In early works the human figure was shown in the same geometric fashion as animal figures, but reflections of a classical figure style spread as the period went on, probably mostly from the southern Anglo-Saxon regions, though northern areas also had direct contacts with the Continent.

[ 14 ] The origins of the overall format of the carpet page have often been related to Roman floor mosaics, [ 15 ] Coptic carpets and manuscript paintings, [ 16 ] without general agreement being reached among scholars.

Background [ edit ] Early Anglo-Saxon shoulder-clasps from Sutton Hoo , early 7th century. Gold, garnet, and millefiori glass.

Front plate of the 12th century Saint Manchan's Shrine Unlike contemporary Byzantine art , and that of most major periods, Insular art does not come from a society where common stylistic influences were spread across a great number of types of object in art, applied art and decorative art .  Across all the islands society was effectively entirely rural, buildings were rudimentary, and architecture has no Insular style.  Although related objects in many more perishable media certainly existed and have not survived, it is clear that both religious and secular Insular patrons expected individual objects of dazzling virtuosity, that were all the more dazzling because of the lack of visual sophistication in the world in which they were seen.

[ 17 ] Especially in Ireland, the clerical and secular elites were often very closely linked; some Irish abbacies were held for generations among a small kin-group.

[ 18 ] Ireland was divided into very small "kingdoms", almost too many for historians to keep track of, whilst in Britain there was a smaller number of generally larger kingdoms. Both the Celtic (Irish and Pictish ) and Anglo-Saxon elites had long traditions of metalwork of the finest quality, much of it used for the personal adornment of both sexes of the elite. The Insular style arises from the meeting of their two styles, Celtic and Anglo-Saxon animal style , in a Christian context, and with some awareness of Late Antique style. This was especially so in their application to the book, which was a new type of object for both traditions, as well as to metalwork.

[ 19 ] The role of the Kingdom of Northumbria in the formation of the new style appears to have been pivotal.  The northernmost Anglo-Saxon kingdom continued to expand into areas with Celtic populations, but often leaving those populations largely intact in areas such as Dál Riata , Elmet and the Kingdom of Strathclyde . The Irish monastery at Iona was established by Saint Columba (Colum Cille) in 563, when Iona was part of a Dál Riata that included territory in both Ireland and modern Scotland. Although the first conversion of a Northumbrian king, that of Edwin in 627, was effected by clergy from the Gregorian Mission to Kent, it was the Celtic Christianity of Iona that was initially more influential in Northumbria, founding Lindisfarne on the eastern coast as a satellite in 635.  However Northumbria remained in direct contact with Rome and other important monastic centres were founded by Wilfrid and Benedict Biscop who looked to Rome, and at the Synod of Whitby it was the Roman practices that were upheld, while the Iona contingent walked out, not adopting the Roman Easter dating until 715.

[ 20 ] What had finally settled into a broad consensus as to the origins of the style may be disturbed by the continuing assessment of the large numbers of decorated metalwork finds in the Staffordshire Hoard , found in 2009, and to a lesser extent the Prittlewell princely burial from Essex , found in 2003.

[ 21 ] Metalwork [ edit ] The Hunterston Brooch , Irish c. 700, is cast in silver, mounted with gold, silver and amber decoration.

Christianity discouraged the burial of grave goods so that, at least from the Anglo-Saxons, we have a larger number of pre-Christian survivals than those from later periods.

[ 22 ] The majority of examples that survive from the Christian period have been found in archaeological contexts that suggest they were rapidly hidden, lost or abandoned. There are a few exceptions, notably arm-shaped reliquaries such as the Shrine of Saint Lachtin's Arm , [ 23 ] and portable book-shaped (" cumdachs ") and house-shaped [ 24 ] shrines for books or relics , several of which have been continuously owned, mostly by churches on the Continent—though the Monymusk Reliquary has always been in Scotland.

[ 25 ] In general it is clear that most survivals are only by chance, and that we have only fragments of some types of object—in particular the largest and least portable. The highest quality survivals are either secular jewellery, the largest and most elaborate pieces probably for male wearers, or tableware or altarware in what were apparently very similar styles—some pieces cannot be confidently assigned between altar and royal dining-table.  It seems possible, even likely, that the finest church pieces were made by secular workshops, often attached to a royal household, though other pieces were made by monastic workshops.

[ 26 ] The evidence suggests that Irish metalworkers produced most of the best pieces, [ 27 ] however the finds from the royal burial at Sutton Hoo , from the far east of England and at the beginning of the period, are as fine in design and workmanship as any Irish pieces.

[ 28 ] Even excepting the existence of workshops in the mid-to-late medieval period, the craftsman may not always have had been responsible for the full design of the works, for example the execution of portions of the Ardagh Chalice evidences a lack of skill compared to the rest of the piece.

[ 29 ] There are a number of large penannular brooches , including several of comparable quality to the Tara brooch .  Almost all of these are in the British Museum , the National Museum of Ireland , the National Museum of Scotland , or local museums in the islands.  Each of their designs is wholly individual in detail, and the workmanship is varied in technique and superb in quality.  Many elements of the designs can be directly related to elements used in manuscripts.  Almost all of the many techniques known in metalwork can be found in Insular work.  Surviving stones used in decoration are semi-precious ones, with amber and rock crystal among the commonest, and some garnets .  Coloured glass, enamel and millefiori glass, probably imported, are also used, as seen in the late 6th century Ballinderry Brooch .

[ 30 ] The gilt-bronze Rinnegan Crucifixion Plaque (NMI, late 7th or early 8th century) is the best known of a group of nine recorded Irish metal Crucifixion plaques and is comparable in style to figures on many high crosses; it may well have come from a book cover or formed part of a larger altar frontal or high cross .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] The Ardagh Chalice , c.? 750 The Ardagh Chalice and the Derrynaflan Hoard of chalice, paten with stand, strainer, and basin (only discovered in 1980) are the most outstanding pieces of church metalware to survive (only three other chalices, and no other paten, survive).  These pieces are thought to come from the 8th or 9th century, but most dating of metalwork is uncertain, and comes largely from comparison with manuscripts.  Only fragments remain from what were probably large pieces of church furniture, probably with metalwork on wooden frameworks, such as shrines, crosses and other items.

[ 33 ] The Insular crozier had a distinctive shape; the survivals, such as the Kells Crozier and Lismore Crozier all appear to be Irish or Scottish, and from rather late in the Insular period. These later works, which also including the 11th century River Laune and Clonmacnoise Croziers are heavily influenced by Viking art and have interlace patterns in the Ringerike or Urnes styles .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] The Cross of Cong is a 12th-century Irish processional cross and reliquary that shows Insular decoration, possibly added in a deliberately revivalist spirit.

[ 36 ] The fittings of a major abbey church in the Insular period remain hard to imagine; one thing that does seem clear is that the most fully decorated manuscripts were treated as decorative objects for display rather than as books for study.  The most fully decorated of all, the Book of Kells, has several mistakes left uncorrected, the text headings necessary to make the Canon tables usable have not been added, and when it was stolen in 1006 for its cover in precious metals, it was taken from the sacristy , not the library.  The book was recovered, but not the cover, as also happened with the Book of Lindisfarne.  None of the major Insular manuscripts have preserved their elaborate jewelled metal covers, but we know from documentary evidence that these were as spectacular as the few remaining continental examples.

[ 37 ] The re-used metal back cover of the Lindau Gospels (now in the Morgan Library , New York [ 38 ] ) was made in southern Germany in the late 8th or early 9th century, under heavy Insular influence, and is perhaps the best indication as to the appearance of the original covers of the great Insular manuscripts, although one gold and garnet piece from the Anglo-Saxon Staffordshire Hoard , found in 2009, may be the corner of a book-cover.  The Lindau design is dominated by a cross, but the whole surface of the cover is decorated, with interlace panels between the arms of the cross.  The cloisonné enamel shows Italian influence, and is not found in work from the Insular homelands, but the overall effect is very like a carpet page.

[ 39 ] The Tara Brooch , c. 710 to 750 AD Rinnegan Crucifixion Plaque , 8th century Monymusk Reliquary , 8th century The Derrynaflan Chalice , 8th or 9th century Cumdach for the Stowe Missal , c. 1026 Shrine of Saint Lachtin's Arm , early 10th century The Clonmacnoise Crozier , 11th century Soiscél Molaisse , metalwork added in 11th century Illuminated manuscripts [ edit ] Main article: Insular illumination Cathach of St. Columba, 7th century Cathach of St. Columba .
An Irish Latin psalter of the early 7th century, [ 40 ] this is perhaps the oldest known Irish manuscript of any sort.  It contains only decorated letters, at the beginning of each Psalm, but these already show distinctive traits.  Not just the initial, but the first few letters are decorated, at diminishing sizes.  The decoration influences the shape of the letters, and various decorative forms are mixed in a very unclassical way. Lines are already inclined to spiral and metamorphose, as in the example shown. Apart from black, some orange ink is used for dotted decoration.  The classical tradition was late to use capital letters for initials at all (in Roman texts it is often very hard to even separate the words), and though by this time they were in common use in Italy, they were often set in the left margin, as though to cut them off from the rest of the text.  The Insular tendency for the decoration to lunge into the text, and take over more and more of it, was a radical innovation.

[ 41 ] The Bobbio Jerome which according to an inscription dates to before 622, from Bobbio Abbey , an Irish mission centre in northern Italy, has a more elaborate initial with colouring, showing Insular characteristics still more developed, even in such an outpost. From the same scriptorium and of similar date, the Bobbio Orosius has the earliest carpet page , although a relatively simple one.

[ 42 ] The beginning of the Gospel of Mark from the Book of Durrow.

Durham Gospel Book Fragment .
The earliest painted Insular manuscript to survive, produced in Lindisfarne c. 650, but with only seven leaves of the book remaining, not all with illuminations. This introduces interlace, and also uses Celtic motifs drawn from metalwork. The design of two of the surviving pages relates them as a two-page spread.

[ 43 ] Book of Durrow .
The earliest surviving Gospel Book with a full programme of decoration (though not all has survived): six extant carpet pages, a full-page miniature of the four evangelist's symbols, four full-page miniatures of the evangelists' symbols, four pages with very large initials, and decorated text on other pages. Many minor initial groups are decorated.

[ 44 ] Its date and place of origin remain subjects of debate, with 650–690 and Durrow in Ireland, Iona or Lindisfarne being the normal contenders. The influences on the decoration are also highly controversial, especially regarding Coptic or other Near Eastern influence.

[ 45 ] The manuscript is decorated by cross motifs, ribbon interlace, lattice work, carpet pages, and the evangelist symbols.

[ 44 ] After large initials the following letters on the same line, or for some lines beyond, continue to be decorated at a smaller size.

[ 46 ] Dots around the outside of large initials are much used.

[ 46 ] The figures are highly stylised, and some pages use Germanic interlaced animal ornament, whilst others use the full repertoire of Celtic geometric spirals.

[ 46 ] Each page uses a different and coherent set of decorative motifs. Only four colours are used, but the viewer is hardly conscious of any limitation from this. All the elements of Insular manuscript style are already in place. The execution, though of high quality, is not as refined as in the best later books, nor is the scale of detail as small.

[ 47 ] Carpet page from the Lindisfarne Gospels Lindisfarne Gospels Produced in Lindisfarne by Eadfrith , Bishop of Lindisfarne , between about 690 and his death in 721 (perhaps towards the end of this period), this is a Gospel Book in the style of the Book of Durrow, but more elaborate and complex.  All the letters on the pages beginning the Gospels are highly decorated in a single composition, and many two-page openings are designed as a unit, with carpet pages facing an incipit ("Here begins..") initial page at the start of each Gospel.  Eadfrith was almost certainly the scribe as well as the artist.  There are four Evangelist portraits , clearly derived from the classical tradition but treated without any sense of depth; the borders around them are far plainer than the decoration of the text pages, and there is clearly a sense of two styles which Eadfrith does not attempt to integrate wholly.  The carpet-pages are enormously complex, and superbly executed.

[ 48 ] Lichfield Gospels Likely made in Lichfield around 730, this deluxe gospel-book contains eight major decorated pages, including a stunning cross-carpet page and portraits of the evangelists Mark and Luke. The gospels of Matthew and Mark and the beginning of Luke survives. From its time in Wales, pages include marginalia representing some of the earliest examples of Old Welsh writing. The manuscript has been at Lichfield Cathedral since the late 10th century, except for a brief period during the English Civil War.

St Petersburg Bede .
Attributed to Monkwearmouth-Jarrow Abbey in Northumbria between about 730–746, this contains larger opening letters in which metalwork styles of decoration can clearly be seen. There are thin bands of interlace within the members of letters. It also contains the earliest historiated initial , a bust probably of Pope Gregory I , which like some other elements of the decoration, clearly derives from a Mediterranean model.  Colour is used, although in a relatively restrained way.

[ 49 ] Book of Kells Usually dated to around 800, although sometimes up to a century earlier, the place of origin is disputed between Iona and Kells , or other locations.

[ 50 ] It is also often thought to have been begun in Iona and then continued in Ireland, after disruption from Viking raids; the book survives nearly intact but the decoration is not finished, with some parts in outline only. It is far more comprehensively decorated than any previous manuscript in any tradition, with every page (except two) having many small decorated letters. Although there is only one carpet page, the incipit initials are so densely decorated, with only a few letters on the page, that they rather take over this function. Human figures are more numerous than before, though treated in a thoroughly stylised fashion, and closely surrounded, even hemmed in, by decoration as crowded as on the initial pages. Books, however, are the most directly depicted objects in the illustrations. A few scenes such as the Temptation and Arrest of Christ are included, as well as a Madonna and Child, surrounded by angels (the earliest Madonna in a Western book).  More miniatures may have been planned or executed and lost.  Colours are very bright and the decoration has tremendous energy, with spiral forms predominating. Gold and silver are not used.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] The Book of Kells is held in Trinity College Dublin .

A lesser known Insular manuscript in Trinity College Dublin's library is the Garland of Howth , which is in a damaged condition. Two of its illuminated pages remain, decorated with the common motifs of the Insular style.

[ 54 ] Other books [ edit ] St John from the Book of Mulling A distinctive Insular type of book is the pocket gospel book , inevitably much less decorated, but in several cases with Evangelist portraits and other decoration.  Examples include the Book of Mulling , Book of Deer , Book of Dimma , Book of Armagh , and the smallest of all, the Stonyhurst Gospel (now British Library ), a 7th-century Anglo-Saxon text of the Gospel of John, which belonged to St Cuthbert and was buried with him.  Its beautifully tooled goatskin cover is the oldest Western bookbinding to survive, and a virtually unique example of Insular leatherwork, in an excellent state of preservation.

[ 55 ] Both Anglo-Saxon and Irish manuscripts have a distinctive rougher finish to their vellum, compared to the smooth-polished surface of contemporary continental and all late-medieval vellum.

[ 56 ] It appears that, in contrast to later periods, the scribes copying the text were often also the artists of the illuminations, and might include the most senior figures of their monastery.

[ 57 ] Movement to Anglo-Saxon art [ edit ] Main article: Anglo-Saxon art In England the pull of a Continental style operated from very early on; the Gregorian mission from Rome had brought the St Augustine Gospels and other manuscripts now lost with them, and other books were imported from the continent early on.  The 8th-century Cotton Bede shows mixed elements in the decoration, as does the Stockholm Codex Aureus of similar period, probably written in Canterbury .

[ 58 ] In the Vespasian Psalter it is clear which element is coming to dominate.  All these and other members of the "Tiberius" group of manuscripts were written south of the river Humber , [ 59 ] but the Codex Amiatinus , of before 716 from Jarrow, is written in a fine uncial script, and its only illustration is conceived in an Italianate style, with no Insular decoration; it has been suggested this was only because the volume was made for presentation to the Pope.

[ 60 ] The dating is partly known from the grant of additional land secured to raise the generations of cattle, amounting to 2,000 head in all, which were necessary to make the vellum for three complete but unillustrated Bibles, which shows the resources necessary to make the large books of the period.

Many Anglo-Saxon manuscripts written in the south, and later the north, of England show strong Insular influences until the 10th century or beyond, but the pre-dominant stylistic impulse comes from the continent of Europe; carpet-pages are not found, but many large figurative miniatures are. Panels of interlace and other Insular motifs continue to be used as one element in borders and frames ultimately classical in derivation.  Many continental manuscripts, especially in areas influenced by the Celtic missions, also show such features well into the early Romanesque period.  "Franco-Saxon" is a term for a school of late Carolingian illumination in north-eastern France that used Insular-style decoration, including super-large initials, sometimes in combination with figurative images typical of contemporary French styles. The "most tenacious of all the Carolingian styles", it continued until as late as the 11th century.

[ 61 ] Sculpture [ edit ] Main article: High cross Muiredach's High Cross at Monasterboice , 10th century Large stone high crosses , usually erected outside monasteries or churches, first appear in the 8th century in Ireland, [ 62 ] perhaps at Carndonagh , Donegal , a monastic site with Ionian foundations, [ 63 ] apparently later than the earliest Anglo-Saxon crosses , which may be 7th-century.

[ 64 ] Later Insular carvings found throughout Britain and Ireland were almost entirely geometrical, as was the decoration on the earliest crosses.  By the 9th century figures are carved, and the largest crosses have very many figures in scenes on all surfaces, often from the Old Testament on the east side, and the New on the west, with a Crucifixion at the centre of the cross.  The 10th-century Muiredach's High Cross at Monasterboice is usually regarded as the peak of the Irish crosses.  In later examples the figures become fewer and larger, and their style begins to merge with the Romanesque, as at the Dysert Cross in Ireland.

[ 65 ] The 8th-century Northumbrian Ruthwell Cross , unfortunately damaged by Presbyterian iconoclasm , is the most impressive remaining Anglo-Saxon cross, though as with most Anglo-Saxon crosses the original cross head is missing.  Many Anglo-Saxon crosses were much smaller and more slender than the Irish ones, and therefore only had room for carved foliage, but the Bewcastle Cross , Easby Cross and Sandbach Crosses are other survivals with considerable areas of figurative reliefs , with larger-scale figures than any early Irish examples.  Even early Anglo-Saxon examples mix vine-scroll decoration of Continental origin with interlace panels, and in later ones the former type becomes the norm, just as in manuscripts.  There is literary evidence for considerable numbers of carved stone crosses across the whole of England, and also straight shafts, often as grave-markers, but most survivals are in the northernmost counties.  There are remains of other works of monumental sculpture in Anglo-Saxon art, even from the earlier periods, but nothing comparable from Ireland.

[ 66 ] A replica of the Hilton of Cadboll Stone , carved in the Pictish Easter Ross style 800–900 AD Pictish standing stones [ edit ] Main article: Pictish stones The stone monuments erected by the Picts of Scotland north of the Clyde-Forth line between the 6th–8th centuries are particularly striking in design and construction, carved in the typical Easter Ross style related to that of Insular art, though with much less classical influence. In particular the forms of animals are often closely comparable to those found in Insular manuscripts, where they typically represent the Evangelist's symbols, which may indicate a Pictish origin for these forms, or another common source.

[ 67 ] The carvings come from both pagan and early Christian periods, and the Pictish symbols, which are still poorly understood, do not seem to have been repugnant to Christians.  The purpose and meaning of the stones are only partially understood, although some think that they served as personal memorials, the symbols indicating membership of clans , lineages, or kindreds and depict ancient ceremonies and rituals [ 68 ] Examples include the Eassie Stone and the Hilton of Cadboll Stone . It is possible that they had subsidiary uses, such as marking tribal or lineage territories.  It has also been suggested that the symbols could have been some kind of pictographic system of writing.

[ 69 ] There are also a few examples of similar decoration on Pictish silver jewellery, notably the Norrie's Law Hoard, of the 7th century or perhaps earlier, much of which was melted down on discovery, [ 70 ] and the 8th-century St Ninian's Isle Hoard, with many brooches and bowls.

[ 71 ] The surviving items from both are now held by the National Museum of Scotland .

[ 72 ] Legacy [ edit ] 9th-century Carolingian Franco-Saxon Incipit initial combines Insular decoration with classicising Evangelist portraits .

The true legacy of Insular art lies not so much in the specific stylistic features discussed above, but in its fundamental departure from the classical approach to decoration, whether of books or other works of art.  The barely controllable energy of Insular decoration, spiralling across formal partitions, becomes a feature of later medieval art, especially Gothic art, in areas where specific Insular motifs are hardly used, such as architecture. The mixing of the figurative with the ornamental also remained characteristic of all later medieval illumination; indeed for the complexity and density of the mixture, Insular manuscripts are only rivalled by some 15th-century works of late Flemish illumination. It is also noticeable that these characteristics are always rather more pronounced in the north of Europe than the south; Italian art, even in the Gothic period, always retains a certain classical clarity in form.

[ 73 ] Unmistakable Insular influence can be seen in Carolingian manuscripts, even though these were also trying to copy the Imperial styles of Rome and Byzantium. Greatly enlarged initials, sometimes inhabited, were retained, as well as far more abstract decoration than found in classical models. These features continue in Ottonian and contemporary French illumination and metalwork, before the Romanesque period further removed classical restraints, especially in manuscripts, and the capitals of columns.

[ 74 ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Nordenfalk, 29, 86–87 ^ Honour & Fleming, 244–247; Pächt, 65–66; Walies & Zoll, 27–30 ^ No manuscripts are commonly dated before 600, but some jewellery, mostly Irish, is dated to the 6th century. Youngs 20–22. The early history of Anglo-Saxon metalwork is dominated by the early-7th-century finds at Sutton Hoo , but it is clear these were the product of a well-established tradition of which only smaller pieces survive. Wilson, 16–27. The earliest Pictish stones may date from the fifth century however. Laing, 55–56.

^ Dodwell (1993), 85, 90; Wilson, 141 ^ Ryan ^ The late Ricemarch Psalter is certainly Welsh in origin, and the much earlier Hereford Gospels is believed by many to be Welsh (see Grove Art Online, S2); the 10th-century Book of Deer , the earliest manuscript with Scottish Gaelic , is an Insular product of eastern Scotland (Grove).

^ Henderson, 63–71 ^ OED "Insular" 4 b.

^ Apparently a more recent usage from the ?1970s on, in works such as Cowgill, Warren (1975). "The origins of the Insular Celtic conjunct and absolute verbal endings". In H. Rix (ed.).

Flexion und Wortbildung: Akten der V. Fachtagung der Indogermanischen Gesellschaft, Regensburg, 9.–14. September 1973 . Wiesbaden: Reichert. pp.

40– 70.

ISBN 978-3-920153-40-7 .

^ Schapiro, 225–241, Nordenfalk, 11–14, Wailes & Zoll, 25–38, Wilson, 32–36, give accounts of some of these scholarly controversies; Oxford Art Online "Insular art", The Oxford Dictionary of Art Archived 5 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Hendersons ^ Hicks ^ Dodwell (1993), 90.

^ Grove, Wilson, 38–40, Nordenfalk, 13–26, Calkins Chapter 1, Laing 346–351 ^ Henderson, 97–100 ^ Nordenfalk, 19–22, Schapiro, 205–206 ^ Henderson 48–55, Dodwell, 19 and throughout Chapter 7 ^ Youngs, 13–14 ^ Youngs, 15–16, 72; Nordenfalk, 7–11, Pächt, 65–66 ^ Nordenfalk, 8–9; Schapiro, 167–173 ^ Hendersons ^ Dodwell (1982), 4 ^ Mitchell (1984), p. 139 ^ Moss (2014), 286 ^ Youngs, 134–140 catalogues two examples from Italy and one from Norway. See also Laing, who describes major pieces by period and area at various points.

^ Youngs, 15–16, 125 ^ Youngs, 53 ^ Wilson, 16–25 ^ Murray (2011), pp. 162, 164 ^ Youngs, 72–115, and 170–174 on techniques; Ryan, Michael in Oxford Art Online , S2, Wilson, 113–114, 120–130 ^ Johnson, Ruth.

Irish Crucifixion Plaques: Viking Age or Romanesque?

, The Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, Vol. 128, (1998), pp. 95–106.

JSTOR .

Image Archived 11 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ó Floinn; Wallace (2002), p. 187 ^ Youngs, 125–130, and catalogue entries following, including the Derrynaflan Hoard.

^ Murray (2010), p. 50 ^ Ó Floinn; Wallace (2002), p. 220 ^ Rigby, 562 ^ Calkins 57–60. The 8th-century pocket gospel book Book of Dimma has a fine 12th-century cover.

^ "Gospel Book" .

themorgan.org . 13 July 2017.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2014 . Retrieved 9 May 2018 .

^ Lasko, 8–9, and plate 2; Lindau Gospels cover Archived 13 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine , from Morgan Library ^ Or "the second half of the sixth century" according to Schapiro, 229. Calkins, 31–32 gives no date, Nordenfalk, 12–13 says 7th century.

^ Pächt, 63–64, in his chapter on the initial, which gives a thorough treatment of the subject. Nordenfalk, 12–13 has other images.

^ Schapiro, 227–229; Wilson, 60 ^ Calkins, 32–33; Nordenfalk, 14–15, 28, 32–33 ^ a b Moss, Rachel (2018).

The Book of Durrow: Official Guide . London: Thames and Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-500-29460-4 .

^ Calkins, 33–63 gives a full account with many illustrations; Nordenfalk, 34–47, and 19–22 on Coptic influences; see also Schapiro Index (under Dublin), Wilson, 32–36 and index.

^ a b c Meehan, Bernard (1996).

The Book of Durrow: A medieval manuscript at Trinity College Dublin . Dublin, Ireland: Town House and Country House.

ISBN 1-57098-053-5 .

^ Calkins, 33–63 gives a full account with many illustrations; Nordenfalk, 34–47.

^ Calkins, 63–78; Nordenfalk, 60–75 ^ Schapiro, 199–224; Wilson, 63 ^ Dodwell, 84 ^ Calkins, 78–92; Nordenfalk, 108–125 ^ Meehan, Bernard (2007). "Looking the Devil in the eye: the figure of Satan in the Book of Kells folio 202V". In Moss, Rachel (ed.).

Making and Meaning in Insular Art: Proceedings of the fifth international conference on Insular art held at Trinity College Dublin, 25-28 August 2005 . Dublin, Ireland: Four Courts Press. pp.

268– 274.

ISBN 978-1-85182-986-6 .

^ Meehan, Bernard (2012).

The Book of Kells . London, UK: Thames and Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-500-23894-3 .

^ Moss, Rachel (2017). "The Garland of Howth (TCD MS 56)". In Moss, Rachel; O'Mahoney, Felicity; Maxwell, Jane (eds.).

An Insular Odyssey: Manuscript culture in early Christian Ireland and beyond . Dublin, Ireland: Four Courts Press. pp.

260– 282.

ISBN 978-1-84682-633-7 .

^ Bloxham & Rose, and images Archived 25 November 2005 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Wilson, 32 ^ Alexander, 9 and 72. The tradition that St Cuthbert copied the Stonyhurst Gospel himself may be correct, though that attributing the Book of Kells to St Columba himself seems impossible.  For other high-ranking Anglo-Saxon monastic artists see Eadfrith of Lindisfarne , Spearhafoc and Dunstan , all bishops.

^ Nordenfalk, 96–107 ^ Wilson, 91–94 ^ Alexander, 72–73 ^ Dodwell (1998), 74(quote)–75, and see index.; Pächt, 72–73 ^ Grove Art Online S4 ^ Michael Herity, Studies in the layout, buildings and art in stone of early Irish monasteries , Pindar Press, 1995 ^ Wilson, 54–56, 113–129 ^ Grove ^ Wilson deals extensively with the sculptural remains, 74–84 for the 8th century, 105–108, 141–152, 195–210 for later periods.

^ Laing, 54–55, Henderson, 59 ^ Laing, 53–56. See also C. Michael Hogan, Eassie Stone , The Megalithic Portal, editor: Andy Burnham, 2007 Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Forsyth, Katherine (1997), Henry, David (ed.), "Some thoughts on Pictish Symbols as a formal writing system" (PDF) , The Worm, the Germ and the Thorn. Pictish and related studies presented to Isabel Henderson , Balgavies, Forfar: Pinkfoot Press, pp.

85– 98, ISBN 978-1-874012-16-0 , archived (PDF) from the original on 29 September 2011 , retrieved 10 December 2010 ^ Youngs, 26–27 ^ Wilson, 117–118; Youngs, 108–112, see also Shetland museum images Archived 27 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Main, Ian Brooks; Sven Edge; Xabier Garcia; Jamie Wheeler; Andy.

"Search Results" .

nms.scran.ac.uk . Retrieved 9 May 2018 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Henderson, 63–71; A major theme of Pächt, see in particular chapter II and pp. 173–177 ^ Pächt, 72–73, and Henderson 63–71 Sources [ edit ] Alexander, Jonathan J.G..

Medieval Illuminators and their Methods of Work , Yale UP, 1992, ISBN 978-0-300-05689-1 Bloxham, Jim & Rose, Krisine.

St. Cuthbert Gospel of St. John, Formerly Known as the Stonyhurst Gospel Brown, Michelle P.

Mercian Manuscripts? The "Tiberius" Group and its Historical Context , in Michelle P. Brown, Carol Ann Farr: Mercia: an Anglo-Saxon kingdom in Europe , Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005, ISBN 978-0-8264-7765-1 Calkins, Robert G.

Illuminated Books of the Middle Ages . Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1983, ISBN 978-0-8014-1506-7 Dodwell, C.R. (1982).

Anglo-Saxon Art, a new perspective , 1982, Manchester UP, ISBN 978-0-7190-0926-6 Dodwell, C.R. (1993).

The Pictorial arts of the West, 800–1200 , 1993, Yale UP, ISBN 978-0-300-06493-3 Gombrich, E.H.

The Story of Art , Phaidon, 13th edn. 1982.

ISBN 978-0-7148-1841-2 Ó Floinn, Raghnal ; Wallace, Patrick (eds).

Treasures of the National Museum of Ireland: Irish Antiquities . Dublin: National Museum of Ireland , 2002.

ISBN 978-0-7171-2829-7 Forbes, Andrew; Henley, David (2012).

Pages from the Book of Kells . Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti Books. ASIN: B00AN4JVI0 Grove Art Online . "Insular Art", accessed 18 April 2010, see also Ryan, Michael.

Henderson, George.

Early Medieval Art , 1972, ISBN 978-0-14-021420-8 , rev. 1977, Penguin, "Hendersons": Henderson, George and Henderson, Isabel, "The implications of the Staffordshire Hoard for the understanding of the origins and development of the Insular art style as it appears in manuscripts and sculpture" , Papers from the Staffordshire Hoard Symposium (online), 2010, Portable Antiquities Scheme , British Museum Hicks, Carola . Insular – The Age of Migrating Ideas: Early Medieval Art in Northern Britain and Ireland Hugh Honour and John Fleming. "A World History of Art", 1st edn. 1982 & later editions, Macmillan, London, page refs to 1984 Macmillan 1st edn. paperback.

ISBN 978-0-333-37185-5 Laing, Lloyd Robert.

The archaeology of late Celtic Britain and Ireland, c. 400–1200 AD , Taylor & Francis, 1975, ISBN 978-0-416-82360-8 Lasko, Peter.

Ars Sacra, 800–1200 , Penguin History of Art (now Yale), 1972 (nb, 1st edn.) ISBN 978-0-14-056036-7 Moss, Rachel .

Medieval c. 400—c. 1600 , "Art and Architecture of Ireland" series. CT: Yale University Press, 2014.

ISBN 978-03-001-7919-4 Mitchell, G. F.

"The Cap of St Lachtin's Arm".

The Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland , volume 114, 1984.

JSTOR 25508863 Moss, Rachel.

The Book of Durrow . Dublin: Trinity College Library; London: Thames and Hudson, 2018.

ISBN 978-0-5002-9460-4 Murray, Griffin . " The Makers of Church Metalwork in Early Medieval Ireland: Their Identity and Status ".

Making Histories: Proceedings of the Sixth International Insular Art Conference . York, 2011 Murray, Griffin. "The Medieval Treasures of County Kerry".Tralee: Kerry County Museum, 2010.

ISBN 978-0-956-5714-0-3 Nordenfalk, Carl.

Celtic and Anglo-Saxon Painting: Book illumination in the British Isles 600–800 . New York: George Braziller, 1976, ISBN 978-0-8076-0825-8 Pächt, Otto.

Book Illumination in the Middle Ages (trans fr German), 1986, Harvey Miller Publishers, London, ISBN 978-0-19-921060-2 Rigby, Stephen Henry.

A companion to Britain in the later Middle Ages , Wiley-Blackwell, 2003, ISBN 978-0-631-21785-5 .

Google books Ryan, Michael, and others, in Grove Art Online , Insular art (Ryan is also a major contributor to Youngs below) Schapiro, Meyer , Selected Papers, volume 3, Late Antique, Early Christian and Mediaeval Art , 1980, Chatto & Windus, London, ISBN 978-0-7011-2514-1 Wailes, Bernard and Zoll, Amy L., in Philip L. Kohl, Clare P. Fawcett, Nationalism, politics, and the practice of archaeology [ permanent dead link ] , Cambridge University Press, 1995, ISBN 978-0-521-55839-6 Wilson, David M.

Anglo-Saxon Art: From The Seventh Century To The Norman Conquest , Thames and Hudson (US edn. Overlook Press), 1984, ISBN 978-0-87951-976-6 Susan Youngs (ed.).

"The Work of Angels", Masterpieces of Celtic Metalwork, 6th–9th centuries AD , 1989, British Museum Press, London, ISBN 978-0-7141-0554-3 Further reading [ edit ] Treasures of Early Irish Art, 1500 B.C. to 1500 A.D.: From the Collections of the National Museum of Ireland, Royal Irish Academy, Trinity College, Dublin . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 1977.

ISBN 9780870991646 .

External links [ edit ] "Lindisfarne Gospels" - images from the British Library Archived 17 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine Irish Brooches of the Early Medieval Celtic Period - exhibition Archived 23 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine Lichfield Gospels - instructive Features page for the manuscript; interactive 3D renderings; interactive Reflectance Transformation Imaging (RTI) for viewing dry-point; overlaid historical images (going back 125 years) to examine how the manuscript is aging 3D for Presenting Insular Manuscripts - Explains 3D modeling for the 8th-century illuminated St Chad Gospels Book of Armagh . Trinity College Digital Collections. MS 52 The Armagh Satchel held at Trinity College Dublin The Book of Mulling , digitised at the Library of Trinity College Dublin [MS 60] The Library of Trinity College Online Exhibition on the Book of Durrow The Library of Trinity College full digitised Book of Durrow Trinity College Digital Collections, Book of Kells (full collection with images) Exhibition information about Book of Kells at Trinity College Library The Book of Dimma digitised at the Library of Trinity College Dublin [MS 59] The Garland of Howth digitised at the Library of Trinity College Dublin [MS 56] v t e Insular art Types Bell shrine Celtic brooch Crucifixion plaque Cumdach Illuminated manuscript Insular crozier High cross House-shaped shrine Pictish stone Processional cross Techniques Carpet page Celtic knot Insular illumination Interlace Triple spiral Examples Ballinderry Brooch (late C6/early C7) Rinnegan Crucifixion Plaque (late C7/early C8) Hunterston Brooch (c. 700) Book of Durrow (c. 700) Tara Brooch (c. 710–750) Lichfield Gospels (c. 730) Lindisfarne Gospels (c. 730) Ardagh Chalice (c. 750) Rogart Brooch (C8) Moylough Belt-Shrine (C8) St. Fillan's Crozier (C8) Book of Dimma (C8) Ruthwell Cross (C8) Breadalbane Brooch (C8) Monymusk Reliquary (C8) Stowe Missal (after 792) Tully Lough Cross (C8/C9) Londesborough Brooch (C8/C9) Derrynaflan Chalice (C8/C9) Domnach Airgid (C8/C9 and C14) Kilmainham Brooch (late C8/early C9) Book of Kells (C9) Book of Armagh (C9) Prosperous Crozier (late C9/early C10) Muiredach's High Cross (C9/C10) Kells Crozier (c. C9–C11) Ardboe High Cross (C10) Corp Naomh (C10 and C15) Soiscél Molaisse (c. 1001–1011) Clonmacnoise Crucifixion Plaque (late C10/early C11) Bell Shrine of St. Mura (C11) Breac Maodhóg (11) Shrine of Miosach (C11) Cathach of St. Columba (late C11) Clonmacnoise Crozier (late C11) River Laune Crozier (late C11) Shrine of St. Patrick's Bell (c. 1094–1105) Lismore Crozier (c. 1100) Tynan Crucifixion Plaque (c. 1100) Shrine of Saint Lachtin's Arm (c. 1120) Bell Shrine of St. Cuileáin (late C11) Cross of Cong (early C12) Shrine of St Patrick's Tooth (C12 and late C14) Collections British Museum Library of Trinity College Dublin National Museum of Ireland National Museum of Scotland Notable art historians George Petrie (d. 1866) Margaret Stokes (d. 1900) Máire de Paor (d. 1994) Peter Harbison (d. 2023) Raghnall Ó Floinn (d. 2024) Cormac Bourke Rachel Moss Griffin Murray Related Abbey of Kells Anglo-Saxon art Celtic art Celtic Christianity Clonmacnoise English art Iona Irish art Pictish art Scottish art Viking art v t e Celts and modern Celts Celtic nations · Celtic studies · Celtic tribes · Celtic languages Peoples Ancient Celtic ethnic groups ( names ) Aedui Aigosages Allobroges Allotriges Ambarri Anartes Arecomici Armorica Astures Arverni Atuatuci Attacotti Atrebates Aulerci Aulerci Cenomani Cenomani Autrigones Bituriges Bituriges Vivisci Belgae Bellovaci Berones Boii Brigantii Britons Caledonians Caleti Cantabri Carni Cantii Carnutes Caristii Carpetani Catubrini Celegeri Cenomani Celtiberians Celtici Cotini Coriosolites Dumnonii Eburones Eburovices Eravisci Haedui Helvetii Gaels Gaesatae Gallaeci Gauls Galatians Helvetii Insubres Latobici Latobrigi Lemovices Lexovii Leuci Ligures Lingones Lusitanians Lepontii Menapii Morini Namnetes Nervii Noricum Orobii Osismii Parisi Parisii Petrocorii Picts Pictones Rauraci Redones Regni Remi Salluvii Santones Sequani Senones Scordisci Scoti Silures Sordones Tectosages Teurisci Tolistobogii Treveri Trinovantes Triboci Tricasses Trocmi Tulingi Turoni Ulidia Varciani Varisci Viromandui Veneti Veliocasses Vennones Vindelici Vocontii Volcae Modern Celtic ethnic groups Bretons Cornish Welsh Gaels Irish Manx Scots Celtic diaspora Cornish diaspora Irish diaspora Scottish diaspora Welsh diaspora Related ethnic groups Anglo-Celtic Breton Americans Cornish Americans English people French people Irish Americans Irish Canadians Scotch-Irish Americans Scottish Americans Scottish Canadians Scots-Irish people Spanish people Studies Places Alesia Avaricum Gergovia Hallstatt Hochdorf La Tène Vix Grave Gaelic Ireland Hill of Tara Newgrange Rathcroghan Dálriata Alba Fortriu Cumbria Brigantia Iron Age Britain Roman Britain Sub-Roman Britain Stonehenge Dumnonia Hen Ogledd Gaul Roman Gaul Britonia Armorica Domnonée Brittany Gallaecia Numantia Gallia Aquitania Gallia Belgica Gallia Celtica Cisalpine Gaul Transalpine Gaul Balkans Transylvania Galatia Ancient religion Proto-Celtic religion Celtic polytheism Celtic deities Celtic Animism Celtic mythology Celtic Christianity Celtic Rites Celtic stone idolss * Druids Monasticism Romano-Celtic temple Practices Mythology Irish Scottish Welsh British Breton Cornish Society Bard Brehon Celtic calendar Celtic festivals Celtic women Celticisation Chief of the Name Derbfine Druid Clan chief Irish Clans Scottish clans ( List ) Gaelicisation Gaelic astrology Fáinne Fili Law Tanistry Seanchaí Sept Túath Vates Warfare ( Gaelic ) Coinage Modern Celts Celtic Revival Celtic nations Pan-Celticism Celtic Congress Celtic League Celtic union Music Rock Neo-Christianity Neopaganism Celtic Wicca Neo-Druidism Nations Celtic League definition Brittany ( Breizh ) Cornwall ( Kernow ) Ireland ( Éire ) Isle of Man ( Mannin ) Scotland ( Alba ) Wales ( Cymru ) Other claimants Asturias Cantabria Cumbria Devon Galicia Norte Portugal Nova Scotia Province of León Y Wladfa England Culture Literature Arthurian Legend Bardic Poetry Breton literature Cornish literature Irish literature Manx literature Scottish literature Welsh-language literature Welsh literature in English Early Irish literature Irish annals Gaelic literature Scottish Gaelic literature National cultures Brittany Cornwall Ireland Isle of Man Scotland Wales Art Bell shrines Brooches Dragonesque Carnyx Celtic cross Knotwork High crosses Insular art Interlace Leaf-crowns Mazes Pictish stones Torcs Triple spiral Clothing Celtic Dress Highland dress Gaelic clothing Tartan Traditional Welsh costume Welsh hat Regional cultures Gaelic culture Highland culture Music Ancient Celtic music Breton Folk music Gaelic music Irish folk music Scottish folk music Welsh folk music Sean-nós singing Carnyx National music scenes Brittany Cornwall Ireland Isle of Man Scotland Wales Festivals Calendar Samhain / Calan Gaeaf Imbolc / Gŵyl Fair Beltane / Calan Mai Lughnasadh / Calan Awst Festival Interceltique de Lorient Pan Celtic Festival Hebridean Celtic Festival Celtic Connections Celtic Media Festival Eisteddfod Sport Bando Bataireacht Camogie Cammag Cnapan Cornish hurling Cornish wrestling Curling Gaelic football ( Ladies' ) Gaelic handball Gouren Rounders Highland games Hurling Road bowls Shinty Welsh handball Politics Nationalism Breton nationalism history reunification Cornish nationalism status Irish nationalism Isle of Man Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles Scottish nationalism national identity Welsh nationalism national identity Autonomy Cornish devolution Scottish devolution Welsh devolution Independence Breton independence Scottish independence Welsh independence United Ireland and Irish republicanism Pan-Celticism Celtic League Celtic Congress Celtic Revival Celtic society Celtic unity Columba Project Languages Brittonic Breton Cornish Welsh Goidelic Irish Manx Scottish Gaelic Mixed Shelta Bungi Creole Beurla Reagaird Ancient Celtic languages Extinct Proto-Celtic Proto-Brittonic Proto-Goidelic Celtiberian Gaulish Galatian Gallaecian Lepontic Noric Cumbric Pictish Hispano-Celtic Cisalpine Gaulish Scottish Gaelic dialects Arran Gaelic Deeside Gaelic Galwegian Gaelic Law and Warfare Law Early Irish law Cyfraith Hywel (Medieval Welsh law) Early Scots law Warfare Gaelic warfare Ceathairne Ceithearn Fianna Gaesatae Gallóglaigh Hobelar Redshanks Trimarcisia Lists Tribes Deities Celtic words in English – in Spanish – in Galician Gaulish words in French Celtic place names in Galicia – in Italy – in Portugal Celts portal v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐8cfl5
Cached time: 20250814220903
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.689 seconds
Real time usage: 0.883 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3326/1000000
Revision size: 51474/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 284626/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1810/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 141595/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.332/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19007255/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  582.732      1 -total
 65.57%  382.084     17 Template:Navbox
 24.44%  142.403      1 Template:Reflist
 20.73%  120.809      1 Template:Celts
 20.31%  118.342      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 16.06%   93.601      7 Template:Cite_book
 14.07%   82.009      6 Template:Lang
 14.01%   81.641      1 Template:Insular_art
  9.64%   56.194      1 Template:Short_description
  5.73%   33.410      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9206479:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220903 and revision id 1295397578. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Insular_art&oldid=1295397578 " Categories : Insular art Anglo-Saxon art Celtic art Celtic Christianity Christianity in Anglo-Saxon England Culture of medieval Scotland Hiberno-Saxon manuscripts Medieval art Medieval history of Ireland Medieval history of Wales Migration Period Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from September 2015 Use dmy dates from September 2015 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles containing Breton-language text Articles containing Cornish-language text Articles containing Irish-language text Articles containing Manx-language text Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language text Articles containing Welsh-language text This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 13:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Insular art 20 languages Add topic

