Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Traditions 2 Historical design eras 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Spanish garden 8 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Português Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Style of garden or designed landscape Jardín del Generalife de Granada A traditional Spanish garden is a style of garden or designed landscape developed in historic Spain. Especially in the United States , the term tends to be used for a garden design style with a formal arrangement that evokes, usually not very precisely, the sort of plan and planting developed in southern Spain, incorporating principles and elements from precedents in ancient Persian gardens , Roman gardens and Islamic gardens , and the great Moorish gardens (historically known as riyad s [ 1 ] [ 2 ] ) of the Al-Andalus era on the Iberian Peninsula .

In other parts of Spain, public parks and large gardens have been more influenced by the Italian garden , French formal garden , and even the English landscape garden . Spain has a variety of climatic conditions, especially in altitude and rainfall, and modern Spanish gardens are very varied accordingly. Spanish urban housing has long had more apartments than small houses, and the small houses have traditionally lacked front garden , with not that much to the rear either, often just a paved patio with small beds by the walls, and space for plants in pots.  Until recently, "full" gardens were mostly found in the country or very large urban houses, but some modern suburban developments have gardens closer to those of northern Europe and North America.

Traditions [ edit ] Traditionally, the paradise garden is interpreted with a central cross axis, in the four cardinal directions , with long ponds or water channels (a rill or stylized qanat ) where water reflects and flows, set in a walled courtyard . The remaining quadrants often had fruit trees and fragrant plants. Thus, characteristic sensory experiences are refreshing coolness, humidity, sounds, greenery, and fragrance. This type of garden is compatible with the Spanish climate of sun and heat.  Provisions for shade are given with the use of arcades , pergolas , trellising , and garden pavilions .

Ceramic elements and tiles are often used: in water features ; for structural, decorative, and seating elements; and as paving ; with solid fields, embellishments and accents; and in pottery . A clarity from the symmetrical simplicity often results.

[ 3 ] Historical design eras [ edit ] Spain has a long tradition of making gardens. Significant gardens were made by: immigrants from the Carthaginian and Roman Empires; for example, the Palmeral of Elche in Alicante nobility, Christians in the Spanish Medieval period Islamic rulers and artisans of Al-Andalus , the Moorish Iberian Peninsula or Spanish territories, especially in present-day Andalusia in Southern Spain; for example, the Alhambra , Generalife in Granada .

[ 4 ] post- Reconquista Mudéjar design and artisans; for example, the Alcázar of Seville .

[ 5 ] catholic monarchs during the Spanish Renaissance , Spanish Gothic , and Spanish Baroque periods; for example, the Royal Palace of La Granja de San Ildefonso .

landowning and business dynasties during the Romantic and Modern periods; for example, Park Güell .

civic projects and expositions; for example, Maria Luisa Park and Plaza de España in Seville .

In 21st century Spain, gardens are designed by garden and landscape designers , horticulturalists , artists, architects, and landscape architects ; for example, the Olympic village public outdoor spaces for the 1992 Barcelona Olympics or the public spaces for the Universal Exposition of Seville Expo '92 .

Many historic gardens are protected by a heritage designation, Jardín histórico .

Gallery [ edit ] Garden of the Lions from Maria Luisa Park Gardens from Alcázar of Seville .

Maria Luisa Park , Seville Jardín de la Alhambra Jardín del Alcázar de Sevilla Jardín del Alcázar de Córdoba Jardín del Museo Sorolla de Madrid Jardín de la Alcazaba de Málaga Jardines de las Delicias de Sevilla Jardín del Alcázar de Jerez Bird nests built by Gaudí in the Park Güell terrace walls.

See also [ edit ] Gardening in Spain List of garden types Notes [ edit ] ^ Bearman, P.; Bianquis, Th.; Bosworth, C.E.; van Donzel, E.; Heinrichs, W.P., eds. (2012). "Būstān".

Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition . Brill.

^ Wilbaux, Quentin (2001).

La médina de Marrakech: Formation des espaces urbains d'une ancienne capitale du Maroc . Paris: L'Harmattan.

ISBN 2747523888 .

^ Segall (1999), pp. 8–10 ^ Goodwin (1990), pp. 1–13 ^ Goodwin (1990), pp. 13–17 References [ edit ] Correcher, Consuelo (1993).

The Gardens of Spain . Harry N. Abrahms.

ISBN 0-8109-3370-5 .

Segall, Barbara (1999).

The Garden Lover's Guide to Spain and Portugal . Princeton Architectural Press. pp.

8– 10.

ISBN 1-56898-161-9 .

Goodwin, Godfrey (1990).

Islamic Spain . Chronicle Books.

ISBN 0-87701-692-5 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Moorish gardens in Spain .

Gardening portal v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Architecture of Spain Styles Megalithic Iberian Celtic Celtiberian Roman Visigothic Asturian Andalusi Mozarabic Repoblación Mudéjar First Romanesque Romanesque Gothic Catalan Gothic Isabelline Valencian Gothic Cisneros Plateresque Renaissance Purism Herrerian Baroque Churrigueresque Neoclassical Rococo Modernisme Valencian Art Nouveau Noucentisme Neo-Mudéjar Buildings and structures Roman sites Alcázars Alcazabas Cantabrian defensive towers Castles Castros Cathedrals Hórreos Lighthouses Llotjes Monasteries Royal sites Windmills Airports Indoor arenas Museums Stadiums Tallest buildings and structures Destroyed heritage Other Architects Andalusian patio Andalusian White Towns Aragonese Mudéjar Catalan vault Gaudí buildings Spanish Colonial architecture Alhóndiga Alqueria Artesonado Azulejo Baserri Cabaña pasiega Casa montañesa Casona montañesa Corral de comedias Cortijo Finca Estipite Hacienda Masia Mirador Palloza Pazo Real Spanish garden Yeseria Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spanish_garden&oldid=1244416369 " Categories : Spanish gardens Gardens in Spain Islamic gardens Garden design history of Spain Culture of Spain Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 September 2024, at 00:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spanish garden 8 languages Add topic

