Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Basic concepts Toggle Basic concepts subsection 3.1 Latitude 3.2 Longitude 3.3 Loxodrome 4 Methods of navigation Toggle Methods of navigation subsection 4.1 Mental navigation checks 4.2 Piloting 4.3 Celestial navigation 4.3.1 Marine chronometer 4.3.2 The marine sextant 4.3.3 Bubble octant 4.4 Inertial navigation 4.4.1 Gravity-aided navigation 4.4.2 Space navigation 4.5 Electronic navigation 4.5.1 Radar navigation 4.5.2 Radio navigation 4.5.3 Satellite navigation 4.5.4 Acoustic navigation 5 Navigation processes Toggle Navigation processes subsection 5.1 Passage planning 5.2 Integrated bridge systems 5.3 Ships and similar vessels 5.3.1 One day's work in traditional navigation 5.4 Land navigation 5.5 Underwater navigation 5.6 Artificial intelligence 6 Standards, training and organisations Toggle Standards, training and organisations subsection 6.1 Publications 7 Navigation in spatial cognition Toggle Navigation in spatial cognition subsection 7.1 Wayfinding 8 See also 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Navigation 77 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Limburgs Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of monitoring and controlling the movement of a craft or vehicle For other uses, see Navigation (disambiguation) .

A navigation system on an oil tanker Navigation is a field of study that focuses on the process of monitoring and controlling the movement of a craft or vehicle from one place to another.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The field of navigation includes four general categories: land navigation, [ 3 ] marine navigation , aeronautic navigation , and space navigation.

[ 1 ] It is also the term of art used for the specialized knowledge used by navigators to perform navigation tasks.

[ 4 ] All navigational techniques involve locating the navigator's position compared to known locations or patterns. Navigation, in a broader sense, can refer to any skill or study that involves the determination of position and direction .

[ 1 ] In this sense, navigation includes orienteering and pedestrian navigation.

[ 1 ] For marine navigation, this involves the safe movement of ships, boats and other nautical craft either on or underneath the water using positions from navigation equipment with appropriate nautical charts (electronic and paper).

[ 4 ] Navigation equipment for ships is mandated under the requirements of the SOLAS Convention , depending on ship size.

[ 5 ] For land navigation, this involves the movement of persons, animals and vehicles from one place to another by means of navigation equipment (such as a compass or GNSS receivers), maps and visual navigation marks across urban or rural environments.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Aeronautic (air) navigation involves piloting an aircraft from one geographic position to another position while monitoring the position as the flight progresses.

[ 8 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term stems from the 1530s, from Latin navigationem (nom.

navigatio ), from navigatus , pp. of navigare "to sail, sail over, go by sea, steer a ship," from navis "ship" and the root of agere "to drive".

[ 9 ] History [ edit ] "The light of navigation", Dutch sailing handbook, 1608, showing  compass, hourglass, sea astrolabe, terrestrial and celestial globes, divider, Jacob's staff and astrolabe.

Further information: History of navigation See also: History of geodesy Polynesian navigation is probably the earliest form of open-ocean navigation; it was based on memory and observation recorded on scientific instruments like the Marshall Islands Stick Charts of Ocean Swells . Early Pacific Polynesians used the motion of stars, weather, the position of certain wildlife species, or the size of waves to find the path from one island to another.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Among the first proper navigational instruments was the compass , with one of the oldest Chinese in origin from the Han dynasty (since c. 206 BC).

[ 13 ] The compass was later adopted for sea navigation by the Song dynasty Chinese during the 11th century.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] The first usage of a compass recorded in Western Europe and the Islamic world occurred around 1190.

[ 17 ] Maritime navigation using scientific instruments such as the mariner's astrolabe first occurred in the Mediterranean during the Middle Ages. Although land astrolabes were invented in the Hellenistic period and existed in classical antiquity and the Islamic Golden Age , the oldest record of a sea astrolabe is that of Spanish astronomer Ramon Llull dating from 1295.

[ 18 ] The perfecting of this navigation instrument is attributed to Portuguese navigators during early Portuguese discoveries in the Age of Discovery .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The earliest known description of how to make and use a sea astrolabe comes from Spanish cosmographer Martín Cortés de Albacar 's Arte de Navegar ( The Art of Navigation ) published in 1551, [ 21 ] based on the principle of the archipendulum used in constructing the Egyptian pyramids . However, the first altitude measuring instrument to navigate extensively used at sea was the quadrant .

[ 22 ] This was reintroduced by Leonardo of Pisa in the 13th century.

[ 22 ] Its first recorded use was in 1461 by Diogo Gomes .

[ 22 ] As well as astrolabes and quadrants, the first cross-staff used in navigation was known from the 14th century onwards, believed to have come from early Arab navigators.

[ 23 ] However, it had many errors and was also difficult to use as it required squinting at the sun.

[ 23 ] These disadvantages were overcome with the invention of the backstaff in 1595 by John Davis .

[ 23 ] German 16th century astrolabe Widespread open-seas navigation using the astrolabe, quadrant, backstaff and the compass started during the Age of Discovery in the 15th century. The Portuguese began systematically exploring the Atlantic coast of Africa from 1418, under the sponsorship of Prince Henry . In 1488 Bartolomeu Dias reached the Indian Ocean by this route. In 1492 the Spanish monarchs funded Christopher Columbus 's expedition to sail west to reach the Indies by crossing the Atlantic, which resulted in the Discovery of the Americas . In 1498, a Portuguese expedition commanded by Vasco da Gama reached India by sailing around Africa, opening up direct trade with Asia . Soon, the Portuguese sailed further eastward, to the Spice Islands in 1512, landing in China one year later. The first circumnavigation of the earth was completed in 1522 with the Magellan-Elcano expedition , a Spanish voyage of discovery led by Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan and completed by Spanish navigator Juan Sebastián Elcano after the former's death in the Philippines in 1521.

For sailing ships, other developments took place with charting and methods to record courses.

[ 24 ] One of the oldest surviving marine charts is the Carta Pisana , drawn on a sheepskin, dating to 1275.

[ 25 ] On land, improvements in the production of maps led to improved navigation by armies, traders and other travellers.

[ 26 ] For sailing ships, navigation by dead reckoning requires frequent recording of course changes and the ship tacks with the wind.

[ 24 ] To prevent paper charts, which were expensive and in the early days, rare, from being worn out, other methods were used, including the Traverse board and traverse tables (the oldest traverse tables, dates back to 1428).

[ 24 ] Quadrants were further developed by inventors such as Robert Hooke , Isaac Newton and John Hadley leading to the invention of the octant .

[ 27 ] Harrison's Chronometer H5 of 1772, now on display at the Science Museum, London Developments in mathematics were also important in the history of navigation.

[ 28 ] These include initially meridional parts , then developments in spherical trigonometry and logarithms enabled navigators from the 1700s onwards to navigate more accurately.

[ 28 ] On land, mathematical and new instruments led to developments in Surveying and triangulation which further improved maps, as well as the construction of better roads, paths, canals and eventually railways.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Development of an accurate marine chronometer under John Harrison and others ensured accurate timekeeping for calculating longitude .

[ 31 ] Further improvements in ocean navigation led to the first proper sextant in 1757, the parts and usage developed by various inventors including Pierre Vernier and John Campbell .

[ 32 ] Various methods for calculation with sextant and chronometer evolved over time, beginning with the Duller method (1728) but reached their most accessible with the Douwes method (1821), the Sumner method (1837), modified by Henry Raper (1844) and the Marc St Hilaire or intercept method (1877).

[ 33 ] Modifications to the magnetic compass and better methods of determining course were also important, include developments in the compass by Matthew Flinders , Lord Kelvin and others.

[ 34 ] The sextant, together with the chronometer, compass and astronomical calculations became the most widely used methods of maritime navigation until developments in the 20th century with radio-navigation and gyrocompasses .

[ 32 ] These in turn were superseded with the advent of computers, electronic calculators and later satellite navigation in the 20th century.

[ 35 ] On land, the development of handheld GPS occurred in the 1980s and with the advent of smartphones, with in-build compassess and satellite receivers, navigation is now widely achieved through technology globally.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Basic concepts [ edit ] Map of Earth Longitude (λ) Lines of longitude appear vertical with varying curvature in this projection, but are actually halves of great ellipses, with identical radii at a given latitude.

Latitude (φ) Lines of latitude appear horizontal with varying curvature in this projection; but are actually circular with different radii.  All locations with a given latitude are collectively referred to as a circle of latitude .

The equator divides the planet into a Northern Hemisphere and a Southern Hemisphere , and has a latitude of 0°.

v t e In terrestrial navigation, the location of a person, ship, plane, etc is defined as a position using a reference point/coordinates (see Cartesian coordinate system ). Positions can either be referenced as latitude/longitude or a distance and direction from a fixed reference point ( bearing ).

[ 38 ] Lines of position can be derived from a variety of methods and equipment. By determining and monitoring positions it is possible to find and direct a person, ship, plane, etc in a scientific way from one place to another.

[ 39 ] This often involves the use of maps or charts from which if desired, courses can be calculated or followed depending on the projection or methods used ( Rhumb line , Great circle , etc).

[ 40 ] Latitude [ edit ] Further information: Latitude Roughly, the latitude of a place on Earth is its angular distance north or south of the equator .

[ 41 ] Latitude is usually expressed in degrees (marked with °) ranging from 0° at the Equator to 90° at the North and South poles.

[ 41 ] The latitude of the North Pole is 90° N, and the latitude of the South Pole is 90° S.

[ 41 ] Mariners calculated latitude in the Northern Hemisphere by sighting the pole star ( Polaris ) with a sextant and using sight reduction tables to correct for height of eye and atmospheric refraction. The height of Polaris in degrees above the horizon is the latitude of the observer, within a degree or so.

Longitude [ edit ] Further information: Longitude Similar to latitude, the longitude of a place on Earth is the angular distance east or west of the prime meridian or Greenwich meridian .

[ 41 ] Longitude is usually expressed in degrees (marked with °) ranging from 0° at the Greenwich meridian to 180° east and west.

Sydney , for example, has a longitude of about 151° east .

New York City has a longitude of 74° west . For most of history, mariners struggled to determine longitude. Longitude can be calculated if the precise time of a sighting is known. Lacking that, one can use a sextant to take a lunar distance (also called the lunar observation , or "lunar" for short) that, with a nautical almanac , can be used to calculate the time at zero longitude (see Greenwich Mean Time ).

[ 42 ] Reliable marine chronometers were unavailable until the late 18th century and not affordable until the 19th century.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] For about a hundred years, from about 1767 until about 1850, [ 46 ] mariners lacking a chronometer used the method of lunar distances to determine Greenwich time to find their longitude. A mariner with a chronometer could check its reading using a lunar determination of Greenwich time.

[ 43 ] [ 47 ] Loxodrome [ edit ] Further information: Rhumb line In navigation, a rhumb line (or loxodrome) is a line crossing all meridians of longitude at the same angle, i.e. a path derived from a defined initial bearing. That is, upon taking an initial bearing, one proceeds along the same bearing, without changing the direction as measured relative to true or magnetic north.

Methods of navigation [ edit ] Most modern navigation relies primarily on positions determined electronically by receivers collecting information from satellites. Most other modern techniques rely on finding intersecting lines of position or LOP.

[ 48 ] A line of position can refer to two different things, either a line on a chart or a line between the observer and an object in real life.

[ 49 ] A bearing is a measure of the direction to an object.

[ 49 ] If the navigator measures the direction in real life, the angle can then be drawn on a nautical chart and the navigator will be somewhere on that bearing line on the chart.

[ 49 ] In addition to bearings, navigators also often measure distances to objects.

[ 48 ] On the chart, a distance produces a circle or arc of position.

[ 48 ] Circles, arcs, and hyperbolae of positions are often referred to as lines of position.

If the navigator draws two lines of position, and they intersect he must be at that position.

[ 48 ] A fix is the intersection of two or more LOPs.

[ 48 ] If only one line of position is available, this may be evaluated against the dead reckoning position to establish an estimated position.

[ 50 ] Lines (or circles) of position can be derived from a variety of sources: celestial observation (a short segment of the circle of equal altitude , but generally represented as a line), terrestrial range (natural or man made) when two charted points are observed to be in line with each other, [ 51 ] compass bearing to a charted object, radar range to a charted object, on certain coastlines, a depth sounding from echo sounder or hand lead line .

There are some methods seldom used today such as the maritime method of "dipping a light" to calculate the geographic range from observer to lighthouse, where the height of the lighthouse is known (from a list of lights or from a chart).

[ 52 ] Methods of navigation have changed through history.

[ 53 ] Each new method has enhanced the mariner's ability to complete his voyage.

[ 53 ] One of the most important judgments the navigator must make is the best method to use.

[ 53 ] Some types of navigation are depicted in the table.

Illustration Description Application Traditional navigation methods include: In marine navigation, dead reckoning or DR, in which one advances a prior position using the ship's course and speed. The new position is called a DR position. It is generally accepted that only course and speed determine the DR position. Correcting the DR position for leeway , current effects, and steering error result in an estimated position or EP. An inertial navigator develops an extremely accurate EP.

[ 53 ] Used at all times.

In marine navigation, pilotage involves navigating in restricted/coastal waters with frequent determination of position relative to geographic and hydrographic features.

[ 53 ] When within sight of land.

Land navigation is the discipline of following a route through terrain on foot or by vehicle, using maps with reference to terrain, a compass, and other basic navigational tools and/or using landmarks and signs.

Wayfinding is the more basic form.

Used at all times.

Celestial navigation involves reducing celestial measurements to lines of position using tables, spherical trigonometry , and almanacs . It is primarily used at sea but can also be used on land.

Used primarily as a backup to satellite and other electronic systems in the open ocean.

[ 53 ] Electronic navigation covers any method of position fixing using electronic means, including: Radio navigation uses radio waves to determine position by either radio direction finding systems or hyperbolic systems, such as Decca , Omega and LORAN-C .

Availability has declined due to the development of accurate GNSS.

Radar navigation uses radar to determine the distance from or bearing of objects whose position is known. This process is separate from radar's use as a collision avoidance system.

[ 53 ] Primarily when within radar range of land.

Satellite navigation uses a Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) to determine position.

[ 53 ] Used in all situations.

The practice of navigation usually involves a combination of these different methods.

[ 53 ] Mental navigation checks [ edit ] By mental navigation checks, a pilot or a navigator estimates tracks, distances, and altitudes which will then help the pilot avoid gross navigation errors.

[ 54 ] Piloting [ edit ] Further information: Pilotage Manual navigation through Dutch airspace Piloting (also called pilotage) involves navigating an aircraft by visual reference to landmarks, [ 55 ] or a water vessel in restricted waters and fixing its position as precisely as possible at frequent intervals.

[ 56 ] More so than in other phases of navigation, proper preparation and attention to detail are important.

[ 56 ] Procedures vary from vessel to vessel, and between military, commercial, and private vessels.

[ 56 ] As pilotage takes place in shallow waters , it typically involves following courses to ensure sufficient under keel clearance , ensuring a sufficient depth of water below the hull as well as a consideration for squat .

[ 57 ] It may also involve navigating a ship within a river, canal or channel in close proximity to land.

[ 57 ] A military navigation team will nearly always consist of several people.

[ 56 ] A military navigator might have bearing takers stationed at the gyro repeaters on the bridge wings for taking simultaneous bearings, while the civilian navigator on a merchant ship or leisure craft must often take and plot their position themselves, typically with the aid of electronic position fixing.

[ 56 ] While the military navigator will have a bearing book and someone to record entries for each fix, the civilian navigator will simply pilot the bearings on the chart as they are taken and not record them at all.

[ 56 ] If the ship is equipped with an ECDIS , it is reasonable for the navigator to simply monitor the progress of the ship along the chosen track, visually ensuring that the ship is proceeding as desired, checking the compass, sounder and other indicators only occasionally.

[ 56 ] If a pilot is aboard, as is often the case in the most restricted of waters, his judgement can generally be relied upon, further easing the workload.

[ 56 ] But should the ECDIS fail, the navigator will have to rely on his skill in the manual and time-tested procedures.

[ 56 ] Celestial navigation [ edit ] Main article: Celestial navigation A celestial fix will be at the intersection of two or more circles.

Celestial navigation systems are based on observation of the positions of the Sun , Moon , planets and navigational stars using a sextant or similar navigation instrument.

[ 58 ] By knowing which point on the rotating Earth a celestial object is above and measuring its height above the observer's horizon, the navigator can determine his distance from that subpoint using mathematical calculation.

[ 59 ] A nautical almanac and a source of time, typically a marine chronometer are used to compute the subpoint on Earth a celestial body is over, and a sextant is used to measure the body's angular height above the horizon.

[ 59 ] That height can then be used to compute distance from the subpoint to create a circular line of position. Alternatively sight reduction tables can be used.

[ 60 ] A navigator shoots a number of stars in succession to give a series of overlapping lines of position. Where they intersect is the celestial fix. The Moon and Sun may also be used. The Sun can also be used by itself to shoot a succession of lines of position (best done around local noon) to determine a position.

[ 61 ] Since the advent of GNSS, celestial navigation is less used for marine and air navigation, though it remains useful as a backup or as another method to cross-check the accuracy of electronic systems, particularly in the open ocean.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Marine chronometer [ edit ] Main article: Marine chronometer Breguet marine chronometer In order to accurately measure longitude, the precise time is required of a sextant sighting (down to the second, if possible) which is then recorded for subsequent calculation. Each second of error is equivalent to 15 seconds of longitude error, which at the equator is a position error of .25 of a nautical mile, about the accuracy limit of manual celestial navigation. The spring-driven marine chronometer is a precision timepiece used aboard ship to provide accurate time for celestial observations.

[ 61 ] A chronometer differs from a spring-driven watch principally in that it contains a variable lever device to maintain even pressure on the mainspring, and a special balance designed to compensate for temperature variations.

[ 61 ] A spring-driven chronometer is set approximately to Greenwich mean time (GMT) and is not reset until the instrument is overhauled and cleaned, usually at three-year intervals.

[ 61 ] The difference between GMT and chronometer time is carefully determined and applied as a correction to all chronometer readings.

[ 61 ] Spring-driven chronometers must be wound at about the same time each day.

[ 61 ] Quartz crystal marine chronometers have replaced spring-driven chronometers onboard modern ships because of their greater accuracy.

[ 61 ] They are maintained on GMT directly from radio time signals.

[ 61 ] This eliminates chronometer error and watch error corrections.

[ 61 ] Should the second hand be in error by a readable amount, it can be reset electrically.

[ 61 ] The basic element for time generation is a quartz crystal oscillator.

[ 61 ] The quartz crystal is temperature compensated and is hermetically sealed in an evacuated envelope.

[ 61 ] A calibrated adjustment capability is provided to adjust for the aging of the crystal.

[ 61 ] The chronometer is typically designed to operate for a minimum of one year on a single set of batteries.

[ 61 ] Observations may be timed and ship's clocks set with a comparing watch, which is set to chronometer time and taken to the bridge wing for recording sight times.

[ 61 ] In practice, a wrist watch coordinated to the nearest second with the chronometer will be adequate.

[ 61 ] A stop watch, either spring wound or digital, may also be used for celestial observations.

[ 61 ] In this case, the watch is started at a known GMT by chronometer, and the elapsed time of each sight added to this to obtain GMT of the sight.

[ 61 ] All chronometers and watches should be checked regularly with a radio time signal.

[ 61 ] Times and frequencies of radio time signals are listed in publications such as Radio Navigational Aids .

[ 61 ] The marine sextant [ edit ] The marine sextant is used to measure the elevation of celestial bodies above the horizon.

Further information: Sextant The second critical component of celestial navigation is to measure the angle formed at the observer's eye between the celestial body and the sensible horizon. The sextant, an optical instrument, is used to perform this function. The sextant consists of two primary assemblies. The frame is a rigid triangular structure with a pivot at the top and a graduated segment of a circle, referred to as the "arc", at the bottom. The second component is the index arm, which is attached to the pivot at the top of the frame. At the bottom is an endless vernier which clamps into teeth on the bottom of the "arc". The optical system consists of two mirrors and, generally, a low power telescope. One mirror, referred to as the "index mirror" is fixed to the top of the index arm, over the pivot. As the index arm is moved, this mirror rotates, and the graduated scale on the arc indicates the measured angle ("altitude").

[ 64 ] The second mirror, referred to as the "horizon glass", is fixed to the front of the frame. One half of the horizon glass is silvered and the other half is clear. Light from the celestial body strikes the index mirror and is reflected to the silvered portion of the horizon glass, then back to the observer's eye through the telescope. The observer manipulates the index arm so the reflected image of the body in the horizon glass is just resting on the visual horizon, seen through the clear side of the horizon glass.

[ 64 ] There are three main errors that must be corrected in order to each usage for navigation.

[ 64 ] The main errors are perpendicular error, side error and index error.

[ 64 ] Adjustment of the sextant consists of checking and aligning all the optical elements to eliminate the overall "index error" (or index correction). Index correction should be checked, using the horizon or more preferably a star, each time the sextant is used.

[ 64 ] The practice of taking celestial observations from the deck of a rolling ship, often through cloud cover and with a hazy horizon, is by far the most challenging part of celestial navigation.

[ 65 ] Bubble octant [ edit ] Until the widespread usage of technologies such as inertial navigation systems, VHF omnidirectional range and GNSS, air navigators used the Bubble octant or bubble sextant.

[ 66 ] Using this instrument to take sights, mathematical calculations could then be carried out to determine the past position of the aircraft.

[ 67 ] Inertial navigation [ edit ] Further information: Inertial navigation system Inertial navigation system (INS) is a dead reckoning type of navigation system that computes its position based on motion sensors.

[ 68 ] Before actually navigating, the initial latitude and longitude and the INS's physical orientation relative to the Earth (e.g., north and level) are established. After alignment, an INS receives impulses from motion detectors that measure (a) the acceleration along three axes (accelerometers), and (b) rate of rotation about three orthogonal axes (gyroscopes). These enable an INS to continually and accurately calculate its current latitude and longitude (and often velocity).

Advantages over other navigation systems are that, once aligned, an INS does not require outside information. An INS is not affected by adverse weather conditions and it cannot be detected or jammed. Its disadvantage is that since the current position is calculated solely from previous positions and motion sensors, its errors are cumulative, increasing at a rate roughly proportional to the time since the initial position was input. Inertial navigation systems must therefore be frequently corrected with a location 'fix' from some other type of navigation system.

The first inertial system is considered to be the V-2 guidance system deployed by the Germans in 1942. However, inertial sensors are traced to the early 19th century.

[ 69 ] The advantages INSs led their use in aircraft, missiles, surface ships and submarines. For example, the U.S. Navy developed the Ships Inertial Navigation System (SINS) during the Polaris missile program to ensure a reliable and accurate navigation system to initial its missile guidance systems. Inertial navigation systems were in wide use until satellite navigation systems (GPS) became available. INSs are still in common use on submarines (since GPS reception or other fix sources are not possible while submerged) and long-range missiles but are not now widely found elsewhere.

[ 70 ] Gravity-aided navigation [ edit ] Gravity-aided navigation originated in the 1990s and provides a technology to obtain a position fix for navigation.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] It utilises the concept that an on0obard sensor measures elements of the gravitational vector while the platform is in motion and then these measurements are referenced to a map of the Earth's gravitational field to determine a position.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Space navigation [ edit ] Not to be confused with satellite navigation, which depends upon satellites to function, space navigation refers to the navigation of spacecraft themselves. This has historically been achieved (during the Apollo program ) via a navigational computer , an Inertial navigation system, and via celestial inputs entered by astronauts which were recorded by sextant and telescope. Space rated navigational computers, like those found on Apollo and later missions, are designed to be hardened against possible data corruption from radiation. Navigation in space has three main components: the use of a suitable reference trajectory which describes the planned flight path of the spacecraft, monitoring the actual spacecraft position while the mission is in flight (orbit determination) and creating maneuvers to bring the spacecraft back to the reference trajectory as required (flight path control).

[ 74 ] Another possibility that has been explored for deep space navigation is Pulsar navigation , which compares the X-ray bursts from a collection of known pulsars in order to determine the position of a spacecraft. This method has been tested by multiple space agencies, such as NASA and ESA .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Electronic navigation [ edit ] Radar ranges and bearings can be used to determine a position.

Radar navigation [ edit ] Further information: Radar navigation and Doppler radar § navigation Radars can be used for navigation and marine radars are commonly fitted to ships for navigation at sea.

[ 77 ] Radar is an effective aid to navigation because it provides ranges and bearings to objects within range of the radar scanner.

[ 78 ] When a vessel (ship or boat) is within radar range of land or fixed objects (such as special radar aids to navigation and navigation marks) the navigator can take distances and angular bearings to charted objects and use these to establish arcs of position and lines of position on a chart.

[ 79 ] A fix consisting of only radar information is called a radar fix.

[ 80 ] Types of radar fixes include "range and bearing to a single object," [ 81 ] "two or more bearings," [ 81 ] "tangent bearings," [ 81 ] and "two or more ranges." [ 81 ] Radar can also be used with ECDIS as a means of position fixing with the radar image or distance/bearing overlaid onto an Electronic nautical chart .

[ 78 ] Parallel indexing is a technique defined by William Burger in the 1957 book The Radar Observer's Handbook .

[ 82 ] This technique involves creating a line on the screen that is parallel to the ship's course, but offset to the left or right by some distance.

[ 82 ] This parallel line allows the navigator to maintain a given distance away from hazards .

[ 82 ] The line on the radar screen is set to a specific distance and angle, then the ship's position relative to the parallel line is observed. This can provide an immediate reference to the navigator as to whether the ship is on or off its intended course for navigation.

[ 83 ] Other techniques that are less used in general navigation have been developed for special situations. One, known as the "contour method," involves marking a transparent plastic template on the radar screen and moving it to the chart to fix a position.

[ 84 ] Another special technique, known as the Franklin Continuous Radar Plot Technique, involves drawing the path a radar object should follow on the radar display if the ship stays on its planned course.

[ 85 ] During the transit, the navigator can check that the ship is on track by checking that the pip lies on the drawn line.

[ 85 ] Radio navigation [ edit ] Main articles: Radio navigation and Radio direction finder A radio direction finder or RDF is a device for finding the direction to a radio source. Due to radio's ability to travel very long distances "over the horizon", it makes a particularly good navigation system for ships and aircraft that might be flying at a distance from land. RDFs works by rotating a directional antenna and listening for the direction in which the signal from a known station comes through most strongly. This sort of system was widely used in the 1930s and 1940s. RDF antennas are easy to spot on German World War II aircraft, as loops under the rear section of the fuselage, whereas most US aircraft enclosed the antenna in a small teardrop-shaped fairing.

In navigational applications, RDF signals are provided in the form of radio beacons , the radio version of a lighthouse . The signal is typically a simple AM broadcast of a morse code series of letters, which the RDF can tune in to see if the beacon is "on the air". Most modern detectors can also tune in any commercial radio stations, which is particularly useful due to their high power and location near major cities.

Decca , OMEGA , and LORAN-C are three similar hyperbolic navigation systems. Decca was a hyperbolic low frequency radio navigation system (also known as multilateration ) that was first deployed during World War II when the Allied forces needed a system which could be used to achieve accurate landings. As was the case with Loran C , its primary use was for ship navigation in coastal waters. Fishing vessels were major post-war users, but it was also used on aircraft, including a very early (1949) application of moving-map displays. The system was deployed in the North Sea and was used by helicopters operating to oil platforms .

The OMEGA Navigation System was the first truly global radio navigation system for aircraft, operated by the United States in cooperation with six partner nations. OMEGA was developed by the United States Navy for military aviation users. It was approved for development in 1968 and promised a true worldwide oceanic coverage capability with only eight transmitters and the ability to achieve a four-mile (6 km) accuracy when fixing a position. Initially, the system was to be used for navigating nuclear bombers across the North Pole to Russia. Later, it was found useful for submarines.

[ 86 ] Due to the success of the Global Positioning System the use of Omega declined during the 1990s, to a point where the cost of operating Omega could no longer be justified. Omega was terminated on September 30, 1997, and all stations ceased operation.

LORAN is a terrestrial navigation system using low frequency radio transmitters that use the time interval between radio signals received from three or more stations to determine the position of a ship or aircraft. The current version of LORAN in common use is LORAN-C, which operates in the low frequency portion of the EM spectrum from 90 to 110 kHz . Many nations are users of the system, including the United States , Japan , and several European countries. Russia uses a nearly exact system in the same frequency range, called CHAYKA . LORAN use is in steep decline, with GPS being the primary replacement. However, there are attempts to enhance and re-popularize LORAN. LORAN signals are less susceptible to interference and can penetrate better into foliage and buildings than GPS signals.

Satellite navigation [ edit ] Further information: Satellite navigation A ship's Furuno GNSS receiver showing a GPS position A GNSS allow small electronic receivers to determine their location ( longitude , latitude , and altitude ) within a few meters using time signals transmitted along a line of sight by radio from satellites .

[ 87 ] Positions derived can then be used with maps and charts for satellite navigation . Since the first experimental satellite was launched in 1978, GNSS have become an indispensable aid to navigation around the world, and an important tool for map-making and land surveying . GNSS also provides a precise time reference used in many applications including scientific study of earthquakes , and synchronization of telecommunications networks. Global Navigation Satellite System or GNSS is the term for satellite navigation systems that provide positioning with global coverage.

[ 87 ] The first system, GPS was developed by the United States Department of Defense and officially named NAVSTAR GPS (NAVigation Satellite Timing And Ranging Global Positioning System). The satellite constellation is managed by the United States Air Force 50th Space Wing . The cost of maintaining the system is approximately US$ 750 million per year, [ 88 ] including the replacement of aging satellites, and research and development. Despite this fact, GPS is free for civilian use as a public good .

With improvements in technology and developments globally, as of 2024, there are several different operational GNSS now available for navigation by the public. These include the United States NAVSTAR Global Positioning System (GPS), the Russian GLONASS , the European Union 's Galileo positioning system and the Beidou navigation system of China .

[ 87 ] The different global systems have varying differences in accuracy but stated positions are normally in the range of between 1 and 10 metres accuracy depending on system and on that system's satellite coverage.

[ 87 ] As a result over 100 satellites are in medium Earth orbit , transmitting signals allowing GNSS receivers to determine the receiver's location , speed and direction.

[ 87 ] There are also several regional GNSS systems available for navigation, including the Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System and the Quasi-Zenith Satellite System . However, not all GNSS receivers are capable of operating with these systems and older GNSS receivers, such as on old ships may not be capable of receiving all of the GNSS now available to users.

[ 87 ] Modern smartphones act as personal GNSS navigators for civilians who own them. Overuse of these devices, whether in the vehicle or on foot, can lead to a relative inability to learn about navigated environments, resulting in sub-optimal navigation abilities when and if these devices become unavailable.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Typically a compass is also provided to determine direction when not moving.

Acoustic navigation [ edit ] Main articles: Sonar and Acoustic location Acoustic location is a method of navigation by the use of acoustic positioning systems which determine the position of an object by using sound waves . It is primarily used by submarines and ships fitted with sonar and similar transducer based technologies.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Underwater acoustic positioning systems are also commonly used by divers and Remotely operated underwater vehicles , specifically the Long baseline acoustic positioning system , the Short baseline acoustic positioning system and the Ultra-short baseline acoustic positioning system .

[ 92 ] [ 94 ] Navigation processes [ edit ] Passage planning [ edit ] Main article: Passage planning Poor passage planning and deviation from the plan can lead to groundings, ship damage and cargo loss.

Passage planning or voyage planning is a procedure to develop a complete description of vessel's voyage from start to finish. The plan includes leaving the dock and harbor area, the en route portion of a voyage, approaching the destination, and mooring . According to international law, a vessel's captain is legally responsible for passage planning, [ 95 ] however on larger vessels, the task will be delegated to the ship's navigator .

[ 96 ] Studies show that human error is a factor in 80 percent of navigational accidents and that in many cases the human making the error had access to information that could have prevented the accident.

[ 96 ] The practice of voyage planning has evolved from penciling lines on nautical charts to a process of risk management .

[ 96 ] Passage planning consists of four stages: appraisal, planning, execution, and monitoring, [ 96 ] which are specified in International Maritime Organization Resolution A.893(21), Guidelines For Voyage Planning, [ 97 ] and these guidelines are reflected in the local laws of IMO signatory countries (for example, Title 33 of the U.S.

Code of Federal Regulations ), and a number of professional books or publications. There are some fifty elements of a comprehensive passage plan depending on the size and type of vessel.

The appraisal stage deals with the collection of information relevant to the proposed voyage as well as ascertaining risks and assessing the key features of the voyage. This will involve considering the type of navigation required e.g.

Ice navigation , the region the ship will be passing through and the hydrographic information on the route. In the next stage, the written plan is created. The third stage is the execution of the finalised voyage plan, taking into account any special circumstances which may arise such as changes in the weather, which may require the plan to be reviewed or altered. The final stage of passage planning consists of monitoring the vessel's progress in relation to the plan and responding to deviations and unforeseen circumstances.

Integrated bridge systems [ edit ] Integrated Bridge System, integrated on an Offshore Service Ship Electronic integrated bridge concepts are driving future navigation system planning.

[ 53 ] Integrated systems take inputs from various ship sensors, electronically display positioning information, and provide control signals required to maintain a vessel on a preset course.

[ 53 ] The navigator becomes a system manager, choosing system presets, interpreting system output, and monitoring vessel response.

[ 53 ] Two ship's officers practicing traditional celestial navigation taking a sunsight by sextant Ships and similar vessels [ edit ] One day's work in traditional navigation [ edit ] In traditional marine navigation, one day's work in navigation is a minimal set of tasks consistent with prudent celestial navigation. The definition and processes vary on military and civilian vessels, and from ship to ship, but the traditional method takes a form resembling: [ 98 ] Maintain a continuous dead reckoning plot.

Take two or more star observations at morning twilight for a celestial fix (prudent to observe six stars).

Morning Sun observation. Can be taken on or near prime vertical for longitude, or at any time for a line of position.

Determine compass error by azimuth observation of the Sun.

Computation of the interval to noon, watch time of local apparent noon, and constants for meridian or ex-meridian sights.

Noontime meridian or ex-meridian observation of the Sun for noon latitude line. Running fix or cross with Venus line for noon fix.

Noontime determination the day's run and day's set and drift.

At least one afternoon Sun line, in case the stars are not visible at twilight.

Determine compass error by azimuth observation of the Sun.

Take two or more star observations at evening twilight for a celestial fix (prudent to observe six stars).

Navigation on ships is usually always conducted on the bridge . It may also take place in adjacent space, where chart tables and publications are available. However, increasingly traditional navigation processes have been replaced with technological processes for marine navigation using GNSS and marine radar.

Land navigation [ edit ] Navigation for cars and other land-based travel typically uses maps , landmarks , and in recent times computer navigation (" satnav ", short for satellite navigation), as well as any means available on water.

Computerized navigation commonly relies on GPS for current location information, a navigational map database of roads and navigable routes, and uses algorithms related to the shortest path problem to identify optimal routes.

Pedestrian navigation is involved in orienteering , land navigation (military) , and wayfinding .

Underwater navigation [ edit ] Main articles: Diver navigation and Submarine navigation Submariners, divers, remotely operated underwater vehicles (ROVs) and other underwater craft carry out underwater navigation by a variety of methods and processes including GNSS, radar navigation and sonar/acoustic position fixing.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Artificial intelligence [ edit ] Artificial intelligence can be utilised to assist with planning, problem-serving and decision-making processes in navigation.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] This includes using AI in navigation systems such as GNSS as well as in general computing to assist with position fixing and monitoring from one position to another such as in vehicles, planes and cars.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Standards, training and organisations [ edit ] Professional standards for navigation depend on the type of navigation and vary by country. For marine navigation, Merchant Navy deck officers are trained and internationally certified according to the STCW Convention .

[ 105 ] Leisure and amateur mariners may undertake lessons in navigation at local/regional training schools.

Naval officers receive navigation training as part of their naval training.

In land navigation, courses and training is often provided to young persons as part of general or extra-curricular education. Land navigation is also an essential part of army training. Additionally, organisations such as the Scouts and DoE programme teach navigation to their students.

Orienteering organisations are a type of sports that require navigational skills using a map and compass to navigate from point to point in diverse and usually unfamiliar terrain whilst moving at speed.

[ 106 ] In aviation, pilots undertake air navigation training as part of learning to fly.

Professional organisations also assist to encourage improvements in navigation or bring together navigators in learned environments. The Royal Institute of Navigation (RIN) is a learned society with charitable status, aimed at furthering the development of navigation on land and sea, in the air and in space. It was founded in 1947 as a forum for mariners, pilots, engineers and academics to compare their experiences and exchange information.

[ 107 ] In the US, the Institute of Navigation (ION) is a non-profit professional organisation advancing the art and science of positioning, navigation and timing.

[ 108 ] Publications [ edit ] An illustration showing a compass used for navigation from Bowditch's American Practical Navigator Numerous nautical publications are available on navigation, which are published by professional sources all over the world. In the UK, the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office , the Witherby Publishing Group and the Nautical Institute provide numerous navigational publications, including the comprehensive Admiralty Manual of Navigation.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] In the US, Bowditch's American Practical Navigator is a free available encyclopedia of navigation issued by the US Government.

[ 111 ] Navigation in spatial cognition [ edit ] Navigation is an essential everyday activity that involves a series of abilities that help humans and animals to locate, track, and follow paths in order to arrive at different destinations.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Navigation, in spatial cognition , allows for acquiring information about the environment by using the body and landmarks of the environment as frames of references to create mental representations of our environment, also known as a cognitive map . Humans navigate by transitioning between different spaces and coordinating both egocentric and allocentric frames of reference .

Navigation can be distinguished into two sptial components: locomotion and wayfinding.

[ 114 ] Locomotion is the process of movement from one place to another, both in humans and in animals. Locomotion helps you understand an environment by moving through a space in order to create a mental representation of it.

[ 115 ] Wayfinding is defined as an active process of following or deciding upon a path between one place to another through mental representations.

[ 116 ] It involves processes such as representation, planning and decision which help to avoid obstacles, to stay on course or to regulate pace when approaching particular objects.

[ 114 ] [ 117 ] Navigation and wayfinding can be approached in the environmental space . According to Dan Montello ’s space classification , there are four levels of space with the third being the environmental space. The environmental space represents a very large space, like a city, and can only be fully explored through movement since all objects and space are not directly visible.

[ 118 ] Also Barbara Tversky systematized the space, but this time taking into consideration the three dimensions that correspond to the axes of the human body and its extensions: above/below, front/back and left/right. Tversky ultimately proposed a fourfold classification of navigable space: space of the body, space around the body, space of navigation and space of graphics.

[ 119 ] Wayfinding [ edit ] There are two types of wayfinding in navigation: aided and unaided.

[ 118 ] Aided wayfinding requires a person to use various types of media , such as maps , GPS , directional signage , etc., in their navigation process which generally involves low spatial reasoning and is less cognitively demanding. Unaided wayfinding involves no such devices for the person who is navigating.

[ 118 ] Unaided wayfinding can be subdivided into a taxonomy of tasks depending on whether it is undirected or directed, which basically makes the distinction of whether there is a precise destination or not: undirected wayfinding means that a person is simply exploring an environment for pleasure without any set destination.

[ 120 ] Directed wayfinding, instead, can be further subdivided into search vs. target approximation.

[ 120 ] Search means that a person does not know where the destination is located and must find it either in an unfamiliar environment, which is labeled as an uninformed search, or in a familiar environment, labeled as an informed search. In target approximation, on the other hand, the location of the destination is known to the navigator but a further distinction is made based on whether the navigator knows how to arrive or not to the destination. Path following means that the environment, the path, and the destination are all known which means that the navigator simply follows the path they already know and arrive at the destination without much thought. For example, when you are in your city and walking on the same path as you normally take from your house to your job or university.

[ 120 ] However, path finding means that the navigator knows where the destination is but does not know the route they have to take to arrive at the destination: you know where a specific store is but you do not know how to arrive there or what path to take. If the navigator does not know the environment, it is called path search which means that only the destination is known while neither the path nor the environment is: you are in a new city and need to arrive at the train station but do not know how to get there.

[ 120 ] Path planning, on the other hand, means that the navigator knows both where the destination is and is familiar with the environment so they only need to plan the route or path that they should take to arrive at their target. For example, if you are in your city and need to get to a specific store that you know the destination of but do not know the specific path you need to take to get there.

[ 120 ] See also [ edit ] Geography portal Robot navigation TVMDC Collision avoidance in transportation Spatial cognition#Navigation References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Rell Pros-Wellenhof, Bernhard (2007).

Navigation: Principles of Positioning and Guidances . Springer. pp.

5– 6.

ISBN 978-3-211-00828-7 .

^ Bowditch, 2003:799.

^ The Handbook Of The SAS And Elite Forces. How The Professionals Fight And Win. Edited by Jon E. Lewis. p.363-Tactics And Techniques, Personal Skills And Techniques. Robinson Publishing Ltd 1997. ISBN 1-85487-675-9 ^ a b Safe Nav Watch . Livingston, Scotland: Witherby Publishing Group . 2023. p. iii.

ISBN 978-1-914993-46-6 .

^ Safe Nav Watch . Livingston, Scotland: Witherby Publishing Group . 2023. p. 4.

ISBN 978-1-914993-46-6 .

^ Abbott, E.; Powell, D. (1999-01-31). "Land-vehicle navigation using GPS".

Proceedings of the IEEE .

87 : 145– 162.

doi : 10.1109/5.736347 .

^ Hawkins, Pete (2024-05-13).

Navigation . Cicerone Press Limited.

ISBN 978-1-78362-788-2 .

^ "Navigation" (PDF) . Federal Aviation Administration . Retrieved 2025-02-24 .

^ "Etymonline - Online Etymology Dictionary" .

www.etymonline.com .

^ Vermillion, Stephanie (2021-07-27).

"Polynesia's master voyagers who navigate by nature" .

BBC Home . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ "The history and mystery of Polynesian navigation" .

Phys.org . 2019-03-25 . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ Martins, Kim (2020-08-07).

"Polynesian Navigation & Settlement of the Pacific" .

World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ Li Shu-hua , p. 176 ^ Kreutz , p. 367 ^ Needham, Joseph (1986) Science and civilisation in China , Vol. 4: "Physics and physical technology", Pt. 1: "Physics", Taipei. p. 252 Caves Books, originally publ. by Cambridge University Press (1962), ISBN 0-521-05802-3 ^ Li Shu-hua , p. 182f.

^ Schmidl, Petra G. (2014). "Compass". In Ibrahim Kalin (ed.).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Science, and Technology in Islam . Oxford University Press. pp.

144– 146.

ISBN 978-0-19-981257-8 .

^ The Ty Pros Companion to Ships and the Sea , Peter Kemp ed., 1976 ISBN 0-586-08308-1 ^ Comandante Estácio dos Reis (2002).

Astrolábios Náuticos . INAPA.

ISBN 978-972-797-037-7 .

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 2012-11-22 . Retrieved 2013-04-02 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Swanick, Lois Ann.

An Analysis Of Navigational Instruments In The Age Of Exploration: 15th Century To Mid-17th century , MA Thesis, Texas A&M University, December 2005 ^ a b c Williams, 1992:35 ^ a b c Williams, 1992:37 ^ a b c Williams, 1992:30 ^ Williams, 1992:28 ^ Andrews, John Harwood (2009).

Maps in Those Days . Dublin: Four Courts press.

ISBN 978-1-84682-188-2 .

^ Williams, 1992:96-97 ^ a b Williams, 1992:41 ^ "Evolution of surveying and surveying technology" .

Intergovernmental Committee on Surveying and Mapping . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ Tyrrell, Rachel (2023-08-16).

"Surveying the past – the origins of surveying" .

The Survey Association . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ Williams, 1992:81 ^ a b Williams, 1992:98 ^ Williams, 1992:110-114 ^ Williams, 1992:132-135 ^ Williams, 1992:198 ^ "Release date history" .

GPS Training . 2024-07-19 . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ Yohannes, Samraweet (2023-02-24).

"Smartphones may be our greatest tool for outdoor and indoor navigation" .

CBC . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ Smith, Philip M. (2017-10-16).

Terrestrial Navigation . London ; New York: Routledge. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1-317-20046-8 .

^ "navigation" .

Cambridge Dictionary . 2025-02-19 . Retrieved 2025-02-24 .

^ Smith, Philip M. (2017-10-16).

Terrestrial Navigation . London ; New York: Routledge. p. 24.

ISBN 978-1-317-20046-8 .

^ a b c d Bowditch, 2003:4.

^ Norie, J.W. (1828).

New and Complete Epitome of Practical Navigation . London. p. 222. Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-08-02 .

^ a b Norie, J.W. (1828).

New and Complete Epitome of Practical Navigation . London. p. 221. Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-08-02 .

^ Taylor, Janet (1851).

An Epitome of Navigation and Nautical Astronomy (Ninth ed.). Taylor. p. 295f . Retrieved 2007-08-02 .

Nautical Almanac 1849-1851.

^ Britten, Frederick James (1894).

Former Clock & Watchmakers and Their Work . New York: Spon & Chamberlain. p.

230 . Retrieved 2007-08-08 .

Chronometers were not regularly supplied to the Royal Navy until about 1825 ^ Lecky, Squire, Wrinkles in Practical Navigation ^ Roberts, Edmund .

"Chapter XXIV―departure from Mozambique" .

1837, Embassy to the Eastern courts of Cochin-China, Siam, and Muscat: in the U.S. sloop-of-war Peacock ... during the years 1832–3–4 (Digital ed.). Harper & brothers. p. 373.

ISBN 9780608404066 . Retrieved April 25, 2012 .

...what I have stated, will serve to show the absolute necessity of having first rate chronometers, or the lunar observations carefully attended to; and never omitted to be taken when practicable.

^ a b c d e Maloney, 2003:615.

^ a b c Maloney, 2003:614 ^ Maloney, 2003:618.

^ Maloney, 2003:622.

^ Rousmaniere, John (1999).

The Annapolis Book of Seamanship: Third Edition . New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 214-215.

ISBN 978-0-684-85420-5 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Bowditch, 2002:1.

^ The Handbook of the SAS and Elite Forces. How the Professionals Fight and Win . Edited by Jon E. Lewis. p. 370 "Tactics And Techniques, Personal Skills And Techniques". Robinson Publishing Ltd 1997.

ISBN 1854876759 ^ Federal Aviation Regulations Part 1 §1.1 ^ a b c d e f g h i Bowditch, 2002:105.

^ a b Gilardoni, Eduardo O.; Presedo, Juan P. (2017).

Navigation in Shallow Waters . Livingston, Scotland: Witherby Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-1-85609-667-6 .

^ "Celestial Navigation" .

Time and Navigation . Retrieved 2025-02-24 .

^ a b Cunliffe, Tom (2010-09-28).

Celestial Navigation . London: *Wiley Nautical.

ISBN 978-0-470-66633-3 .

^ Prinet, Dominique F. (2014-07-18).

Celestial Navigation . FriesenPress.

ISBN 978-1-4602-4212-4 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t Bowditch, 2002:269.

^ Karl, John (2007).

Celestial navigation in the GPS age . Arcata,CA: Paradiese Cay Publ.

ISBN 978-0-939837-75-5 .

^ Escobar, Lieutenant Juan J.; Navy, Chilean (2021-12-01).

"Bring Celestial Navigation into the 21st Century" .

U.S. Naval Institute . Retrieved 2025-02-24 .

^ a b c d e House, D.J. (2013-11-12).

Seamanship Techniques . London: Routledge. p. 350-252.

ISBN 978-1-135-08015-0 .

^ "How Did Aviators "Shoot" the Sun and Stars? | Time and Navigation" .

timeandnavigation.si.edu . Retrieved 2023-06-12 .

^ United States. Navy Department (1983).

Air Navigation: Flying Training . Air Force AFM. Air Training Command in accordance with AFR 5-6. p. 16-1 . Retrieved 2025-02-25 .

^ Wolper, James S. (2001-06-13).

Understanding Mathematics for Aircraft Navigation . McGraw Hill Professional. p. 109-150.

ISBN 978-0-07-163879-1 .

^ Jekeli, Christopher (2012-10-25).

Inertial Navigation Systems with Geodetic Applications . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. p. 113.

ISBN 978-3-11-080023-4 .

^ "An historical perspective on inertial navigation systems", Daniel Tazartes, 2014 International Symposium on Inertial Sensors and Systems (ISISS) ,  Laguna Beach, CA ^ Jekeli, Christopher (2012-10-25).

Inertial Navigation Systems with Geodetic Applications . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. p. 296.

ISBN 978-3-11-080023-4 .

^ Affleck, C.A.; Jircitano, A. (1990). "Passive gravity gradiometer navigation system".

IEEE Symposium on Position Location and Navigation. A Decade of Excellence in the Navigation Sciences . IEEE. pp.

60– 66.

doi : 10.1109/PLANS.1990.66158 .

^ a b Li, Wenchao; Gilliam, Christopher; Wang, Xuezhi; Kealy, Allison; Greentree, Andrew D.; Moran, Bill (2024).

"Gravity-aided navigation using Viterbi map matching algorithm" .

Royal Institute of Navigation Journal of Navigation .

77 (3). Cambridge University Press (CUP): 307– 321.

doi : 10.1017/s0373463324000250 .

ISSN 0373-4633 .

^ Han, Yurong; Wang, Bo; Deng, Zhihong; Fu, Mengyin (2016). "An Improved TERCOM-Based Algorithm for Gravity-Aided Navigation".

IEEE Sensors Journal .

16 (8): 2537– 2544.

Bibcode : 2016ISenJ..16.2537H .

doi : 10.1109/JSEN.2016.2518686 .

ISSN 1530-437X .

^ "Chapter 13: Navigation" .

NASA Science . 2023-07-20 . Retrieved 2025-02-24 .

^ "GSP Executive Summary" .

gsp.esa.int . Archived from the original on 2017-03-16 . Retrieved 2022-12-07 .

^ Rafi Letzter (2018-04-16).

"NASA's Got a Plan for a 'Galactic Positioning System' to Save Astronauts Lost in Space" .

livescience.com . Retrieved 2022-12-07 .

^ Safe Nav Watch . Livingston, Scotland: Witherby Publishing Group . 2023. p. 37.

ISBN 978-1-914993-46-6 .

^ a b Anwar, Nadeem (2015).

Navigation Advanced for Mates and Masters (2nd ed.). Edinburgh: Witherby Publishing Group . pp.

133– 139.

ISBN 978-1-85609-627-0 .

^ Maloney, 2003:744.

^ Bowditch, 2002:816.

^ a b c d National Imagery and Mapping Agency, 2001:163.

^ a b c National Imagery and Mapping Agency, 2001:169.

^ Victor, Alain (2020).

Parallel Index Techniques in Restricted Waters - (2nd ed.). Edinburgh: Witherby Publishing Group .

ISBN 9781856099165 .

^ National Imagery and Mapping Agency, 2001:164.

^ a b National Imagery and Mapping Agency, 2001:182.

^ Proc, Jerry.

"Omega" .

www.jproc.ca . Retrieved 2024-11-22 .

^ a b c d e f Safe Nav Watch . Livingston, Scotland: Witherby Publishing Group . 2023. p. 34-36.

ISBN 978-1-914993-46-6 .

^ GPS Overview from the NAVSTAR Joint Program Office Archived 2006-09-28 at the Wayback Machine . Accessed December 15, 2006.

^ Gardony, Aaron L (April 2013). "How Navigational Aids Impair Spatial Memory: Evidence for Divided Attention".

Spatial Cognition & Computation .

13 (4): 319– 350.

Bibcode : 2013SpCC...13..319G .

doi : 10.1080/13875868.2013.792821 .

S2CID 7905481 .

^ Gardony, Aaron L. (June 2015). "Navigational Aids and Spatial Memory Impairment: The Role of Divided Attention".

Spatial Cognition & Computation .

15 (4): 246– 284.

Bibcode : 2015SpCC...15..246G .

doi : 10.1080/13875868.2015.1059432 .

S2CID 42070277 .

^ Winter, Stephen (2007).

Spatial Information Theory . Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Berlin. pp.

238– 254.

ISBN 978-3540747888 .

^ a b Christ, Robert D.; Wernli, Robert L. (2014). "Practical Applications".

The ROV Manual . Elsevier. pp.

561– 599.

doi : 10.1016/b978-0-08-098288-5.00021-x .

ISBN 978-0-08-098288-5 .

^ "Long Range Acoustic Communications and Navigation in the Arctic" (PDF) . Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution . Retrieved 2025-02-24 .

^ "Precision acoustic navigation for remotely operated vehicles (ROV)" (PDF) . Hydroacoustics, 2005 - bibliotekanauki.pl . Retrieved 2025-02-24 .

^ "Regulation 34 – Safe Navigation" .

IMO RESOLUTION A.893(21) adopted on 25 November 1999 . Archived from the original on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved March 26, 2007 .

^ a b c d "ANNEX 24 – MCA Guidance Notes for Voyage Planning" .

IMO RESOLUTION A.893(21) adopted on 25 November 1999 . Archived from the original on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved March 26, 2007 .

^ "ANNEX 25 – MCA Guidance Notes for Voyage Planning" .

IMO RESOLUTION A.893(21) adopted on 25 November 1999 . Archived from the original on 24 July 2011 . Retrieved January 28, 2011 .

^ Turpin and McEwen, 1980:6–18.

^ Homeier, Lieutenant Matthew G.; Navy, U.S. (2021-10-01).

"Navigate by the Stars—From Beneath the Waves" .

U.S. Naval Institute . Retrieved 2025-02-24 .

^ Christ, Robert D.; Sr., Robert L. Wernli (2013-10-30).

The ROV Manual . Amsterdam: Butterworth-Heinemann.

ISBN 978-0-08-098288-5 .

^ Duffany, Jeffrey L. (2010). "Artificial intelligence in GPS navigation systems".

2010 2nd International Conference on Software Technology and Engineering . IEEE.

doi : 10.1109/icste.2010.5608862 .

ISBN 978-1-4244-8667-0 .

^ Jindal, R.; Mittal, S.K. (2023).

Artificial Intelligence: Application and Real-Time Use . Codex International Publishers. p. 45.

ISBN 978-93-94799-24-0 . Retrieved 2025-02-24 .

^ Viveiros, Inês; Silva, Hélder; Andrade, Yuri; Pendão, Cristiano (2025).

"Smart GNSS Integrity Monitoring for Road Vehicles: An Overview of AI Methods" .

IEEE Access .

13 : 20278– 20296.

Bibcode : 2025IEEEA..1320278V .

doi : 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3534659 .

ISSN 2169-3536 .

^ Yu, K. (2024).

Positioning and Navigation Using Machine Learning Methods . Navigation: Science and Technology. Springer Nature Singapore. p. 32.

ISBN 978-981--976199-9 . Retrieved 2025-02-24 .

^ Standards of Training and Certification of Watchkeeping' (STCW) Convention .

International Maritime Organization . 2010.

^ "About Orienteering" . The Canadian Orienteering Federation. Archived from the original on 2008-10-02 . Retrieved 2008-08-11 .

^ "The Royal Institute of Navigation - Aims and Objects".

Journal of Navigation .

69 (66): b1 – b2 . 2016.

^ "The Institute of Navigation" . Retrieved February 6, 2020 .

^ "The Admiralty Manual of Navigation" . The Nautical Institute . Retrieved February 6, 2020 .

^ "Navigation Publications" . Witherby Publishing Group. Archived from the original on February 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2020 .

^ "The American Practical Navigator" . Retrieved February 6, 2020 .

^ "Focus on spatial cognition" .

Nature Neuroscience .

20 (11): 1431. November 2017.

doi : 10.1038/nn.4666 .

ISSN 1546-1726 .

PMID 29073640 .

S2CID 205441391 .

^ Wolbers, Thomas; Hegarty, Mary (March 2010).

"What determines our navigational abilities?" .

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

14 (3): 138– 146.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.001 .

PMID 20138795 .

S2CID 15142890 .

^ a b Montello, Daniel R. (2005-07-18), Shah, Priti; Miyake, Akira (eds.), "Navigation" , The Cambridge Handbook of Visuospatial Thinking (1 ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp.

257– 294, doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511610448.008 , ISBN 978-0-511-61044-8 , retrieved 2022-05-06 ^ "APA Dictionary of Psychology/Locomotion" .

dictionary.apa.org . Retrieved 2022-05-06 .

^ GOLLEDGE, Reginald G. (December 2000).

"Cognitive Maps, Spatial Abilities, and Human Wayfinding" (PDF) .

Geographical Review of Japan .

73 : 93– 104.

^ Tolman, Edward C. (1948).

"Cognitive maps in rats and men" .

Psychological Review .

55 (4): 189– 208.

doi : 10.1037/h0061626 .

ISSN 1939-1471 .

PMID 18870876 .

^ a b c Denis, Michel (2017-11-13).

Space and Spatial Cognition: A Multidisciplinary Perspective (1 ed.). Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781315103808 .

ISBN 978-1-315-10380-8 .

^ Tversky, Barbara (January 2003).

"Structures Of Mental Spaces: How People Think About Space" .

Environment and Behavior .

35 (1): 66– 80.

doi : 10.1177/0013916502238865 .

ISSN 0013-9165 .

S2CID 16647328 .

^ a b c d e Wiener, Jan M.; Büchner, Simon J.; Hölscher, Christoph (2009-05-20).

"Taxonomy of Human Wayfinding Tasks: A Knowledge-Based Approach" .

Spatial Cognition & Computation .

9 (2): 152– 165.

Bibcode : 2009SpCC....9..152W .

doi : 10.1080/13875860902906496 .

ISSN 1387-5868 .

S2CID 16529538 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Nathaniel Bowditch, The American Practical Navigator, (2002) by the United States government Anwar, Nadeem (2015).

Navigation Advanced for Mates and Masters (2nd ed.). Edinburgh: Witherby Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-1-85609-627-0 .

Cutler, Thomas J. (December 2003).

Dutton's Nautical Navigation (15th ed.). Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-55750-248-3 .

Department of the Air Force (March 2001).

Air Navigation (PDF) . Department of the Air Force. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-03-25 . Retrieved 2007-04-17 .

Great Britain Ministry of Defence (Navy) (1995).

Admiralty Manual of Seamanship .

The Stationery Office .

ISBN 978-0-11-772696-3 .

Gilardoni, Eduardo O.; Presedo, Juan P. (2017).

Navigation in Shallow Waters . Livingston, Scotland: Witherbys.

ISBN 978-1-85609-667-6 .

Bernhard Hofmann-Wellenhof; K. Legat; M. Wieser (2003).

Navigation: principles of positioning and guidance . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-211-00828-7 . Retrieved 7 February 2012 .

Maloney, Elbert S. (December 2003).

Chapman Piloting and Seamanship (64th ed.). New York: Hearst Communications Inc.

ISBN 978-1-58816-089-8 .

National Imagery and Mapping Agency (2001).

Publication 1310: Radar Navigation and Maneuvering Board Manual (7th ed.). Bethesda, MD: U.S. Government Printing Office. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-03-07.

Turpin, Edward A.; McEwen, William A. (1980).

Merchant Marine Officers' Handbook (4th ed.). Centreville, MD: Cornell Maritime Press.

ISBN 978-0-87033-056-8 .

Martin, William Robert (1911).

"Navigation" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

284– 298.

Bunbury, Edward Herbert ; Beazley, Charles Raymond (1911).

"Pytheas" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 22 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

703– 704.

Raol, Jitendra; Gopal, Ajith (2013), Mobile Intelligent Autonomous Systems , Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press Taylor and Francis Group, ISBN 978-1-4398-6300-8 Williams, J. E. D. (1992).

From Sails to Satellites . Oxford: Oxford University Press, USA.

ISBN 0-19-856387-6 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Navigation .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Navigation .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Portal:Navigation Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Navigation .

Lectures in Navigation by Ernest Gallaudet Draper How to navigate with less than a compass or GPS (archived 8 December 2012) v t e Geodesy Overview Geodesists History Timeline Subfields Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity of Earth Navigation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Geopositioning Virtual globe Physical phenomena Chandler wobble Coriolis effect Earth's energy budget Earth's gravity field Geodynamo Gravity of Earth Plate tectonics Precession of the equinoxes Tide Related disciplines Astronomy Geology Geophysics Mathematics Physics Geodesy portal Category Commons v t e Orienteering History of orienteering List of orienteering events Sport disciplines IOF - governed Foot orienteering Mountain bike orienteering Ski orienteering Trail orienteering IARU - governed Amateur radio direction finding Fox Oring Radio Orienteering in a Compact Area Other sports Canoe orienteering Car orienteering Mountain marathon Mounted orienteering Rogaining Related Adventure racing Alleycat race Fell running Relay race Transmitter hunting Equipment Event Control point Course Map Personal Compass hand protractor thumb Eye protectors Gaiters Headlamp Exceptions Backpacking Satellite navigation Whistle Software Proprietary OCAD Condes SportSoftware Open-source OpenOrienteering Mapper Purple Pen MeOS Video games Catching Features Suunnistussimulaattori WinOL / WinOL II Oriantica Fundamentals Map orienteering map Navigation cardinal direction resection route choice wayfinding waypoint Racing hiking running walking skiing mountain biking Organisations / lists International Orienteering Federation members List of clubs List of orienteers by country innovators List of events Non-sport related Adventure travel Bicycle touring Climbing Hiking Hunting Location-based game geocaching poker run Scoutcraft orienteering wilderness Competitions Foot orienteering World Championships Junior Masters University World Cup World Games European Championships Youth University North American Championships Open events O-Ringen Jukola Tiomila Kainuu Orienteering Week Jan Kjellström Festival Ski orienteering World Championships Junior World Cup Mountain bike orienteering World Championships Trail orienteering World Championships Category WikiProject v t e Seamanship (seafaring) topics Seamanship Navigation Watchkeeping Ice navigation Pilotage Maritime studies Sailing Nautical terms A–L M–Z Naval architecture Ship stability Hydrodynamics Ship-to-ship cargo transfer Propeller walk Passage planning Maritime law Dry-docking Ropework Knots Man overboard rescue turn Buoyage Mooring Anchoring Sea anchor v t e Satellite navigation systems Operating BeiDou DORIS Galileo GLONASS GPS, NavStar IRNSS, NAVIC Historic BDS, BeiDou-1 Transit Timation Tsiklon GNSS augmentation EGNOS GAGAN GPS·C (retired) JPALS LAAS MSAS NTRIP QZSS, Michibiki SouthPAN StarFire WAAS SDCM Related topics GNSS reflectometry Kalman filter KPS UK GNSS Wavelet RINEX Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐4ntfq
Cached time: 20250816024011
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.261 seconds
Real time usage: 1.384 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7576/1000000
Revision size: 86237/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 253905/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2183/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 24/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 417691/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.801/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11243482/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1170.745      1 -total
 51.71%  605.345      1 Template:Reflist
 28.59%  334.671     44 Template:Cite_book
 12.12%  141.935     30 Template:Cite_web
  8.75%  102.413      4 Template:Sister_project
  8.60%  100.692      4 Template:Side_box
  7.80%   91.329     13 Template:Cite_journal
  6.65%   77.900      1 Template:Longlat
  6.53%   76.403      1 Template:Sidebar
  5.92%   69.325      1 Template:Wikisource Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21854:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816024011 and revision id 1306125399. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Navigation&oldid=1306125399 " Categories : Navigation Geodesy Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons link from Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 02:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Navigation 77 languages Add topic

