Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Critolaus 18 languages Català Español Français Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek philosopher For other uses, see Critolaus (disambiguation) .

Critolaus ( / k r aɪ t oʊ ˈ l eɪ ə s / ; Greek : Κριτόλαος Kritolaos ; c. 200 – c. 118 BC) [ 1 ] of Phaselis was a Greek philosopher of the Peripatetic school . He was one of three philosophers sent to Rome in 155 BC (the other two being Carneades and Diogenes of Babylon ), where their doctrines fascinated the citizens, but frightened the more conservative statesmen. None of his writings survive. He was interested in rhetoric and ethics , and considered pleasure to be an evil . He maintained the Aristotelian doctrine of the eternity of the world , and of the human race in general, directing his arguments against the Stoics .

Life [ edit ] He was born in Phaselis , a Greek colony in Lycia , c. 200 BC, and studied philosophy at Athens under Aristo of Ceos , and became one of the leaders of the Peripatetic school by his eminence as an orator, a scholar and a moralist. There has been considerable discussion as to whether he was the immediate successor of Aristo, but the evidence is confused.

[ 2 ] The great reputation which Critolaus enjoyed at Athens, as a philosopher, an orator, and a statesman, induced the Athenians to send him to Rome in 155 BC, together with Carneades and Diogenes the Stoic , to obtain a remission of the fine of 500 talents which the Romans had imposed upon Athens for the destruction of Oropus . They were successful in the object for which they came; and the embassy excited the greatest interest at Rome. Not only the Roman youth, but the most illustrious men in the state, such as Scipio Africanus , Laelius , Furius , and others, came to listen to their discourses. The novelty of their doctrines seemed to the Romans of the old school to be fraught with such danger to the morals of the citizens, that Cato induced the senate to send them away from Rome as quickly as possible.

[ 3 ] Gellius describes his arguments as "elegant and polished" ( Latin : scita et teretia ). We have no further information respecting the life of Critolaus. He lived upwards of eighty-two years, but died c. 118 BC. By the time Licinius Crassus arrived at Athens c. 111 BC, he found Critolaus' pupil Diodorus of Tyre at the head of the Peripatetic school.

[ 4 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Critolaus seems to have paid particular attention to rhetoric , though he considered it, like Aristotle , not as an art, but rather as a matter of practice.

Cicero speaks in high terms of his eloquence.

[ 5 ] Next to Rhetoric, Critolaus seems to have given his chief attention to the study of moral philosophy, and to have made some additions to Aristotle's system.

[ 6 ] In general, he deviated very little from the philosophy of the founder of the Peripatetic school, [ 7 ] though in some respects he went beyond his predecessors. For example, he held that pleasure is an evil , [ 8 ] and definitely maintained that the soul consists of aether . The end of existence was to him the general perfection of the natural life, including the goods of the soul and the body, and also external goods. Cicero says in the Tusculanae Quaestiones that the goods of the soul entirely outweighed for him the other goods ( Latin : tantum propendere illam bonorum animi lancem ).

[ 2 ] Further, he defended against the Stoics the Peripatetic doctrine of the eternity of the world and the indestructibility of the human race. There is no observed change in the natural order of things; humankind recreates itself in the same manner according to the capacity given by Nature , and the various ills to which it is heir, though fatal to individuals, do not avail to modify the whole. Just as it is absurd to suppose that humans are merely earth-born, so the possibility of their ultimate destruction is inconceivable. The world, as the manifestation of eternal order, must itself be immortal.

[ 2 ] A Critolaus is mentioned by Plutarch [ 9 ] as the author of a work on Epirus , and of another entitled Phenomena ; and Aulus Gellius [ 10 ] also speaks of an historical writer of this name. Whether the historian is the same as the Peripatetic philosopher, cannot be determined. A grammarian Critolaus is mentioned in the Etymologicum Magnum .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Dorandi 1999 , p. 50.

^ a b c Chisholm 1911 .

^ Plutarch, Cato Maj.

22; Aulus Gellius, vii. 14; Macrobius Saturnalia i. 5 ; Cicero, de Orat.

ii. 37, 38.

^ Lucian, Macrobii 20; Cicero, De Oratore , i. 11.

^ Quintillian, ii. 15. § 23, 17. § 15; Sextus Empiricus, adv. Mathem.

ii. 12; Cicero, De Finibus , v. 5.

^ comp. Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones v. 17; Clement of Alexandria, Stromata , ii.

^ cf. Cicero, De Finibus , v. 5 "C. imitari antiquos voluit".

^ Aulus Gellius, ix. 5. 6.

^ Plutarch, Parall. min.

cc. 6, 9.

^ Aulus Gellius, xi. 9.

References [ edit ] Dorandi, Tiziano (1999). "Chapter 2: Chronology". In Algra, Keimpe; et al. (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.

50 .

ISBN 9780521250283 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Critolaus ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 470.

v t e Peripatetic philosophers Greek era Aristotle Eudemus Theophrastus Aristoxenus Chamaeleon Echecratides Phaenias Praxiphanes Neleus of Scepsis Dicaearchus Nicomachus Demetrius of Phalerum Strato of Lampsacus Clearchus Archestratus (music theorist) Hieronymus of Rhodes Lyco of Troas Aristo of Ceos Satyrus Critolaus Calliphon Diodorus of Tyre Erymneus Roman era Xenarchus of Seleucia Cratippus Apellicon of Teos Andronicus of Rhodes Aristo of Alexandria Boethus of Sidon Athenaeus Mechanicus Ammonius of Athens Alexander of Aegae Aristocles of Messene Aristocles of Pergamon Aristoxenus of Cyrene Aspasius Aristotle of Mytilene Adrastus Herminus Sosigenes Alexander of Aphrodisias Ptolemy-el-Garib Themistius Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 National Germany France BnF data Italy Norway Vatican Catalonia People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critolaus&oldid=1252776503 " Categories : Hellenistic-era philosophers from Anatolia Peripatetic philosophers 2nd-century BC Greek philosophers Hellenistic-era philosophers in Athens Ancient Anatolian Greeks 200s BC births 110s BC deaths Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 22 October 2024, at 22:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Critolaus 18 languages Add topic

