Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Structure 3 Activities 4 Publications 5 Sister organisations 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Deutsche Gesellschaft für Chronometrie 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,831 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Deutsche Gesellschaft für Chronometrie]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Deutsche Gesellschaft für Chronometrie}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Deutsche Gesellschaft für Chronometrie (DGC), (German Society for Timekeeping) today is an organization of scholars, collectors and enthusiasts in Germany interested in the science, art and history of horology .

History [ edit ] The association was founded in the post World War II years (as an unofficial successor to the Deutsche Gesellschaft fuer Zeitmesskunde ) and originally consisted mainly of scientists and engineers from the watch and clock producing industry. Over the years more people joined who were interested in the history of timekeeping devices, and eventually two separate divisions were set up, a Technisch Wissenschaftlicher Fackreis (Scientific Division) and a Historischer Fachkreis "Freunde Alter Uhren" (Historical Division). When the clock and watch industry withered in the fourth quarter of the 20th century the technical division withered, and by 2000 the divisional structure was dropped.  Today the bulk of the membership unites collectors, scholars and museum professionals interested in the historical aspects of clocks , sundials and watches .

Structure [ edit ] Today the association is national in scope, and is loosely organised into working groups, both local groups (in Berlin, Dresden, Franconia, Frankfurt, Furtwangen, Hamburg, Cologne, Mannheim, Munich and Stuttgart) and special interest groups ( wristwatches , electrical horology, restoration, sundials, pocket watches , tower clocks , and horological science).

Activities [ edit ] Besides the meetings of the working groups there is a multiday annual meeting often including visits to museums, restoration workshops or private collections.  Once a year the organization also organizes an international study tour, traveling to a foreign locals to study historic horological artefacts.  The organization also maintains a comprehensive library with books, periodicals, auction catalogues and trade manuals related to horology.

Publications [ edit ] The DGC published a "Jahrbuch" , an annual volume of scholarly papers.

[ 1 ] Starting in 1961 the Freunde Alter Uhren started publishing its own yearbook with articles on historic timekeepers and collecting horological artefacts and sundials.

Starting in 2000 the two yearbooks were combined into a redesigned "Jahresschrift" .

Newsletter: The organization publishes a quarterly newsletter for its members describing the activities of DGC and its working groups.

Facsimile Editions on CD-ROM: In an effort to preserve and distribute rare historic horological publications the society has an active program of scanning historic periodicals and other publications on horology and making them available to the public and its members on CD-ROM.

The administrative office and the library of the DGC are located in the historic former Gewerbemuseum in Nuremberg , today a continued education center which also houses the Gebhardt collection on the history of the portable timekeeper.

Sister organisations [ edit ] Its main sister organizations in other countries pursuing similar goals are: Antiquarian Horological Society - AHS (United Kingdom) Association Française des Amateurs d'Horlogerie Ancienne - AFAHA (France) Chronometrophilia (Switzerland) HORA Associazione Italiana Cultori di Orologeria Antica (Italy) National Association of Watch and Clock Collectors - NAWCC (United States of America) References [ edit ] ^ "Publikationen" .

Deutsche Gesellschaft für Chronometrie e.V.

(in German) . Retrieved 2024-12-07 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Poulle, Emmanuel; Deutsche Gesellschaft für Chronometrie, eds. (2008).

Die Planetenlaufuhr: ein Meisterwerk der Astronomie und Technik der Renaissance geschaffen von Eberhard Baldewein 1563-1568 . Jahresschrift. Stuttgart: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Chronometrie.

ISBN 978-3-89870-548-6 .

OCLC 631915483 .

External links [ edit ] DGC website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deutsche_Gesellschaft_für_Chronometrie&oldid=1264180745 " Categories : Collectors organizations Horological organizations Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 20 December 2024, at 23:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deutsche Gesellschaft für Chronometrie 1 language Add topic

