Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Purpose 3 Activities 4 Facilities 5 Budget 6 Knowledge exchange obligations 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Science and Technology Facilities Council 3 languages Deutsch Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "STFC" redirects here. For other uses, see STFC (disambiguation) .

Government agency of the United Kingdom Science and Technology Facilities Council Abbreviation STFC Formation 2007 ; 18 years ago ( 2007 ) Type Research Council within UKRI Legal status Government agency Purpose Funding of science research Headquarters Polaris House Location North Star Avenue, Swindon , SN2 1SZ Region served United Kingdom Executive Chair Michele Dougherty Main organ STFC Council Parent organisation Department for Science, Innovation and Technology UK Research and Innovation Website stfc .ukri .org The Science and Technology Facilities Council ( STFC ) is a United Kingdom government agency that carries out research in science and engineering, and funds UK research in areas including particle physics , nuclear physics , space science and astronomy (both ground-based and space-based).

History [ edit ] STFC was formed in April 2007 when the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council (PPARC), the Council for the Central Laboratory of the Research Councils (CCLRC), along with the nuclear physics activities of the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) were brought under the one umbrella organisation .

[ 1 ] The organisation's first Chief Executive was Professor Keith Mason, who held the position until 2011, when he was replaced by Professor John Womersley.

Womersley was the CEO until 2016 when he left to become Director General of the European Spallation Source. Dr Brian Bowsher, former CEO of the National Physical Laboratory and member of STFC's Council was the last CEO of the STFC before it was subsumed into UK Research and Innovation , a division of the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy . In 2018, Professor Mark Thomson was appointed as the first Executive Chair of STFC under UKRI.  Professor Michele Dougherty took over in 2025.

[ 2 ] Purpose [ edit ] Receiving its funding through the science budget from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS), STFC's mission is "To maximise the impact of our knowledge, skills, facilities and resources for the benefit of the United Kingdom and its people" under several heads: [ 3 ] Universities : the STFC supports university-based research, [ 4 ] innovation and skills development in particle physics , nuclear physics , space science and astronomy .

Scientific Facilities : They provide access to world-leading, large-scale facilities across a range of physical and life sciences, enabling research, innovation and skills.

[ 4 ] National Campuses : Working with partners to build National Science and Innovation Campuses based around National Laboratories to promote academic and industrial collaboration and translation of research to market through direct interaction with industry.

[ 5 ] Inspiring and Involving : STFC help create a future pipeline of skilled and enthusiastic young people by using the excitement of our sciences to encourage wider take-up of STEM subjects in school and future life (science, technology, engineering and mathematics).

[ 6 ] Activities [ edit ] The STFC is one of Europe's largest multidisciplinary research organisations supporting scientists and engineers worldwide.

[ 7 ] Through research fellowships and grants, it is responsible for funding research in UK universities, in the fields of astronomy , particle physics , nuclear physics and space science . The STFC operates its own world-class, large-scale research facilities, such as materials research, laser and space science and alternative energy exploration, and provides strategic advice to the UK government on their development.

It manages international research projects in support of a broad cross-section of the UK research community and directs, coordinates and funds research, education and training. It is a partner in the UK Space Agency (formerly British National Space Centre or BNSC) providing about 40% of the UK government's expenditure in space science and technology.

Facilities [ edit ] It helps operate/provide access for UK and international scientists to the following large-scale facilities: Central Laser Facility (CLF) at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory CERN DiRAC Distributed Research using Advanced Computing ( Supercomputing facility ) The space science and space exploration programmes of ESA European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL) Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes (ING), La Palma ISIS pulsed neutron and muon source at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory Diamond Light Source , operating on STFC's Rutherford Appleton Laboratory site (Diamond is also partly funded by the Wellcome Trust .) UK Astronomy Technology Centre , Edinburgh Microelectronics Support Centre (MSC) at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory The Hartree Centre for high performance computing and data analytics at Daresbury Laboratory ALICE (accelerator) , EMMA (accelerator) , CLARA and VELA at Daresbury Laboratory The LHC Computing Grid (through its funding of the GridPP project) Boulby underground laboratories Advanced LIGO [ 8 ] Budget [ edit ] STFC's budget is allocated annually by the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy . For 2015–16, its allocation was £529 million.

[ 9 ] Knowledge exchange obligations [ edit ] STFC is active in its responsibility for knowledge exchange from government funded civil science into UKPLC. As such, many technologies are licensed to UK companies and spin-out companies created including: L3 Technology (L3T); Microvisk; Orbital Optics Ltd; Oxsensis ; PETRRA; Quantum Detectors ; ThruVision.

However knowledge exchange activities are not purely limited to commercialization of technologies, but also cover a wider range of activities which aim to transfer expertise into the wider economy.

See also [ edit ] Cosener's House , a conference centre owned by STFC in Abingdon National Astronomy Week (NAW) References [ edit ] ^ House of Commons Science and Technology Committee (2007).

Office of Science and Innovation: Scrutiny Report 2005 and 2006 .

ISBN 978-0-215-03350-5 .

^ "Executive Chair for STFC Appointed" .

ukri.org . UKRI. 1 March 2025.

^ "STFC Corporate Strategy 2010 – 2020" .

STFC Corporate Strategy 2010 – 2020 . STFC. September 2010 . Retrieved 2 November 2015 .

^ a b "House of Commons - Astronomy and Particle Physics: Government and Science and Technology Facilities Council Responses to the Committee's Fourth Report of - Science and Technology Committee" .

www.publications.parliament.uk . Retrieved 2 November 2015 .

^ "Science & Technology Facilities Council | Sci-Tech Daresbury" .

www.sci-techdaresbury.com . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 2 November 2015 .

^ "stfc | BU Research Blog" .

blogs.bournemouth.ac.uk . Retrieved 2 November 2015 .

^ Taylor, A.

; Dunne, M.; Bennington, S.; Ansell, S.; Gardner, I.; Norreys, P.; Broome, T.; Findlay, D.; Nelmes, R. (2007). "A Route to the Brightest Possible Neutron Source?".

Science .

315 (5815): 1092– 1095.

Bibcode : 2007Sci...315.1092T .

doi : 10.1126/science.1127185 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 17322053 .

S2CID 42506679 .

^ "UK Team looking for ripples in Space" .

News, Events and Publications . STFC . Retrieved 28 November 2015 .

^ "Science and research budget allocations for financial year 15/16, Department for Business, Innovation & Skills" (PDF) .

Gov.UK . gov.uk. September 2014 . Retrieved 2 November 2015 .

v t e Department for Science, Innovation and Technology Headquarters: 100 Parliament Street Ministers Secretary of State : Peter Kyle MP Minister of State for Science, Research and Innovation : Lord Vallance of Balham Minister of State for Data Protection and Telecoms : Sir Chris Bryant MP Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for AI and Digital Government : Feryal Clark MP Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Future Digital Economy and Online Safety : Baroness Jones of Whitchurch Civil Service Permanent Secretary : Emran Mian Government Chief Scientific Adviser : Dame Angela McLean National Technology Advisor : Dr Dave Smith Executive agencies Building Digital UK Intellectual Property Office Met Office UK Space Agency Non-departmental public bodies Executive Advanced Research and Invention Agency Information Commissioner's Office UK Research and Innovation Arts and Humanities Research Council Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council Economic and Social Research Council Innovate UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Medical Research Council Natural Environment Research Council Research England Science and Technology Facilities Council Tribunal Copyright Tribunal Public corporations National Physical Laboratory Ordnance Survey Other British Technology Investments Government Digital Service Government Office for Science Ofcom Regulatory Horizons Council UK Shared Business Services v t e Science and technology in the United Kingdom Economy of the United Kingdom Official bodies and personnel Chief Scientific Adviser to the Ministry of Defence Council for Science and Technology Defence Science and Technology Laboratory Department for Science, Innovation and Technology Building Digital UK Intellectual Property Office Government Office for Science Chief Scientific Adviser National Technology Advisor UK Research and Innovation Arts and Humanities Research Council Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council Economic and Social Research Council Innovate UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Medical Research Council Natural Environment Research Council Research England Science and Technology Facilities Council UK Space Agency Food and Environment Research Agency List of UK government scientific research institutes Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology Science and Technology Select Committee Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies Industry sectors Aerospace British space programme Automotive Computers Nuclear technology Pharmaceutical Renewable energy Telecommunications Non- governmental bodies Education and museums Science museums National Museum of Science and Industry National Space Centre Universities List Golden triangle Russell Group Societies and professional bodies British Computer Society British Mass Spectrometry Society British Science Association British Society for the Philosophy of Science Engineering Council Geological Society of London Institute of Physics Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine Royal Academy of Engineering Royal Aeronautical Society Royal Astronomical Society Royal Entomological Society Royal Geographical Society Royal Institution Christmas Lectures Royal Society The Association for Science Education Royal Society of Chemistry Science Council Royal Society of Biology North of England Institute of Mining and Mechanical Engineers Other Campaign for Science and Engineering EngineeringUK Science Media Centre Wellcome Trust People Engineers Inventors Nobel laureates Science writers Scientists Technology writers Places Burlington House East London Tech City M4 corridor Science parks Silicon Fen Silicon Glen Silicon Gorge Sites of Special Scientific Interest Other Innovations and discoveries Science and technology awards Science and technology magazines JANET National Science Week Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science_and_Technology_Facilities_Council&oldid=1278069581 " Categories : Science and Technology Facilities Council Science and technology in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Swindon Government agencies established in 2007 Space programme of the United Kingdom UK Research and Innovation 2007 establishments in the United Kingdom Members of the European Research Consortium for Informatics and Mathematics Hidden categories: Use British English from March 2015 Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 08:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Science and Technology Facilities Council 3 languages Add topic

