Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Overview 3 Organization 4 Launch regulation Toggle Launch regulation subsection 4.1 Rocket categories 4.1.1 Amateur 4.1.2 Licensed launch vehicles 4.1.3 Launch site operations 4.2 General requirements 4.2.1 Quantitative analysis 4.2.2 System Safety Process 4.2.3 Operating restrictions 5 Other activities 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Office of Commercial Space Transportation Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of the US FAA Part of a series on the United States space program NASA U.S. Space Force Human spaceflight programs Mercury Gemini Apollo Skylab Space Shuttle Shuttle– Mir International Space Station Commercial Crew Constellation Artemis Lunar Gateway Robotic spaceflight programs CRS Explorers GLS Large Strategic Lunar Orbiter Lunar Precursor Mariner Mars Exploration New Millennium Pioneer Planetary Missions Discovery New Frontiers Solar System Exploration Planetary Observer Ranger Surveyor Vanguard Viking Voyager X-37 NASA Astronaut Corps Mercury Gemini Apollo Space Shuttle Spaceports Eastern Range Cape Canaveral Space Force Station Kennedy Space Center Wallops Flight Facility Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport Pacific Spaceport Complex – Alaska Western Range Vandenberg Space Force Base Space launch vehicles Alpha Antares Atlas V Electron Falcon 9 Falcon Heavy LauncherOne Minotaur I III IV V C New Glenn New Shepard Pegasus Space Launch System Starship Vulcan Centaur National security space United States Space Force National Reconnaissance Office United States Space Command Civil space Department of Energy national laboratories Federal Aviation Administration Office of Commercial Space Transportation National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service Office of Space Commerce Space Weather Prediction Center Department of State Office of Space Affairs Office of Science and Technology Policy Commercial space industry Astra Ball Aerospace Bigelow Aerospace Blue Origin Boeing Firefly Aerospace Lockheed Martin Raytheon Rocket Lab Northrop Grumman Sierra Nevada Corporation SpaceX SSL United Launch Alliance Virgin Galactic Virgin Orbit v t e The Office of Commercial Space Transportation (generally referred to as FAA/AST or simply AST [ 1 ] [ note 1 ] ) is the branch of the United States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) that approves any commercial rocket launch operations — that is, any launches that are not classified as model , amateur , or "by and for the government " — in the case of a U.S. launch operator and/or a launch from the U.S.

History [ edit ] With the signing of Executive Order 12465 on February 25, 1984, President Reagan designated the Department of Transportation to be the lead agency for commercial expendable launch vehicles.  This selection occurred following an interagency competition between the Departments of Commerce and Transportation to be the lead agency. At the time, Congress and the industry supported the Department of Commerce for the lead role, and draft legislation named the Department of Commerce as the agency responsible for the new industry.  However, it was the Administration's call, and, moreover, the Administration contended that no legislation was necessary.  However, the Department of Transportation was selected for this role only after agreeing that it would not place the lead agency role in the Federal Aviation Administration due to concerns about FAA's "heavy-handed" regulation.

[ 2 ] Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Dole selected Jennifer Dorn to oversee the new responsibility.  The Office of Commercial Space Transportation (OCST) was established in late 1984, and placed in the Office of the Secretary.

[ 3 ] At the time the Executive Order was signed, the government's means for controlling commercial launches was through a unique application of the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR).  The use of ITAR was in response to a 1982 proposed private rocket launch by Space Services, Inc.

Specifically, SSI's launch had been declared by the US government to be an "export" into space, thereby requiring an "export license" from the Department of State's Office of Munitions Control.

[ 4 ] The Administration continued to oppose legislation, however, the Department Of Transportation negotiated an arrangement whereby the Department of State would agree to delegate to DOT the authority to use the ITAR "export license" insofar as it related to licensing commercial space launches.  The DOS letter agreeing to this transfer also stated that the Department of State felt uncomfortable with the use of the "export license" as a means to control commercial launches, and that it believed that a legal authority specifically designed for commercial space launches was preferable.  This letter from the State Department to the Secretary of Transportation persuaded the Reagan administration to change its position regarding the need for legislation, and paved the way for passage of the Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984.

[ 5 ] The first 10 years of OCST were marked by major challenges—and most of these challenges fell into either the policy or regulatory arena.  Accordingly, the Office of Commercial Space Transportation was divided into two major functions, policy formulation and shuttle pricing strategy, headed by Donald Trilling, and regulatory oversight, headed by Norman Bowles. The new industry was immediately confronting problems.

Starstruck was stuck in the Department of State's export licensing process.

[ 6 ] Commercial launch firms were being undercut by NASA's shuttle pricing policy.

[ 7 ] Launch companies discovered that insurance rates that NASA and the US Air Force were setting were impossible to meet.

[ 8 ] Then launch companies confronted problems with trying to use the government launch facilities.

[ 9 ] Over the course of several years, these issues emerged and were quickly resolved. OCST established its reputation within the space community that it could create the hospitable path the industry needed to grow and flourish.

Interim regulations implementing the Commercial Space Launch Act were issued within a year of the Act's passage and final regulations were issued a year later.  The licensing framework created at that time was modular and designed to handle any type of space vehicle or spacecraft.  At the time it was designed based on the most modern regulatory principles.  The regulatory approach was based on the assumption that the era of traditional expendable launch vehicles would be brief and that before long, new, different designs would emerge; this was not a view held by the traditional space community.

[ 10 ] This turned out to be true, more than OCST had envisioned. The first Office of Commercial Space Transportation regulatory action was a precedent setting payload approval of "cremains", which consisted of human cremated remains enclosed in lipstick style capsules.

[ 11 ] Within the first 8 years, 30 licensed launches would occur (31 if one includes Starstruck) and an innovative aircraft launched vehicle would be licensed and a re-entry vehicle approval action would be well underway.  A review of Hawaii's Palima Point as a prospective spaceport location had been completed (although political factors had caused the state to drop its proposal) and two other states had approached OCST with prospective proposals.  The concept that the license process had to look forward to new concepts had been validated.

Between 1984 and 1992 the OCST regulatory program had taken an aggressive approach to building a program that anticipated future issues and had taken actions to reduce or eliminate future stumbling blocks.  From the very beginning it prepared environmental impact statements or assessments that permitted the categorical exclusion of commercial space launches.  Before the first re-entry vehicle it had completed an environmental study of re-entry vehicle operation. OCST's Launch Hazard Analysis report issued in 1988 had even studied the risks of reentering vehicle components to the public safety, paving the way for subsequent reentry vehicle proposals. Proactively, it approached the National Transportation Safety Board to ensure NTSBs investigators would be prepared in advance of an incident or accident.

As part of an effort to ensure OCST maintained a light regulatory touch, in 1991 OCST Director Stephanie Lee-Myers and associate director for Licensing and Safety, Norman Bowles met with Burt Rutan, pre-eminent air plane designer to get his views on how to avoid over-regulating the commercial launch industry.  Burt Rutan informed Lee-Myers and Bowles that he knew nothing about space, and was not entertaining any thoughts of going into the space launch business. Less than 10 years later, his vehicle SpaceShipOne would win the Ansari XPrize as the first privately crewed vehicle to fly into outer space.

[ 12 ] In 1984, OCST had made its motto, "Blue skies; not red tape." By 1992, OCST had completed two studies that were beginning to explore the concept of industry self-regulation .  Previous studies had demonstrated that the public safety risks from commercial space launches were exceptionally low.

[ 13 ] Early in the Clinton administration, the office was transferred to the Federal Aviation Administration in 1995 during the tenure of OCST Director Frank Weaver.

[ 14 ] After Frank Weaver, the office was headed by Patti Grace Smith until 2008.

[ 15 ] Under her administration, the F.A.A. licensed the Mojave Air & Space Port in California to become the first inland commercial spaceport in the country.

SpaceShipOne , the first privately developed crewed vehicle to reach space, was launched from this facility in 2004.

[ 16 ] In August 2019, the office had 97 personnel assigned out of 108 positions authorized.  The increase in commercial space launches and reentries in recent years—licensing 33 to 44 launches in 2019 vs. "single-digit number of launches annually" in earlier years, and anticipating up to 50 launches in 2021 with a projected ten-fold workload increase ten-fold from 2012.

[ 17 ] Overview [ edit ] Under international law , the nationality of the launch operator and the location of the launch determines which country is responsible for any damage that occurs.

[ 18 ] Due to this, the United States requires that rocket manufacturers and launchers adhere to specific regulations to carry insurance and protect the safety of people and property that may be affected by a flight. The office also regulates launch sites, publishes quarterly launch forecasts, and holds annual conferences with the space launch industry. The office is headed by the Associate Administrator for Commercial Space Transportation (FAA/AST), who is currently Kelvin Coleman. They are located in Washington, DC , and ultimately operate under the Department of Transportation .

A map of all licensed spaceports in the US, as of February 2010 AST is responsible for licensing private space vehicles and spaceports within the US. This is in contrast with NASA , which is a research and development agency of the U.S. Federal Government, and as such neither operates nor regulates the commercial space transportation industry. The regulatory responsibility for the industry has been assigned to the Federal Aviation Administration , which is a regulatory agency. NASA does, however, often use launch satellites and spacecraft on vehicles developed by private companies.

According to its legal mandate, [ 19 ] AST has the responsibility to: regulate the commercial space transportation industry, only to the extent necessary to ensure compliance with international obligations of the United States and to protect the public health and safety, safety of property, and national security and foreign policy interest of the United States; encourage, facilitate, and promote commercial space launches by the private sector; recommend appropriate changes in Federal statutes, treaties, regulations, policies, plans, and procedures; and facilitate the strengthening and expansion of the United States space transportation infrastructure.

Organization [ edit ] AST is organized into five divisions: [ 20 ] Safety Authorization Division (ASA-100) Safety Analysis Division (ASA-200) Safety Assurance Division (ASA-300) Business Operations Division (ASZ-100) Policy and Innovation Division (ASZ-200) Launch regulation [ edit ] The primary responsibility of OCST has been to regulate non-government space launches in the United States.  As of 2020, this remains their largest focus.

Rocket categories [ edit ] For a vehicle to legally be considered a rocket, its "thrust must be greater than lift for the majority of powered flight".

[ 21 ] Commercial rockets fall into two basic categories: Amateur and Licensed.

Amateur [ edit ] An amateur rocket has a total impulse of 200,000 lb-s or less, and cannot reach an altitude of 150 km above sea level.  If a rocket exceeds these capabilities (or if it has a person on board), it is considered licensable.

[ 22 ] Amateur rockets come in 3 classes, and the regulations applied to each class increase as you move up through the classes.  The following list describes the general regulations.

[ citation needed ] Class 1—Model Rockets do not require approval to be launched, and are legal so long as they are launched in a safe manner.

Class 2—High-Power Rockets require approval to enter National Airspace.  Information regarding the rocket and where it will be launched must be provided to obtain this approval.

Class 3—Advanced High-Power Rockets require approval to enter National Airspace.  More advanced information about the rocket (such as the dynamic stability profile) and operations is required to obtain this approval.

Once a rocket exceeds amateur rocket criteria, it is considered "Licensed," which means it requires either a License or Experimental Permit in order to fly.

[ citation needed ] Experimental Permits are authorizations given to reusable rockets to fly in a specific area, called the "Operating Area."  This authorization is optional, but it is easier to obtain than a license.  It is easier because unlike a license, an experimental permit does not require an Expected Casualty analysis, nor a full System Safety Process.  However, the permit is also more limited.  Among other things, a permitted rocket cannot be used to carry people or things for compensation.  Examples of permitted rockets include all participants in the X Prize Cup .

[ citation needed ] Licensed launch vehicles [ edit ] A Licensed Rocket encompasses all other commercial rockets, including anything non-amateur, orbital, or large expendable launch vehicles (ELVs). Examples of licensed rockets would include all Atlas, Delta, and Titan rockets.  These rockets are subject to the US Code of Federal Regulations (14 C.F.R., Chapter III, §400-460).

.  Launches that are by and for the government are exempted from this regulation. NASA's shuttle and military rockets, for example, do not require a license to launch . (They are required to meet NASA and Air Force regulations instead.)  A Commercial Launch License must be obtained from FAA/AST before any rocket in this category may be launched from any US territory or if launch is conducted by a U.S. citizen.

Launch site operations [ edit ] Launch sites, in addition to the launch vehicles that operate there, must also receive authorization from AST. The launch site regulations are contained in Part 420.

[ citation needed ] General requirements [ edit ] In general, when licensing launch operations, AST uses a 3-pronged approach to safety: Quantitative Analysis , System Safety Process , and Operating Restrictions .

Quantitative analysis [ edit ] AST will generally require that the operator perform what's known as an "E c Analysis." E c ("Eee-sub-cee") is shorthand for Expected Casualty – a calculation of the probability of casualty to any and all groups of people within the maximum dispersion of the vehicle. In the simplest case, a rocket will have containment , which means that there are no people or property located within the maximum range of the vehicle. Most rockets, however, cannot achieve containment, and must be regulated using a risk-based approach.

A calculation of risk takes into account various failure modes of the rocket, various locations of the people, various shelters in which they reside, and various manners in which they can be hurt (direct impact, blast overpressure, toxic cloud, etc.). The calculation is very involved, even for relatively small rockets. In all cases, the assumptions in the calculation become the limits on the day of launch. For example, if a vehicle is analyzed for malfunction turn due to thrust offset, and the assumed wind in the model is 30 knots (56 km/h), then one of the GO/NO GO criteria on the day of launch will be a <30 knot wind. For AST, as it is with most government agencies, Unknown = No.

[ citation needed ] System Safety Process [ edit ] Certain rockets are hard to quantify in an analysis. Newer vehicles especially do not have the history required to demonstrate reliability, and thus the uncertainty in quantitative analyses can be substantial. In all cases, but especially in cases where quantitative uncertainty is at a maximum, AST will require that the launch operator follow a System Safety Process.

A System Safety Process (SSP) can come in many forms, and generally involves "Top-Down" analyses (such as Fault Trees), "Bottom-Up" analyses (such as a Hazard Analysis or Failure Modes & Effects Analysis (FMEA)), and various other analyses as required (Fishbone). Rocket systems, failure modes, external hazards, and everything else are analyzed with an eye towards public safety. From these systematic analyses, mitigation measures - or actions taken to reduce the risk - are developed. Just as in the quantitative analysis, these mitigation measures become GO/NO GO criteria on the day of launch. AST will generally require verification (evidence of an operator using mitigation measures) for every safety-critical system on the vehicle.

[ citation needed ] Operating restrictions [ edit ] In addition to all the operating restrictions developed in the quantitative analyses and system safety processes, AST requires other restrictions be followed. These are described in the Code of Federal Regulations. An example of an operating restriction is a Collision Avoidance Analysis (COLA) for rockets operating above 150 km – to preclude collisions with crewed or crewable space structures (such as the ISS or Shuttle ).

[ citation needed ] Other activities [ edit ] The Office of Commercial Space Transportation takes on activities beyond their core regulatory responsibility for all non-governmental space launches in the United States.

For example, in June 2020, the Office of Spaceports, a subordinate section of OCST, developed a set of space launch infrastructure recommendations in a National Spaceport Network Development Plan to provide information for the development of a network of spaceports in the US that would involve commercial, state , and federal funding.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Commercialization of space Notes [ edit ] ^ "AST" is the FAA routing symbol assigned to the Office of Commercial Space Transportation. See FAA Order 1100.87F - Routing Symbol Standards .

References [ edit ] ^ "Acronyms and Abbreviations" .

Federal Aviation Administration . June 8, 2017.

Archived from the original on December 28, 2019 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

AST = FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation ^ "Giving FAA and J Lynn Helms the Bad News" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "Part 1: The Office of Commercial Space Transportation–Pre FAA" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "In the Beginning…" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "Transferring the Export-Launch License to DOT" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "Adventures with Starstruck" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "The Hidden Side Effects of the Space Shuttle" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2018-07-07 .

^ "Launch Hazards: Problems Getting Insurance" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "The Bumpy Path to the Launch Pad" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "Regulating Commercial Space Transportation: A New Frontier" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "Cremains–A New Use for Space" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "SpaceX president slams space regulations: 'It requires heroics' to make minor changes" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "Launch Hazards: Problems Getting Insurance" .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2017-11-16 .

^ "About the Office" .

Archived from the original on 2016-07-14.

^ Langer, Emily (June 10, 2016).

"Patti Grace Smith, government champion of commercial spaceflight, dies at 68" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 22 June 2016 . Retrieved 24 June 2016 .

^ Roberts, Sam (June 7, 2016).

"Patti Grace Smith, Champion of Private Space Travel, Dies at 68" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2016 . Retrieved March 3, 2017 .

^ Henry, Caleb (19 August 2019).

"FAA launch office, with mounting workload, prioritizing reorganization over expansion" .

SpaceNews . Retrieved 21 August 2019 .

^ Articles VI and VII of the 1967 United Nations Outer Space Treaty.

^ 51 U.S.C.

§ 50901 , Commercial space launch activities: Findings and purposes [ ^ Monteith, Wayne (April 2020).

"AST Update Letter" (PDF) . pp. Page 2 . Retrieved 2 January 2021 .

^ "Article from Space Review " .

Archived from the original on 2005-04-08 . Retrieved 2005-04-26 .

^ http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2008/pdf/E8-28703.pdf Archived 2009-05-04 at the Wayback Machine Amateur Rocket Regulations Final Rule ^ National Spaceport Network Development Plan (PDF) (Report). Office of Spaceports, Office of Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration. 1 June 2020.

The development of a National Spaceport Network, consisting of current and prospective commercial spaceports, government-owned-and-operated launch & landing sites, and privately-owned-and-operated launch & landing sites, offers an opportunity to increase the safety, capacity, efficiency, and resiliency of the nation's space operations. ... The purpose of this National Spaceport Network Development Plan is to provide the information needed to assist in the development of a network of spaceports in the U.S. that would support civil, commercial, and national security requirements for access to space.

External links [ edit ] Official website Office of Commercial Space Transportation in the Federal Register Federal Aviation Administration Department of Transportation (DOT) Electronic Code of Federal Regulations v t e Public-sector space agencies Africa Pan-African and pan-Arab RASCOM Arabsat National ASAL EgSA NARSS ESSTI GSSTC KSA NASRDA SANSA Americas North America CSA NASA NESDIS OSC FAA/AST FCC USSF USSPACECOM NRO Latin America and the Caribbean ALCE AEM CONAE ABE AEB DCTA INPE ITA CCE ABAE IVIC Asia Pan-Asian APSCO Central Asia KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VK TNSA 1 East Asia CNSA SASTIND CASC CALT CAST CCF CGWIC PLAASF CASIC JAXA ISAS JSS NICT NATA KASA KARI KASI SaTReC TASA South Asia SPARRSO ISRO 2 Antrix Corp DoS NRSC DSA SUPARCO Southeast Asia BRIN ORPA INASA MYSA PhilSA SSTL GISTDA VNSC West Asia ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 NSSA NEHSA ISA ISRC ISA NCSR SSA KACST-SRI SSA 2 GORS TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY UAESA ( MBRSC ) Europe Pan-European CEN / CENELEC CEPT ETSI Eurocontrol ECAC ESA ECSS ESTEC EAC ESRIN ECSAT ESAC ESOC ESTRACK Guiana Space Centre EUMETSAT EUTELSAT IGO ESO EU and EEA DG DEFIS EUSPA EU SatCen EASA BEREC ALR 2 BELSPO BIRA-IASB SRTI 2 CSO 2 DTU Space ESO 1 CNES 2 AAE CdE DLR 2 HSA HSO 2 ASI LSA LSO 1 SRON NSO NOSA POLSA 2 CBK PAN UKE KRRiT ORO ULC PTSPACE ROSA 2 INTA AEC EAE AEE SNSA Other ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 BSA 1 KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VVKO SSO TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY SSAU 1 UKSA 2 Oceania ASA CSIRO NZSA World CCSDS CEOS COSPAR IPDA Cospas-Sarsat GEO GSC IADC ICSMD IMSO ISECG ISS MCB ITSO Intersputnik ODCWG ITU-R UNCOPUOS UNOOSA UNOSAT Former BNSC KCST LAPAN NAL NASDA SSP MOM Interkosmos See also: Timeline of first orbital launches by country 1 Preceded by the Soviet space program 2 Preceded by Interkosmos participation Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qgv4k
Cached time: 20250814230355
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.751 seconds
Real time usage: 0.956 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9852/1000000
Revision size: 26781/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 228587/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13326/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 74/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 98687/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.354/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8730974/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  738.865      1 -total
 50.58%  373.720      5 Template:Navbox
 28.87%  213.295      1 Template:Public-sector_space_agencies
 28.59%  211.215      2 Template:Reflist
 20.57%  152.004    105 Template:Flag_decoration
 20.02%  147.890     16 Template:Cite_web
 13.55%  100.127      1 Template:United_States_space_program_sidebar
 13.29%   98.183      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.43%   77.033      7 Template:Citation_needed
  8.97%   66.299      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1800820:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814230355 and revision id 1295974480. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Office_of_Commercial_Space_Transportation&oldid=1295974480 " Categories : Federal Aviation Administration Commercial spaceflight Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012 This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 01:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Office of Commercial Space Transportation Add languages Add topic

