Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sources of rules Toggle Sources of rules subsection 1.1 Customary international law and soft law 1.2 Treaty law 1.2.1 1977 Environmental Modification Convention 1.2.2 Other relevant treaties 2 Application of the law Toggle Application of the law subsection 2.1 International law of war and armed conflict and general rules of environmental protection 2.2 International environmental law during war and armed conflict 2.2.1 Thermonuclear war 3 Organisations 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents War and environmental law 4 languages العربية فارسی Hausa Igbo Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( May 2025 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "War and environmental law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Environmental law Pollution control law Environmental impact assessment Air quality law Water quality law Waste management law Environmental cleanup law Natural resources law Species protection Water resources law Mining law Forestry law Fisheries law Game law Reference materials Environmental journals International environmental agreements Environmental laws by country Environmental lawsuits Environmental ministries Supranational environmental agencies Related topics Administrative law Bankruptcy law Climate change litigation Earth jurisprudence Earth law Ecocide Energy law Environmental crime poaching Environmental personhood Environmental justice Insurance law International law Land law Land use Law of the sea Property law Public trust doctrine Rights of nature Right to a healthy environment War and environmental law Wild law v t e Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e War can heavily damage the environment, and warring countries often place operational requirements ahead of environmental concerns for the duration of the war . Some international law is designed to limit this environmental harm.

Flooding in Kherson after the Kakhovka Dam , under control by Russia's military during the Russian invasion of Ukraine , was blown up .

War and military activities have obvious detrimental impacts on the environment.

[ 1 ] Weaponry, troop movements, land mines , creation and destruction of buildings, destruction of forests by defoliation or general military usage, poisoning of water sources, target-shooting of animals for practice, consumption of endangered species out of desperation etc., are just some of the examples of how both war and peacetime military activities (such as training, base construction, and transportation of weaponry) harm the environment. " Scorched earth " and " poisoning the well " are classical examples of such impact. Recent examples include the oil dump and fire by Iraq in Kuwait 1990/1991 , depleted uranium use in Kosovo 1999 , air fuel explosives use in Afghanistan since 2001 .

From a legal standpoint, environmental protection during times of war and military activities is addressed partially by international environmental law . Further sources are also found in areas of law such as general international law, the laws of war , human rights law and local laws of each affected country.  However, this article is chiefly focused on the environment and as soon as two countries are battling it out, the issue becomes one of international concern. Thus, international environmental law that the United Nations Security Council enforces is the focus here. The law of armed conflict is not very well developed in comparison to other areas of international law.  Only the United Nations Security Council has the authority and the jurisdiction to regulate its development and implementation, or to monitor its observance.

Sources of rules [ edit ] Customary international law and soft law [ edit ] Customary international law and soft law documents address the protection of the environment during times of armed conflict and military activities. The International Law Commission (ILC) has drafted a Code of Offences Against the Peace and Security of Mankind (1954).

[ 2 ] "Man and his environment must be spared the effects of nuclear weapons and all other means of mass destruction. States must strive to reach prompt agreement, in the relevant international organs, on the elimination and complete destruction of such weapons": Principle 26 of the 1972 Stockholm Declaration → Chapter 11 of the Brundtland Report: Peace, Security, Development, and the Environment. World Charter of Nature 1982: "Nature shall be secured against degradation caused by warfare or other hostile activities." "Warfare is inherently destructive of sustainable development. States shall therefore respect international law providing protection for the environment in times of armed conflict and cooperate in its further development, as necessary": Principle 24 1992 Rio Declaration → paragraph 39.6 of the Agenda 21: "measures in accordance with international law should be considered to address, in times of armed conflict, large-scale destruction of the environment that cannot be justified under international law".

UN General Assembly Resolution 47/37 (1992) provides: [ 3 ] "[D]estruction of the environment, not justified by military necessity and carried out wantonly, is clearly contrary to existing international law." Treaty law [ edit ] Several United Nations treaties, including the Fourth Geneva Convention , the 1972 World Heritage Convention and the 1977 Environmental Modification Convention have provisions to limit the environmental impacts of war or military activities.

Iraq was liable under international law for the 'environmental damage and the depletion of
natural resources' resulting from the unlawful invasion and occupation
of Kuwait: United Nations Security Council Resolution 687 (1991) .

"Destruction of the environment, not justified by military necessity and carried out wantonly, is clearly contrary to existing international law": UN General Assembly Resolution 47/37 (1992) .

1977 Environmental Modification Convention [ edit ] The Environmental Modification Convention is an international treaty prohibiting the military or other hostile use of environmental modification techniques having widespread, long-lasting or severe effects. The Convention bans weather warfare, which is the use of weather modification techniques for the purposes of inducing damage or destruction. This treaty is in force and has been ratified (accepted as binding) by leading military powers.
The treaty has only limited ratification. It prohibits parties from engaging in 'military or any
other hostile use of environmental modification techniques having
widespread, longlasting or severe effects as the means of destruction,
damage or injury' to any other party ← Agent Orange use in Vietnam.

Other relevant treaties [ edit ] 1925 Geneva Gas Protocol 1949 Geneva Convention IV art. 53(4) ← Hague Regulations art. 23(g): prohibition of destruction by occupying power except absolute military need 1972 Biological Weapons Convention 1980 Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and its 5 protocols: Protocol III (incendiary weapons) art. 2(4) (forest and plant cover); 2003 Protocol V (clearance of explosive remnants) ← 1997 Anti-Personnel Mines Convention (Ottawa Treaty) ; → 2008 Convention on Cluster Munitions 1972 World Heritage Convention 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention : not covering herbicides or effects on flora Application of the law [ edit ] International law of war and armed conflict and general rules of environmental protection [ edit ] The starting point is that the natural environment is a civilian object under international humanitarian law. Unless otherwise provided, inhabitants and belligerents are "under the protection and the rule of the principles of the law
of nations, as they result from the usages established among
civilised peoples, from the laws of humanity and the dictates of
public conscience": ' Martens Clause ' (Preamble, 1907 Hague Convention IV Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land). Art. 22 limits the right of belligerents to adopt means of injuring the enemy.

Arts. 35(3) (prohibition of methods) and 55 (due care) of 1977 Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions (wide but not universal ratification) provide additional protection for the environment. "Taken together, these provisions embody a general obligation to protect the natural environment against widespread, long-term and severe environmental damage ; the prohibition of methods and means of warfare which are intended, or may be expected, to cause such damage; and the prohibition of attacks against the natural environment by way of reprisals ": para 31, ICJ Advisory Opinion on Nuclear Weapons 1996; see also ICJ applications Yugoslavia v UK 1999, DR Congo v Rwanda 2002.

"Uganda, by acts of looting, plundering and
exploitation of Congolese natural resources committed by members of
the Ugandan armed forces in the territory of the Democratic Republic of the  Congo and by its failure to comply with its obligations as an occupying Power in Ituri district to prevent acts of looting, plundering and
exploitation of Congolese natural resources, violated obligations owed to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo under international law": ICJ judgment DR Congo v Uganda (Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo) 2005 .

"Works or installations containing dangerous forces, namely dams, dykes and nuclear electrical generating stations, shall not be made the object of attack, even where these objects are military objectives, if such attack may cause the release of dangerous forces and consequent severe losses among the civilian population.":  art. 15 of the 1977 Additional Protocol II (non-international armed conflicts, less widely ratified than AP I); similarly art. 56(1) of the 1977 Additional Protocol I for international armed conflicts.

"Intentionally  launching  an  attack  in  the  knowledge  that  such  attack will  cause  incidental  loss  of  life  or  injury  to  civilians  or  damage  to civilian  objects  or  widespread,  long-term  and  severe  damage  to  the natural  environment  which  would  be  clearly  excessive  in  relation  to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated" is a war crime, being  a "serious violations of the laws and customs applicable in international armed  conflict,  within  the  established  framework  of  international  law": art. 8(2)(b)(iv) Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

To summarize: "The general principles on the conduct of hostilities apply to the natural environment: A. No part of the natural environment may be attacked, unless it is a military objective. B. Destruction of any part of the natural environment is prohibited, unless required by imperative military necessity. C. Launching an attack against a military objective which may be expected to cause incidental damage to the environment which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated is prohibited": ICRC Customary IHL Rule 43 (Application of General Principles on the Conduct of Hostilities to the Natural Environment). Some states insist such rules (incl. Additional Protocol I) only apply to conventional weapons and do not apply to nuclear weapons. See also Rules 44 (due regard) and 45 (serious damage) .

ILC Draft Principles on protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts : Special Rapporteur Marie G. Jacobsson considered from 2013 to 2015  obligations before, during, and after an armed conflict and proposed 5 draft jus in bello principles (proportionality, distinction, precaution, no reprisal, protected zones) among others.
Special Rapporteur Marja Lehto continued in 2018 with some 21 draft principles covering all 3 phases plus occupation. As of mid-2019, some 28  principles (incl. re non-state actors) have been provisionally adopted by the Drafting Committee with the following parts: Introduction – Principles of general application – Principles applicable during armed conflict – Principles applicable in situations of occupation – Principles applicable after armed conflict.

International environmental law during war and armed conflict [ edit ] Some environmental treaties have express provisions about military and conflicts; others need to rely on rebus sic stantibus (art. 62 VCLT) to interpret during wartime → 2011 ILC Draft Articles on the Effects of Armed Conflict on Treaties : environmental treaties continue unless express provision otherwise.

Thermonuclear war [ edit ] The International Court of Justice advisory opinion on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons considered the environment as a minor issue in regard to the legality of thermonuclear war but it did not find all thermonuclear war to be prohibited.

"The Court does not consider that the treaties in question could have
intended to deprive a State of the exercise of its right of self-defence under international law because of its obligations to protect the environment. Nonetheless, States must take environmental considerations into account when assessing what is necessary and proportionate in the pursuit of legitimate military objectives. Respect for the environment is one of the elements that go to assessing whether an action is in conformity with the principles of necessity and proportionality": para 30, ICJ Advisory Opinion on Nuclear Weapons 1996 .

Organisations [ edit ] International organisations with environmental mandates may be called upon during times of armed conflict to assist with mediating or remedying damage caused by armed conflict, e.g.

UN Environment Programme (UNEP), the World Health Organization , the International Civil Aviation Organization , the International Maritime Organization (IMO), and the International Committee of the Red Cross .

[ 4 ] The UN Security Council has also demonstrated environmental concern in deliberations on recent conflicts, for example, during the 1991 Gulf War . UNEP and IMO were also involved in this conflict, attempting to remedy the most serious of the environmental impacts.

References [ edit ] ^ "EarthTrends: Feature - Armed Conflict, Refugees, and the Environment" . March 8, 2006. Archived from the original on 8 March 2006.

^ "Code of Offences Against the Peace and Security of Mankind" (PDF) .

^ "A/RES/47/37 - E - UN General Assembly Resolution 47/37 (1992)" .

undocs.org .

^ "Guidelines on protection of natural environment in armed conflict" .

International Committee of the Red Cross . September 21, 2020.

External links [ edit ] Chapter Seventeen: National Security, the Law of War and Environmental Protection Hunter, Salzman and Daelke: book excerpt International Environmental Law and Naval War: The Effect of Marine Safety and Pollution Conventions During International Armed Conflict Protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts — Texts, instruments and final reports — International Law Commission Protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts :: draft resolution GUIDELINES ON THE PROTECTION OF THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT IN ARMED CONFLICT v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=War_and_environmental_law&oldid=1290084561 " Categories : Law of war International environmental law Environmental impact of war Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles needing additional references from November 2015 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2021 All articles with style issues Wikipedia external links cleanup from November 2024 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 18:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents War and environmental law 4 languages Add topic

