Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Ecclesiastical history Toggle Ecclesiastical history subsection 2.1 Titular see 3 Remains 4 Legend 5 Cultural references 6 Accessibility 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources and external links Toggle the table of contents Tindari 24 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latina Latviešu Nederlands Нохчийн Português Русский Sicilianu Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°08′44″N 15°02′23″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.14556°N 15.03972°E ﻿ / 38.14556; 15.03972 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Frazione of Italy "Tyndaris" redirects here. For the genus of beetles, see Tyndaris (genus) .

Tindari Lu Tìnnaru ( Sicilian ) Tyndaris ( Greek ) Ancient Propylaeum Gate and Arch Shown within Sicily Alternative name Tyndaris Tyndarion Location Patti , Italy Coordinates 38°08′44″N 15°02′23″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.14556°N 15.03972°E ﻿ / 38.14556; 15.03972 Type Settlement History Periods Archaic Greek to Byzantine period Cultures Ancient Greece Tindari ( Italian: [ˈtindari] ; Sicilian : Lu Tìnnaru [lʊ ˈtinnaɾʊ] ), ancient Tyndaris ( Ancient Greek : Τυνδαρίς , Strab.

) or Tyndarion ( Τυνδάριον , Ptol.

), is a small town, frazione (suburb or municipal component) in the comune of Patti and a Latin Catholic titular see .

The monumental ruins of ancient Tyndaris are a main attraction for visitors and excavations are continuing to reveal more parts of the city.

Tindari has a famous sanctuary and is also famous for the poem Vento a Tindari , written by Salvatore Quasimodo .

History [ edit ] The monumental propylaeum gate from the inside Roman Domus Ancient Tyndaris was strategically situated on its prominent hill overlooking the wide bay of the Tyrrhenian Sea bounded by the Capo di Milazzo on the east, and the Capo Calavà on the west.

[ citation needed ] It was connected by a comparatively narrow isthmus with the lower ground inland. It thus commanded views of the summit of Mount Etna and northwards to the Lipari Islands.

[ 1 ] It was one of the latest of all the cities in Sicily that could claim a purely Greek origin, having been founded by the elder Dionysius in 396 or 395 BC in Magna Graecia ; the site is so strategic that it is a surprise it was not occupied earlier.

[ 1 ] The original settlers were the remains of the Messenian exiles, who had been driven from Naupactus , Zacynthus , and the Peloponnese by the Spartans after the close of the Peloponnesian War . These had at first been established by Dionysius at Messana, when he repeopled that city; but the Spartans having taken umbrage at this, he transferred them to the site of Tyndaris, which had previously been included in the territory of Abacaenum . The colonists themselves gave to their new city the name of Tyndaris, from their native divinities, the "Tyndaridae" or Dioscuri , and readily admitting fresh citizens from other quarters, soon raised their whole population to the number of 5000 citizens.

[ 2 ] The new city thus rose at once to be a place of considerable importance.

It is next mentioned in 344 BC, when it was one of the first cities that declared in favor of Timoleon after his landing in Sicily.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] At a later period we find it mentioned as espousing the cause of Hieron , and supporting him during his war against the Mamertines, 269 BC. On that occasion he rested his position upon Tyndaris on the left, and on Tauromenium (modern Taormina ) on the right.

[ 4 ] Indeed, the strong position of Tyndaris made it an important strategic post on the Tyrrhenian sea, as Tauromenium was on the Sicilian sea, and hence we find it frequently mentioned in accounts of subsequent wars. In the First Punic War it was at first dependent upon Carthage ; and though the citizens, alarmed at the progress of the Roman armies, were at one time on the point of turning to Rome, they were restrained by the Carthaginians, who carried off all the chief citizens as hostages.

[ 5 ] In 257 BC, the Battle of Tyndaris took place off the coast of Tyndaris, between the city and the Liparaean islands , in which a Roman fleet under Gaius Atilius Regulus obtained some advantage over the Carthaginian fleet, but without any decisive result.

[ 6 ] The Roman fleet is described on that occasion as touching at the promontory of Tyndaris, but the city had not yet fallen into their hands, and it was not until after the fall of Panormus (modern Palermo ) in 254 BC that Tyndaris expelled the Carthaginian garrison and joined the Roman alliance.

[ 7 ] We hear little of Tyndaris under Roman government, but it appears to have been a flourishing and considerable city.

[ 1 ] Cicero calls it nobilissima civitas [ 8 ] and we learn from him that the inhabitants had displayed their zeal and fidelity towards the Romans upon many occasions. Among others they supplied naval forces for the armament of Scipio Africanus the Younger , a service for which he repaid them by restoring to them a statue of Mercury which had been carried off by the Carthaginians and which continued as an object of great veneration in the city, until it was stolen by the rapacious Verres .

[ 9 ] Tyndaris was also one of seventeen cities selected by the Roman senate , apparently as an honorary distinction, to contribute to certain offerings to the temple of Venus at Eryx .

[ 10 ] In other respects it had no peculiar privileges, and was in the condition of an ordinary municipal town , with its own magistrates, local senate, etc., but was certainly in the time of Cicero one of the most considerable places in the island. It, however, suffered severely from the exactions of Verres [ 11 ] and the inhabitants, to revenge themselves on their oppressor, publicly demolished his statue as soon as he had quit the island.

[ 12 ] Tyndaris again bore a considerable part in the Sicilian revolt between Sextus Pompeius and Octavian . It was one of the points occupied and fortified by the former, [ 1 ] when preparing for the defence of the Sicilian straits, but was taken by Agrippa after his naval victory at Mylae , and became one of his chief posts, from which he carried on offensive warfare against Pompey.

[ 13 ] Subsequently, to this we hear nothing more of Tyndaris in history; but there is no doubt of its having continued to subsist throughout the period of the Roman Empire .

Strabo speaks of it as one of the places on the north coast of Sicily which, in his time, still deserved the name of cities; and Pliny gives it the title of a Colonia . It is probable that it received a colony under Augustus, as we find it bearing in an inscription the titles of Colonia Augusta Tyndaritanorum .

[ 14 ] Pliny indeed mentions a great calamity which the city had sustained, when (he tells us) half of it was swallowed up by the sea, probably from an earthquake having caused the fall of part of the hill on which it stands, but we have no clue to the date of this event.

[ 1 ] [ 15 ] The Itineraries attest the existence of Tyndaris, apparently still as a considerable place, in the fourth century.

[ 16 ] Ecclesiastical history [ edit ] Lagoon of Tindari included in the nature reserve of Marinello.

Established in 498 as Diocese of Tindari (Italian) / Tyndaris (Latin) / Tyndaritan(us) (Latin adjective). In the early 7th century Sicily had no Metropolitan see , so although politically part of the Byzantine empire , all its bishoprics were in the sway of the papal ('Western') Patriarchate of Rome as (exempt) suffragan dioceses of Rome. During the conflict on Iconoclasm , Byzantine emperor Leo III the Isaurian transferred all Sicily to his capital's Patriarchate of Constantinople (circa 732); in the 8th or 9th century, the newly created Metropolitan Archdiocese of Syracuse was given all Sicilian bishoprics as suffragans, including Tindari, where no bishops were recorded since 649.

Although the Notitia Episcopatuum under emperor Leo VI (early 10th century) still lists Tindari among the suffragans of Syracuse, that probably was just canonical theory, as in 836 Tindari was conquered for Islam by Arabs and nothing is heard from the diocese.

Formally suppressed in 880 without direct successor, but lost (some) territory in 1082 to establish the short-lived Diocese of Troina (suppressed in 1098 to establish the Diocese of Messina ). When Sicilia was again conquered and Christianize by the Normans in the 11th century, the bishopric wasn't restored, its territory rather assigned to the new Diocese of Patti .

Titular see [ edit ] The diocese was nominally restored in 1968 as Latin Titular bishopric of Tindari (Curiate Italian) / Tyndaris (Latin) / Tyndaritan(us) (Latin adjective) Remains [ edit ] Theatre By the 19th century, the site of Tyndaris was wholly deserted, but the name was retained by a church, which crowned the most elevated point of the hill on which the city formerly stood, and was still called the Madonna di Tindaro. It is c. 180 m above the sea-level, and forms a conspicuous landmark to sailors. Considerable ruins of the ancient city, are also visible. It occupied the whole plateau or summit of the hill, and the remains of the ancient walls may be traced, at intervals, all round the brow of the cliffs, except in one part, facing the sea, where the cliff is now quite precipitous. It is not improbable that it is here that a part of the cliff fell in, in the manner recorded by Pliny [ 17 ] Two gates of the city are also still distinctly to be traced.

The chief monuments, of which the ruins are still extant within the circuit of the walls, are: the theatre, of which the remains are in imperfect condition, but sufficient to show that it was not of large size, and apparently of Roman construction, or at least, like that of Tauromenium, rebuilt in Roman times upon the Greek foundations a propylaeum with two handsome stone arches (previously called a Gymnasium) several other edifices of Roman times, but of wholly uncertain character, a mosaic pavement and some Roman tombs.

[ 18 ] Numerous inscriptions, fragments of sculpture, and architectural decorations, as well as coins, vases etc. have also been discovered on the site.

Includes vignettes of the British fleet commanded by Admiral John Byng in the Battle of Capo Passero (1718), and landing at Tindari (1719).

Sanctuary of Tindari.

The Black Madonna of Tindari celebrated the 7–8 September, inscribed NIGRA SUM SED FORMOSA , meaning "I am black but beautiful".

Legend [ edit ] Local legend tells that the lagoon was created after a pilgrim who came to see the Madonna refused to pray to the Madonna because she was black . The woman accidentally dropped her baby into the ocean and the Madonna made the land rise to save the baby.  The sands of Marinello have taken shape of the profile of the Madonna.

Cultural references [ edit ] An episode of Inspector Montalbano was called "Excursion to Tindari". It ends with four of the main characters overlooking the bay.

[ 19 ] Salvatore Quasimodo , who would later win the Nobel prize for literature, in 1930 published a poem entitled "Vento a Tindari" (Wind at Tindari).

Accessibility [ edit ] By car, if you come from Falcone, of Autostrada Messina-Palermo take Palermo direction along SS 113.

But Tindari and its Church are reachable by trains run by Trenitalia , including services from Messina with the Oliveri railway station situated on the Palermo–Messina railway. Outside of the station is available an Uber service by app.

Tindari is also served by bus provided from Azienda Siciliana Trasporti .

See also [ edit ] History portal List of Catholic dioceses in Italy References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Ashby 1911 .

^ Diodorus xiv. 78.

^ Diod. xvi. 69.

^ Diod. xxii. Exc. H. p. 499.

^ Diod. xxiii. p. 502.

^ Polybius i. 25; Zonar. viii. 12.

^ Diod. xxiii. p. 505.

^ In Verrem iii. 43.

^ Cicero, In Verrem iv. 3. 9-42, v. 47.

^ Cicero In Verrem v. 47; Zumpt, ad loc.

; Diod. iv. 83.

^ Cicero In Verrem ll. cc.

.

^ Cicero In Verrem ii. 66.

^ Appian, B.C.

v. 105, 109, 116.

^ Strabo vi. p. 272; Plin. iii. 8. s. 14; Ptol. iii. 4. § 2; Orell.

Inscr.

955.

^ Pliny ii. 92. s. 94.

^ Itin. Ant. pp. 90, 93; Tab. Peut.

^ ii. 92. s. 94.

^ Serra di Falco, Antichità della Sicilia , vol. v. part vi.; William Henry Smyth Sicily , p. 101; Richard Hoare , Classical Tour , vol. ii. p. 217, etc.

^ "Excursion to Tindari" . Retrieved 16 March 2015 .

Sources and external links [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1854–1857).

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography . London: John Murray.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Ashby, Thomas (1911). " Tyndaris ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 27 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 500.

GCatholic - former and titular bishopric Fasolo Michele (December 10, 2013).

Tyndaris e il suo territorio I: Introduzione alla carta archeologica del territorio di Tindari . MediaGEO.

ISBN 978-88-908755-1-9 .

Diocese of Patti on BeWeB - Beni ecclesiastici in web Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tindari .

Bibliography Fasolo, Michele (2013).

Tyndaris e il suo territorio I.Introduzione alla carta archeologica del territorio di Tindari (in Italian). Rome: mediaGEO.

ISBN 978-88-908755-1-9 .

Fasolo, Michele (2014).

Tyndaris e il suo territorio II. Carta archeologica del territorio di Tindari e materiali (in Italian). Rome: mediaGEO.

ISBN 978-88-908755-2-6 .

Rocco Pirri, Sicilia sacra , vol. I, Palermo 1733, p. 493 Giuseppe Cappelletti, Le Chiese d'Italia dalla loro origine sino ai nostri giorni , Venice 1870, vol. XXI, pp. 587–588 Francesco Lanzoni, Le diocesi d'Italia dalle origini al principio del secolo VII (an. 604) , vol. II, Faenza 1927, p. 650 v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Archaeological sites in Sicily Province of Agrigento Heraclea Minoa Akragas Valle dei Templi - Temple of Concordia - Temple of Heracles - Temple of Juno - Temple of Olympian Zeus Province of Caltanissetta Gela Bosco Littorio Greek baths of Gela Gibil Gabib Monte Bubbonia Polizzello archaeological site Sabucina Vassallaggi Province of Catania Aetna (city) Katáne Amphitheatre of Catania Roman Theatre of Catania Palike Sant'Ippolito (Caltagirone) Province of Enna Centuripe Morgantina Villa Romana del Casale Villa of Geraci Province of Messina Abacaenum Halaesa Naxos Ancient theatre of Taormina Tindari Villa Romana di Patti Villa Romana Bagnoli Province of Palermo Entella Grotta dell'Addaura Hippana Ietas Himera Pirama Soluntum Province of Ragusa Akrillai Hybla Heraea Kamarina Kaukana Province of Syracuse Akrai Santoni Casmenae Cava del Rivettazzo Colonne di San Basilio Helorus Netum Megara Hyblaea Syrakousai Roman amphitheatre of Syracuse Altar of Hieron Ear of Dionysius Galermi Aqueduct Greek Theatre of Syracuse Grotta del Ninfeo Temple of Athena Temple of Apollo Necropolis of Cassibile Necropolis of Pantalica Thapsos Villa Romana del Tellaro Province of Trapani Eryx / Erice Drepanum Halyciae Grotta del Genovese Monte Polizzo Motya Segesta Selinunte Temple C Temple E Temple F Cave di Cusa Roman furnaces in Alcamo Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Geographic Pleiades Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tindari&oldid=1281073772 " Categories : Frazioni of the Metropolitan City of Messina Ancient cities in Sicily Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Italy Archaeological sites in Sicily Colonies of Magna Graecia Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Sicilian-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA Pages with Sicilian IPA Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRG with no article parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRG Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons link from Wikidata CS1 Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 18 March 2025, at 03:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tindari 24 languages Add topic

