Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Significant appointments 4 Published works 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Marigold Linton 1 language Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Native American cognitive psychologist (born 1936) Marigold Linton PhD Born 1936 (age 88–89) Banning, California Citizenship Morongo Band of Mission Indians and U.S.

Occupation(s) professor, psychologist Board member of Society for Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science , National Indian Education Association Relatives Antonio Garra ( Cupeño , ca. 1800–1852) Academic background Alma mater University of California, Riverside Thesis A Test of the Two Parameter Definition of Drive (D) and the Influence of Drive Upon Learning (sHr) (1958) Academic work Discipline cognitive psychology Institutions San Diego State University , Arizona State University , University of Kansas , University of Texas Marigold Linton (born 1936) is a Native American cognitive psychologist and citizen of the Morongo Band of Cahuilla Mission Indians . In 1964, she became the first Native American to earn a doctorate in psychology.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In 1974, she co–founded the National Indian Education Association. Her research in long-term memory is widely cited in psychology. She is director for mathematics and science initiatives in the University of Texas system, where she is responsible for bringing minority students into those two fields. She has been president of the Society for Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Early life [ edit ] Marigold Lorelei Linton was born in Banning, California , in 1936 and is Cahuilla and Cupeño .
A great-great-granddaughter of Antonio Garra , war chief of the Cupeno who organized an 1847 Indian insurrection against Agoston Haraszthy , San Diego County's first sheriff, [ 5 ] Marigold Linton was 
born on the Morongo Reservation in Southern California. Her grandfather was Sadakichi Hartmann .

[ 6 ] Raised in poverty, she overcame hardship and adversity to become in 1954 the first Indian from a California reservation to attend college. Attending the newly opened University of California, Riverside , she earned straight As to obtain her B.A. in Psychology and completed two publications by the time she entered graduate school at the University of Iowa , eventually obtaining her Ph.D. from UCLA .

[ 2 ] She received her PhD in 1964, and this made her the first Native American to earn a doctorate in psychology.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Career [ edit ] To support biomedical research for American Indian students and faculty at the University of Kansas and Haskell Indian Nations University she collaborated and help develop funding for the Bridges to the Baccalaureate programs, Initiative for Maximizing Student Development (IMSD), Research Initiative for Scientific Enhancement (RISE), Post Baccalaureate Research Education Program (PREP), and the Institutional Research and Academic Career Development Award (IRACDA).

[ 7 ] Helped raise more than $18 million in grants for the Kansas-Haskell partnership.

[ 8 ] One of the founding member of SACNAS (Society for Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science). SACNAS advocates opportunities in science education for Chicano/Latino, Native American, and other underrepresented minority students to excel in science based careers. SACNAS is composed of students, K-12 educators, administrators, industry scientists, and science professors. From 2004 until 2007 Linton was the President of SACNAS Board of Directors.

[ 8 ] She collaborated with others in founding the National Indian Education Association . The NIEA was established in 1969. The NIEA is a non-profit advocacy organization that helps ensure that American Indian, Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian educators, tribal leaders, school administrators, teachers, parents, and students, have a voice in education. The NIEA today has more than 10,000 members.

[ 8 ] Significant appointments [ edit ] She has had a number of significant national appointments including: Committee on Equality of Opportunity in Science and Engineering (CEOSE), congressionally mandated NSF Committee (2006-2009); NIH National Institutes of General Medical Science, National Advisory Research Resources Council (1982-1986); Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching , Board of Directors (1977-1985); National Research Council, Committee on Assessment for NIH Minority Research/Training Programs, III (2001-2004); and the National Academy of Sciences , Fellowship Office Advisory Committee (2009-2011).

[ 7 ] Published works [ edit ] Linton, M. (1982) 'Transformations of memory in everyday life', in Neisser, U. (ed.) Memory Observed: Remembering in Natural Contexts , San Francisco, Freeman.

Linton, M. (1986) 'Ways of searching and the contents of memory', in Rubin, D.C. (ed.) Autobiographical Memory , Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Gazette, JAMES FOLMER, Record (17 August 2017).

"Dragonfly Gala honors remarkable American Indian women" .

Banning Record Gazette .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c "Linton Breaks Education Barrier" .

www.planningcommunications.com .

^ [1] Archived February 8, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ^ [2] at Page 107.

^ [3] Archived June 14, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ Rear View: King of the Bohemians Palm Springs Life, May 2007 ^ a b "Marigold Linton, PhD (Cahuilla-Cupeno) | SACNAS" .

sacnas.org . Retrieved 2017-03-17 .

^ a b c "Marigold Linton American Indian pyschologist" .

aianhealthcareers.org . Archived from the original on 2016-12-25 . Retrieved 2017-03-17 .

External links [ edit ] Biography at the SACNAS Biography Project Marigold Linton Scholarship and brief biography Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Netherlands Israel Academics CiNii Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marigold_Linton&oldid=1286449919 " Categories : American women psychologists University of California, Riverside alumni Cupeño Cahuilla people Serrano people 1936 births Living people 20th-century Native American women 21st-century Native American women Native American women scientists 20th-century Native American scientists 21st-century Native American scientists Scientists from California Native American people from California 21st-century American psychologists 20th-century American psychologists Morongo Band of Mission Indians Graduate Women in Science members Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 20 April 2025, at 00:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marigold Linton 1 language Add topic

