Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Objectives 2 Conclusions 3 Reaction 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change (2005 conference) 2 languages Español Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Avoiding dangerous climate change ) 2005 conference on its consequences "Avoiding dangerous climate change" redirects here. For the wider concept, see Climate change mitigation .

In 2005, an international conference titled Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change: A Scientific Symposium on Stabilisation of Greenhouse Gases examined the link between atmospheric greenhouse gas concentration and global warming and its effects .  The conference name was derived from Article 2 of the charter for the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change [ 1 ] The conference explored the possible impacts at different levels of greenhouse gas emissions and how the climate might be stabilized at a desired level.  The conference took place under the United Kingdom 's presidency of the G8 , with the participation of around 200 "internationally renowned" scientists from 30 countries. It was chaired by Dennis Tirpak and hosted by the Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research in Exeter , from 1 February to 3 February.

[ 2 ] The conference was one of many meetings leading up to the 2015 Paris Agreement , at which the international community agreed to limit global warming to no more than 2 °C in order to have a 50-50 chance of avoiding dangerous climate change.

[ citation needed ] Objectives [ edit ] Global carbon dioxide emissions through year 2004 Global average surface temperature 1880 to 2015, with a zero variance point set at the average temperature between 1961 and 1990 The conference was called to bring together the latest research into what would be necessary to achieve the objective of the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change : to achieve, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Convention, stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.

It was also intended to encourage further research in the area. In the 2001 IPCC Third Assessment Report , an initial assessment of the subject had been included; however, the topic had received relatively little international discussion.

[ 3 ] Specifically, the conference explored three issues: For different levels of climate change what are the key impacts, for different regions and sectors and for the world as a whole?

What would such levels of climate change imply in terms of greenhouse gas stabilisation concentrations and emission pathways required to achieve such levels?

What options are there for achieving stabilisation of greenhouse gases at different stabilisation concentrations in the atmosphere, taking into account costs and uncertainties?

Conclusions [ edit ] Among the conclusions reached, the most significant was a new assessment of the link between the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and the increase in global temperature levels. Some researchers have argued that the most serious consequences of global warming might be avoided if global average temperatures rose by no more than 2 °C (3.6 °F) above pre-industrial levels. It had generally been assumed that this would occur if greenhouse gas concentrations rose above 550 ppm carbon dioxide equivalent by volume. This concentration was, for example, informing government in certain countries, including the European Union .

[ 4 ] The conference concluded that, at the level of 550 ppm, it was likely that 2 °C would be exceeded, according to the projections of more recent climate models . Stabilising greenhouse gas concentrations at 450 ppm  would only result in a 50% likelihood of limiting global warming to 2 °C, and that it would be necessary to achieve stabilisation below 400 ppm to give a relatively high certainty of not exceeding 2 °C.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The conference also claimed that, if action to reduce emissions is delayed by 20 years, rates of emission reduction may need to be 3 to 7 times greater to meet the same temperature target.

[ 5 ] Reaction [ edit ] As a result of changing opinion on the 'safe' atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases, to which this conference contributed, the UK government changed the target in the Climate Change Act from 60% to 80% by 2050.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Energy portal 4 Degrees and Beyond International Climate Conference Action on climate change Climate change mitigation scenarios Environmental impact of aviation Hypermobility (travel) Index of climate change articles References [ edit ] ^ "Article 2" (PDF) .

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .

^ "Climate Stabilisation Conference - Exeter 2005" . (UK) Government News Network. 4 November 2004. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007 . Retrieved 15 March 2007 .

^ "Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change - Background" .

Met Office . 2005. Archived from the original on 2 February 2007 . Retrieved 16 March 2007 .

^ "Community Strategy on Climate Change - Council Conclusions" .

Council of the European Union . 22 June 1996. Archived from the original on 28 January 2008 . Retrieved 15 March 2007 .

^ a b "International Symposium on the Stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations - Report of the International Scientific Steering Committee" .

Met Office . 10 May 2005. Archived from the original on 18 March 2006 . Retrieved 15 March 2007 .

^ DEFRA (2006).

"Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 January 2017 . Retrieved 7 August 2018 .

^ "UK leads world with commitment to cut emissions by 80% by 2050" .

Department of Energy and Climate Change . 16 October 2008. Archived from the original on 20 October 2008 . Retrieved 28 October 2008 .

Further reading [ edit ] Related book: Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change , Editors: Hans Joachim Schellnhuber, Wolfgang Cramer, Nebojsa Nakicenovic, Tom Wigley, and Gary Yohe , Cambridge University Press, February 2006, ISBN 9780521864718 .

PDF version at the Wayback Machine (archived 2007-09-26) External links [ edit ] Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change - official conference website at the Library of Congress Web Archives (archived 2005-07-19) Tyndall Centre - A strategic assessment of scientific and behavioural perspectives on 'dangerous' climate change WWF-UK - 2°C Is Too Much! Evidence and Implications of Dangerous Climate Change in the Arctic Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency - Meeting the European Union 2°C climate target: global and regional emission implications Dr. James Hansen, Climate Scientist's web page at the Wayback Machine (archived 2004-12-04) News April 19, 2007, Reuters : World needs to axe greenhouse gases by 80 pct: report February 1, 2006, Euractive : UK chief scientific adviser: Keeping CO2 concentration below 450ppm is 'unfeasible' January 30, 2006, BBC : Stark warning over climate change January 30, 2006, BBC : Climate report: the main points January 29, 2006, Washington Post : Debate on Climate Shifts to Issue of Irreparable Change January 1, 2006, Times online : World has only 20 years to stop climate disaster February 3, 2005, Guardian Unlimited : Climate conference hears degree of danger v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Avoiding_Dangerous_Climate_Change_(2005_conference)&oldid=1294197153 " Categories : Climate change conferences 2005 in the environment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template other archives This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 06:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change (2005 conference) 2 languages Add topic

