Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Education 3 Professional registration 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Fire protection engineering 8 languages العربية Español हिन्दी မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 ไทย 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Formal approach to protecting against fires "Fire engineering" redirects here. For the magazine, see Fire Engineering (magazine) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fire protection engineering" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fire protection engineering is the application of science and engineering principles to protect people, property, and their environments from the harmful and destructive effects of fire and smoke. It encompasses engineering which focuses on fire detection , suppression and mitigation and fire safety engineering which focuses on human behavior and maintaining a tenable environment for evacuation from a fire. In the United States 'fire protection engineering' is often used to include 'fire safety engineering'.

The discipline of fire engineering includes, but is not exclusive to: Fire detection – fire alarm systems and brigade call systems Active fire protection – fire suppression systems Passive fire protection – fire and smoke barriers, space separation Smoke control and management Escape facilities – emergency exits , fire lifts , etc.

Building design , layout, and space planning Fire prevention programs Fire dynamics and fire modeling Human behavior during fire events Risk analysis , including economic factors Wildfire management [ 1 ] Fire protection engineers identify risks and design safeguards that aid in preventing, controlling, and mitigating the effects of fires. Fire engineers assist architects , building owners and developers in evaluating buildings' life safety and property protection goals. Fire engineers are also employed as fire investigators, including such very large-scale cases as the analysis of the collapse of the World Trade Center.

NASA uses fire engineers in its space program to help improve safety.

[ 2 ] Fire engineers are also employed to provide 3rd party review for performance based fire engineering solutions submitted in support of local building regulation applications.

History [ edit ] Fire engineering's roots date back to ancient Rome , when the Emperor Nero ordered the city to be rebuilt utilizing passive fire protection methods, such as space separation and non-combustible building materials, after a catastrophic fire .

[ 3 ] The discipline of fire engineering emerged in the early 20th century as a distinct discipline, separate from civil , mechanical and chemical engineering , in response to new fire problems posed by the Industrial Revolution . Fire protection engineers of this era concerned themselves with devising methods to protect large factories, particularly spinning mills and other manufacturing properties.

[ citation needed ] Another motivation to organize the discipline, define practices and conduct research to support innovations was in response to the catastrophic conflagrations and mass urban fires that swept many major cities during the latter half of the 19th century (see city or area fires ). The insurance industry also helped promote advancements in the fire engineering profession and the development of fire protection systems and equipment.

[ 3 ] In 1903 the first degree program in fire protection engineering was initiated as the Armour Institute of Technology (later becoming part of the Illinois Institute of Technology).

[ 4 ] As the 20th century emerged, several catastrophic fires [ 5 ] resulted in changes to buildings codes to better protect people and property from fire. It was only in the latter half of the 20th century that fire protection engineering emerged as a unique engineering profession.

[ citation needed ] The primary reason for this emergence was the development of the “body of knowledge,” specific to the profession that occurred after 1950.

[ citation needed ] Other factors contributing to the growth of the profession include the start of the Institution of Fire Engineers in 1918 in the UK, and the Society of Fire Protection Engineers in 1950 in the US, the emergence of independent fire protection consulting engineer, and the promulgation of engineering standards for fire protection.

[ citation needed ] Education [ edit ] Fire engineers, like their counterparts in other engineering and scientific disciplines, undertake a formal course of education and continuing professional development to acquire and maintain their competence. This education typically includes foundation studies in mathematics, physics, chemistry, and technical writing. Professional engineering studies focus students on acquiring proficiency in material science , statics , dynamics , thermodynamics , fluid dynamics , heat transfer , engineering economics , ethics , systems in engineering , reliability , and environmental psychology . Studies in combustion , probabilistic risk assessment or risk management , the design of fire suppression systems , fire alarm systems , building fire safety, and the application and interpretation of model building codes , and the measurement and simulation of fire phenomena complete most curricula.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] New Zealand was one of the first countries in the world to introduce performance based assessment methods into their building codes in regard to fire safety. This occurred with the introduction of their 1991 Building Act.

[ 8 ] Professor Andy Buchanan, [ 9 ] of the University of Canterbury , established the first post graduate and only course available in New Zealand, at the time, in fire safety engineering in 1995. Applicants to the course require a minimum qualification of a bachelor's degree in engineering or bachelor's degree in a limited list of science course. Notable alumni from the university of Canterbury include Sir Ernest Rutherford , Robert (Bob) Park, [ 10 ] Roy Kerr , Michael P. Collins , and John Britten . A master's degree in fire engineering from the University of Canterbury is recognized under the Washington Accord .

[ 11 ] In the United States , the University of Maryland (UMD) offers the ABET -accredited B.S. degree program in Fire Protection Engineering, as well as graduate degrees and a distance M.Eng. program.

[ 12 ] Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) offers an M.S. and a Ph.D. in Fire Protection Engineering as well as online graduate programs in this discipline (M.S. and a Graduate Certificate).

[ 13 ] As of 2011 [update] , Cal Poly [ 14 ] offers an M.S. in Fire Protection Engineering.

[ 14 ] Oklahoma State University offers an ABET -accredited B.S. in Fire Protection and Safety Engineering Technology (established in 1937), Eastern Kentucky University also offers an ABET -accredited B.S. in Fire Protection and Safety Engineering Technology, the Case School of Engineering at Case Western Reserve University offers a master's degree track in Fire Science and Engineering, [ 15 ] University of New Haven offers a B.S. in Fire Protection Engineering, [ 16 ] and the University of Cincinnati offers an associate degree in Fire Science and a bachelor's degree in Fire and Safety Engineering Technology as distance learning options, the only university in the U.S. and Canada to hold this distinction.

[ 17 ] Other institutions, such as the University of Kansas , Illinois Institute of Technology , University of California, Berkeley , University of California, San Diego , [ 18 ] Eastern Kentucky University , and the University of Texas at Austin have or do offer courses in Fire Protection Engineering or technology.

[ citation needed ] Canada has fire engineering programs at York University and the University of Waterloo.

The practice of final fire sprinkler systems design and hydraulic calculations is commonly performed by design technicians who are often educated in-house at contracting firms throughout North America, with the objective of preparing designers for certification by testing by associations such as NICET (National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies). NICET certification is commonly used as a proof of competency for securing a license to design and install fire protection systems.

In Europe , the University of Edinburgh offers a degree in Fire Engineering [ 19 ] and had its first fire research group in the 1970s. These activities are now conducted at the new BRE Centre for Fire Safety Engineering . The University of Leeds uniquely offers an MSc award in Fire and Explosion Engineering.

[ 20 ] Other European Universities active in fire engineering are: Bergische Universität Wuppertal [ citation needed ] Ghent University Imperial College London Letterkenny Institute of Technology Linnaeus University Luleå University of Technology London South Bank University Lund University Norwegian University of Science Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg [ 21 ] Stord/Haugesund University College University of Applied Sciences Cologne [ 22 ] University of Cantabria University of Central Lancashire University of Greenwich University of Manchester University of Poitiers University of Sheffield University of Ulster University of Wales (Newport) University of Warwick Glasgow Caledonian University Vilnius Gediminas Technikal University [ 23 ] The University of Ulster introduced its first fire safety programmes in 1975, followed by the first MSc Programme in Fire Safety Engineering in the United Kingdom introduced in 1990. In 2005 this MSc Programme will celebrate 25 years of unbroken service to higher fire safety engineering education. In 2004 the Institute for Fire Safety Engineering and Technology at the University of Ulster FireSERT occupied its new fire safety engineering laboratories which were funded by £6 million pound Infrastructure Award. The new facilities are state of the art fire safety engineering laboratories including a large scale burn hall and a 10 megawatt calorimeter.

In Australia , Victoria University in Melbourne offers postgraduate courses in Building Fire Safety and Risk Engineering as does the University of Western Sydney. The Centre for Environmental Safety and Risk Engineering (CESARE) is a research unit under Victoria University and has facilities for research and testing of fire behaviour. The Charles Darwin University and the University of Queensland have active programs.

Asian universities active in fire engineering include: Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Tokyo University of Science, Toyohashi University of Technology, and the University of Science and Technology of China.

Professional registration [ edit ] Suitably qualified and experienced fire protection engineers may qualify for registration as a professional engineer . The recognition of fire protection engineering as a separate discipline varies from state to state in the United States.

[ 24 ] NCEES recognizes Fire Protection Engineering as a separate discipline and offers a PE exam subject.

[ 25 ] This test was last updated for the October 2012 exam and includes the following major topics (percentages indicate approximate weight of topic): Fire Protection Analysis (20%) Fire Protection Management (5%) Fire Dynamics (12.5%) Active and Passive Systems (50%) Egress and Occupant Movement (12.5%) Few countries outside the United States regulate the professional practice of fire protection engineering as a discipline, [ citation needed ] although they may restrict the use of the title 'engineer' in association with its practice.

The titles 'fire engineer' and 'fire safety engineer' tend to be preferred outside the United States, especially in the United Kingdom and Commonwealth countries influenced by the British fire service.

The Institution of Fire Engineers is one international organization that qualifies many aspects of the training and qualifications of fire engineers and has the power to offer chartered status.

[ 26 ] See also [ edit ] Architecture Architectural engineering Building services engineering Fire test Institution of Fire Engineers Listing and approval use and compliance Product certification References [ edit ] ^ "bt.cdc.gov" . Archived from the original on 2011-10-30 . Retrieved 2011-11-06 .

^ "Fire Protection Engineering" . NASA. 18 December 2006. Archived from the original on 28 May 2010 . Retrieved 17 October 2010 .

^ a b Cote, Arthur.

"History of Fire Protection Engineering" . Fire Protection Engineering. Archived from the original on 2011-07-11 . Retrieved 2010-10-17 .

^ "Historical Sketch of Armour Institute of Technology" . Illinois Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on 2011-07-18 . Retrieved 2010-10-27 .

^ "FIRES OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY: DEVASTATION AND CHANGE" . 8 June 2018.

^ "Model Curricula - SFPE" .

www.sfpe.org . Retrieved 2019-09-21 .

^ "Department of Fire Protection Engineering - Undergraduate Courses" . A. James Clark School of Engineering. Archived from the original on 2010-08-28 . Retrieved 2010-10-17 .

^ "Building Act" . Department of Building and Housing. Archived from the original on 30 December 2014 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ "Professor Andy Buchanan" .

University of Canterbury . Archived from the original on 2014-12-30 . Retrieved 2011-08-06 .

^ "Robert Park" (PDF) .

University of Canterbury . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-10-05 . Retrieved 2011-08-06 .

^ "Washington Accord" . International Engineering Alliance. Archived from the original on 2012-01-26.

^ "Fire Protection program" . University of Maryland.

^ "WPI Fire Protection Engineering Program" .

^ a b calpoly.edu ^ "Fire Science and Engineering Program" . Case Western Reserve University.

^ "Fire Protection Engineering, B.S." University of New Haven . Retrieved 2019-09-21 .

^ "Fire science" . University of Cincinnati.

^ "Principles of Fire Protection Engineering" .

UCSD Extension .

^ "Fire Safety Engineering" . University of Edinburgh. Archived from the original on 2012-03-04 . Retrieved 2010-02-21 .

^ "MSc in Fire & Explosion Engineering" . University of Leeds. Archived from the original on 2016-04-24 . Retrieved 2014-07-28 .

^ "SGA - Sicherheit und Gefahrenabwehr" . Universitat Magdeburg. Archived from the original on 2011-07-18 . Retrieved 2011-07-17 .

^ . Technische Hochschule Köln https://www.th-koeln.de/mam/downloads/deutsch/studium/studiengaenge/f09/modulhandbuch_bachelor_rettungsingenieurwesen.pdf . Archived from - Rettungsingenieurwesen the original on 2020-01-15 . Retrieved 2020-01-15 .

{{ cite web }} : Check |url= value ( help ) ; Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ "Department of Labour Safety and Fire Protection" . Vilnius Gediminas Technikal University. Archived from the original on 2012-12-13 . Retrieved 2013-06-18 .

^ "Licensure process for Engineers" . NCEES. Archived from the original on 2010-10-06 . Retrieved 2010-10-17 .

^ NCEES ^ "Institution of Fire Engineers" . Institution of Fire Engineers . Retrieved 18 July 2011 .

External links [ edit ] National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) website Society of Fire Protection Engineers website Indian Institute of Fire Engineering - MSBTE recognized Fire Engineering Institute v t e Engineering History Outline List of engineering branches Specialties and interdisciplinarity Civil Architectural Coastal Construction Earthquake Ecological Environmental Sanitary Geological Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Municipal/urban Offshore River Structural Transportation Traffic Railway Mechanical Acoustic Aerospace Automotive Biomechanical Energy Manufacturing Marine Naval architecture Railway Sports Thermal Tribology Electrical Broadcast outline Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Optical Power Radio-frequency Signal processing Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical/bioprocess Biological Bioresource Genetic Tissue Chemical reaction Electrochemical Food Molecular Paper Petroleum Process Reaction Materials Biomaterial Ceramics Corrosion Metallurgy Molecular Nanotechnology Polymers Semiconductors Surfaces Computer AI Computer Cybersecurity Data Networks Robotics Software Engineering education Bachelor of Engineering Bachelor of Science Master's degree Doctorate Graduate certificate Engineer's degree Licensed engineer Related topics Engineer Glossaries Engineering A–L M–Z Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering Other Agricultural Audio Automation Biomedical Bioinformatics Clinical Health technology Pharmaceutical Rehabilitation Building services MEP Design Explosives Facilities Fire Forensic Climate Geomatics Graphics Industrial Information Instrumentation Instrumentation and control Logistics Management Mathematics Mechatronics Military Nuclear Ontology Packaging Physics Privacy Safety Security Survey Sustainability Systems Textile Category Commons Wikiproject Portal v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Authority control databases International FAST National United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_protection_engineering&oldid=1296034722 " Category : Fire protection Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL CS1 errors: URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2008 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 11:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire protection engineering 8 languages Add topic

