Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scientific explanation 2 Explanations vs. arguments 3 Explanation vs. justification 4 Types 5 Theories of explanation 6 See also 7 Further reading 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Explanation 37 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido IsiZulu Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of statements constructed to describe a set of facts which clarifies causes For the poem by Wallace Stevens, see Explanation (poem) .

"Explained" redirects here. For the documentary television series, see Explained (TV series) .

An explanation is a set of statements usually constructed to describe a set of facts that clarifies the causes , context , and consequences of those facts. It may establish rules or laws , and clarifies the existing rules or laws in relation to any objects or phenomena examined.

[ 1 ] In philosophy , an explanation is a set of statements which render understandable the existence or occurrence of an object, event, or state of affairs. Among its most common forms are: Causal explanation Deductive-nomological explanation, involves subsuming the explanandum under a generalization from which it may be derived in a deductive argument. For example, “All gases expand when heated; this gas was heated; therefore, this gas expanded".

Statistical explanation , involves subsuming the explanandum under a generalization that gives it inductive support. For example, “Most people who use tobacco contract cancer; this person used tobacco; therefore, this person contracted cancer”.

Explanations of human behavior usually rely to the subject’s beliefs, desires and other relevant facts. They operate under the assumption that the behavior in question is rational to some extent. Thus an explanation of why the subject removed his coat might cite the fact that he felt hot and desired to feel cooler, and believed that he would feel cooler if he took off his coat.

[ 2 ] Scientific explanation [ edit ] The recent discussions presuppose that science offers explanations (rather than mere description) and that the task of a theory or model of scientific explanation is to outline the structure of such explanations. It is thus assumed that there is a single kind or form of explanation that is “scientific”. In fact, the notion of “scientific explanation” suggests a contrast between those "explanations", that are characteristic of "science" and those which are outside the science, and second a contrast between "explanation" and something else.

However, the tendency in much of the recent philosophical literature has been to assume that there is a substantial continuity between the sorts of explanations found in science and at least some forms of explanation found in more ordinary non-scientific contexts, with the latter embodying in a more or less inchoate way features that are present in a more detailed, precise, rigorous etc. form in the former. It is further assumed that it is the task of a theory of explanation to capture what is common to both scientific and at least some more ordinary forms of explanation.

[ 3 ] A notable theory of scientific explanation is Hempel's Deductive-nomological model . This model has been widely criticized [ by whom?

] but it is still the starting point for discussion of most theories of explanation.

Explanations vs. arguments [ edit ] Main article: Argument The difference between explanations and arguments reflects a difference in the kind of question that arises. In the case of arguments, we start from a doubted fact, which we try to support by arguments. In the case of explanations, we start with an accepted fact, the question being why is this fact or what caused it. The answer here is the explanation.

[ 4 ] For instance, if Fred and Joe address the issue of whether or not Fred's cat has fleas, Joe may state: "Fred, your cat has fleas. Observe the cat is scratching right now." Joe has made an argument that the cat has fleas. However, if Fred and Joe agree on the fact that the cat has fleas, they may further question why this is so and put forth an explanation: "The reason the cat has fleas is that the weather has been damp." The difference is that the attempt is not to settle whether or not some claim is true, but to show why it is true. In this sense, arguments aim to contribute knowledge, whereas explanations aim to contribute understanding.

[ citation needed ] While arguments attempt to show that something is, will be, or should be the case, explanations try to show why or how something is or will be. If Fred and Joe address the issue of whether or not Fred's cat has fleas, Joe may state: "Fred, your cat has fleas. Observe the cat is scratching right now." Joe has made an argument that the cat has fleas. However, if Fred and Joe agree on the fact that the cat has fleas, they may further question why this is so and put forth an explanation : "The reason the cat has fleas is that the weather has been damp." The difference is that the attempt is not to settle whether or not some claim, proposition , or premise is true, but to show why it is true.

[ citation needed ] Arguments and explanations largely resemble each other in rhetorical use. This is the cause of much difficulty in thinking critically about claims . There are several reasons for this difficulty.

People often are not themselves clear on whether they are arguing for or explaining something.

The same types of words and phrases are used in presenting explanations and arguments.

The terms 'explain' or 'explanation,' et cetera are frequently used in arguments.

Explanations are often used within arguments and presented so as to serve as arguments .

Explanation vs. justification [ edit ] The term "explanation" is sometimes used in the context of justification , e.g., the explanation as to why a belief is true. Justification may be understood as the explanation as to why a belief is a true one or an account of how one knows what one knows. It is important to be aware when an explanation is not a justification. One may give a detailed and believable account on something without giving a single proof.

[ citation needed ] Types [ edit ] There are many and varied events, objects, and facts which require explanation. So too, there are many different things that can be used to explain something.

Aristotle recognized four archetypes of explanation. These were thought, since even more ancient times, to be universal and unique 'kinds' of explanation that comprise all ways of explaining something. However, there is much confusion about their precise definition and how they relate to each other. Types of explanation involve appropriate types of reasoning, such as Deductive-nomological , Functional, Historical, Psychological, Reductive, Teleological, Methodological explanations.

[ 1 ] Theories of explanation [ edit ] Deductive-nomological model Statistical relevance model Causal Mechanical model Unificationist model [ 3 ] Pragmatic theories of explanation: [ 3 ] a pragmatic approach to explanation holds that explanations are whatever people will accept as answers to certain questions.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Abductive reasoning Epistemology Explanandum and explanans Explanatory gap Inductive reasoning Inquiry Knowledge Models of scientific inquiry Rationalization Scientific method Theory Unexplained (disambiguation) Wesley Salmon Further reading [ edit ] Moore, Brooke Noel and Parker, Richard. (2012) Critical Thinking . 10th ed. Published by McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-803828-6 .

References [ edit ] ^ a b Drake, Jess (2018).

Introduction to Logic . EP TECH PRESS. pp.

160– 161.

ISBN 978-1-83947-421-7 .

^ Explanation at the Encyclopædia Britannica ^ a b c Woodward, James; Ross, Lauren.

"Scientific Explanation" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Mayes, Gregory (2010).

"Argument-Explanation Complementarity and the Structure of Informal Reasoning" (PDF) .

Informal Logic .

30 : 92.

doi : 10.22329/il.v30i1.419 .

^ Levine, J. (2004), Purple Haze: The Puzzle of Consciousness , Oxford University Press, Incorporated, p. 73 External links [ edit ] Look up explanation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Explanations .

Media related to Explanation at Wikimedia Commons Explanation at PhilPapers Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Scientific Explanation" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Theories of Explanation" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Explanation in several languages and meanings v t e Philosophical logic Critical thinking and informal logic Analysis Ambiguity Argument Belief Bias Credibility Dialectic Antithesis , Socratic method , Unity of opposites Evidence Explanation Explanatory power Fact Fallacy List of fallacies Hypothesis Inquiry Opinion Parsimony (Occam's razor) Premise Propaganda Prudence Razor Reasoning Relevance Rhetoric Rigor Theory Vagueness Theories of deduction Constructivism Dialetheism Fictionalism Finitism Formalism Intuitionism Logical atomism Logicism Nominalism Platonic realism Pragmatism Realism Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐7j7lq
Cached time: 20250811235306
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.326 seconds
Real time usage: 0.410 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2191/1000000
Revision size: 9406/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 38744/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4177/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37612/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.206/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6244638/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  371.871      1 -total
 17.60%   65.464      1 Template:Philosophical_logic
 17.29%   64.283      1 Template:Navbox
 14.64%   54.443      1 Template:Reflist
 13.56%   50.417      1 Template:Short_description
 13.17%   48.984      1 Template:ISBN
  9.34%   34.749      4 Template:Fix
  8.31%   30.885      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.08%   26.313      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.55%   24.374      1 Template:By_whom Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:216186:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235306 and revision id 1303056268. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Explanation&oldid=1303056268 " Categories : Critical thinking Concepts in logic Epistemology of science Theories Causality Hidden categories: Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 21:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Explanation 37 languages Add topic

