Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Business 3 Social role 4 Alternative lifestyle 5 In contemporary North America 6 Spain and Portugal 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Market garden 21 languages Aragonés Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Napulitano Occitan Picard Polski Português Runa Simi Sicilianu Suomi Wayuunaiki Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Huerta ) Small consumer-oriented agriculture For the World War II Allied military action, see Operation Market Garden .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Market garden" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A market garden on an outlying island of Hong Kong A market garden is the relatively small-scale production of fruits , vegetables and flowers as cash crops , frequently sold directly to consumers and restaurants .  The diversity of crops grown on a small area of land, typically from under 0.40 hectares (4,000 m 2 ; 1 acre ) to some hectares (a few acres), or sometimes in greenhouses , distinguishes it from other types of farming. A market garden is sometimes called a truck farm in the US.

[ 1 ] A market garden is a business that provides a wide range and steady supply of fresh produce through the local growing season . Unlike large, industrial farms, which practice monoculture and mechanization, many different crops and varieties are grown and more manual labour and gardening techniques are used. The small output requires selling through such local fresh produce outlets as on-farm stands, farmers' markets , community-supported agriculture subscriptions, restaurants and independent produce stores. Market gardening and orchard farming are closely related to horticulture , which concerns the growing of fruits and vegetables.

History [ edit ] Cucumbers reach to the ceiling in a greenhouse in Richfield, Minnesota , where market gardeners grew a wide variety of produce for sale in Minneapolis. ca. 1910 Traditionally, "market garden" was used to contrast farms devoted to raising vegetables and berries , a specialized type of farming, with the larger branches of grain, dairy, and orchard fruit farming; agricultural historians continue to thus use the term.  Such operations were not necessarily small-scale.  Indeed, many were very large, commercial farms that were called "gardens" not because of size, but because English-speaking farmers traditionally referred to their vegetable plots as "gardens": in English whether in common parlance or in anthropological or historical scholarship, husbandry done by the hoe is customarily called "gardening" and husbandry done by the plough as "farming" regardless of the scale of either.  A "market garden" was simply a vegetable plot, the produce of which the farmer used to sell as opposed to use to feed his or her family.   Market gardens are necessarily close to the markets, i.e. cities, that they serve.

Truck farms produce vegetables for market.

[ 2 ] The word 'truck' in Truck farms does not refer to the transportation truck, which is derived from Greek for "wheel", but rather from the old north French word troquer , which means "barter" or "exchange". The use for vegetables raised for market can be traced back to 1784 and truck farms to 1866.

[ 3 ] Business [ edit ] Selling to the wholesale market usually earns 10–20% of the retail price, but direct-to-consumer selling earns 100%. Although highly variable, a conventional farm may return US$0.03 to US$0.30/m 2 (US$120 to US$1,210 per acre; US$300 to US$3,000 per hectare) but an efficient market garden can earn in the US$2 to US$5/m 2 (US$8,100 to US$20,200 per acre; US$20,000 to US$50,000 per hectare) range, or even higher. However, the size of a market garden has a practical upper bound, while with conventional farming, a farmer can farm vast areas because access to a direct market is not a requirement.

Larger market gardens often sell to such local food outlets as supermarkets , food cooperatives , community-supported agriculture programs, farmers' markets , fresh food wholesalers , and any other higher-volume channels that benefit from buying a range of vegetables from a single supplier, their freshness allowing for a premium over the revenue from the supermarkets and frequently other local suppliers.  A larger market garden can by mixed crop production maintain a sales alternative to the wholesale commodity -style channels often used by farms that specialize in high volumes of a limited number of crops.

Relying on cities for markets, however, can have drawbacks. For example, in England , south Sussex was famous for growing tomatoes for the London market that were delivered by train . The arrival of railways in the 19th century at first stimulated growth of market gardens in certain areas by providing quick access to the city, but it eventually allowed commuting residents to move there and turn many market garden areas into suburbs .

Urban sprawl still eats up farmland in urban regions. Buying the rights to develop farmland from the farmers solved this problem in Suffolk County, New York .

Chinese market gardener in Australia , ca. 1893 Social role [ edit ] In some more affluent countries, including Australia and the United States , market gardening is rated as a high social utility occupation. It is typically taken up by recent immigrant groups for one or two generations, until they can accumulate capital, language and trade skills. The succession of dominant market garden groups in Australia, for example, was – from the early 19th century Anglo-Celtic, people from German-speaking countries, Chinese (after the peak of the gold rushes in mid-late 19th century), then southern European migrants from Italy, Malta and Yugoslavia (before it disintegrated), then southeast Asian migrant and refugee communities following the Vietnam War, such as the Vietnamese and Cambodians.

Involvement in a market garden lets immigrant groups who otherwise have few marketable skills apart from their labour, become actively involved in the market economy. Benefits are that it does not rely on education or language, it adapts well to providing work for extended family groups, and in large market growing regions even wider community support networks. Sharing of knowledge and experience within communities reduces risks, and supports a network of other trades such as carriers, market agents, and heavy machinery contractors, and contract farm labour. Market-gardening land is typically relatively cheap and allows immigrants to purchase land, often with an accompanying residence, far more readily than in urban settings. However, like all agriculture it risks crop failure, market collapse and competition from industrialized broad-acre farming and 'fresh-frozen' imported produce. Other risks are from hazards such as pesticide use, especially where the market gardeners are not trained in their use or able to read product information. Another consequence is marginalization of the succeeding generation where they are relied upon as the fittest and strongest to succeed in continuing the farm rather than pursue other ambitions and opportunities.

Alternative lifestyle [ edit ] Market gardening has in recent decades become an alternative business and lifestyle choice for individuals who wish to " return to the land ", because the business model and niche allow a smaller start-up investment than conventional commercial farming, and generally offers a viable market (in microeconomics, basic or staple foods are considered as necessities and have highly inelastic demand curves, meaning that consumers will buy them in relatively constant quantities even if prices or incomes vary), especially with the recent popularity of organic and local food . It is in some instances considered hobby farming , although market gardening is a recognized type of farming with a distinct business model that can be significantly profitable and sustainable . There is a spectrum with overlap from with the efforts of amateur gardeners who sometimes sell from home or at markets, as an extension of their pastime, to fully commercial market gardening as the main or sole income stream. The latter requires the most discipline and business sense. Successful practitioners who have written books about it include Eliot Coleman and Jean-Martin Fortier .

In contemporary North America [ edit ] A greenhouse with edible plants for use in a culinary school in Lawrenceville, Georgia , US Within the United States, market gardens are most popular in densely populated regions on the Eastern Seaboard such as New Jersey , Massachusetts , and Florida . Outside of the USA, they also exist in similar regions in other developed countries, such as those of Northern Europe, New South Wales, and the Rio de la Plata region.

[ 4 ] An example of a market garden operation in North America might involve one farmer working full-time on two acres (0.81 ha; 8,100 m 2 ). Most work is done with hand and light power tools, and perhaps a small tractor . Some 20 different crops are planted throughout the season. Hardier plants , like peas , spinach , radish , carrots and lettuce are seeded first, in earlier spring, followed by main season crops, like tomatoes , potatoes , corn , beans , cucumber , onions , and summer squash . A further planting timed for harvest in the cooler fall conditions might include more spinach and carrots, winter squash , cabbage , and rutabaga . Harvesting is done at least weekly, by hand, sometimes with part-time help, and produce is sorted, washed and sold fresh at the local farmers' market, and from an on-farm stand. A pick-up truck is used for short-distance transport of crops and other farm materials. The workflow is a steady cycle of planting and harvesting right through the growing season, and usually comes to an end in the cold winter months.

A somewhat larger market garden operation, ranging from 10 to 100 acres (4.0 to 40.5 ha; 40,000 to 405,000 m 2 ), may be referred to as intensive mixed vegetable production, although the essential business and farming tasks are the same. Such operations are often run by a full-time farmer or farm family, and a few full-time employees. The tractor is relied upon for many tasks, and manual labor requirements, particularly for setting transplants and harvesting, are often significant, with crews of 10, 20 or more people employed seasonally. This has led in the U.S. to groups of "transient" or "migrant" workers who follow the harvest seasons to different farms across the country. In cooler climates, greenhouses are generally used to produce transplants, and sometimes greenhouse production is extended through winter or with hydroponics . Harvest and post-harvest handling are more sophisticated at the larger scale, with some mechanized harvest and processing equipment, walk-in coolers, and refrigerated delivery vehicles.

Spain and Portugal [ edit ] This article is about agriculture. For other uses, see Huerta (disambiguation) and Horta .

A huerta ( Spanish: [ˈweɾta] ) or horta ( Catalan: [ˈɔɾta] , Portuguese: [ˈɔɾtɐ] ), from Latin hortus , " garden ", is an irrigated area, or a field within such an area, common in Spain and Portugal , where a variety of vegetables and fruit trees are cultivated for family consumption and sale. Typically, individual plots ( huertos ) belong to different people; they are located around rivers or other water sources because of the amount of water required, which is usually provided through small canals ( acequias ). They are a kind of market garden.

Elinor Ostrom has defined huertas as "well-demarked irrigation areas surrounding or near towns" (emphasis added).

[ 5 ] Huerta in Valencia, Spain See also [ edit ] Acequia Evesham Custom Horta of Valencia Orchard Irrigation district Slow Food Urban agriculture References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Market gardens .

^ "truck farm" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ Folsom, Josiah Chase (1922).

Truck-farm Labor in New Jersey .

United States Department of Agriculture . p. 2.

OCLC 7727539 .

Those farms considered as truck farms usually grow a variety of perishable crops throughout the season ^ Harper, Douglas.

"truck" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved August 30, 2015 .

^ "Agricultural Regions Map" .

Illustrated Human Geography Textbook . December 24, 2019 . Retrieved April 19, 2025 .

^ Ostrom, Elinor (2015).

Governing the Commons , p.71.

Bibliography [ edit ] Glick, Thomas F.

1970.

Irrigation and Society in Medieval Valencia.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Maass, Arthur , and Raymond Lloyd Anderson. 1978.

...and the Desert Shall Rejoice: Conflict, Growth and Justice in Arid Environments.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262131346 Ostrom, Elinor (2015 [1990]). "Huerta Irrigation Institutions." Pp.69-82 in Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781107569782 v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Japan Israel 2 Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐zgtqm
Cached time: 20250814220244
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.473 seconds
Real time usage: 0.660 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1525/1000000
Revision size: 13655/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 56011/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1633/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37125/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.314/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22062307/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  551.944      1 -total
 17.39%   95.987      1 Template:Reflist
 17.21%   94.995      3 Template:IPA
 16.77%   92.547      1 Template:Horticulture_and_gardening
 16.45%   90.776      1 Template:Navbox
 13.67%   75.447      3 Template:Cite_web
 12.21%   67.416      1 Template:Cite_Merriam-Webster
 11.22%   61.909      1 Template:Short_description
  9.09%   50.179      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.72%   48.140      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1263281:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220244 and revision id 1298472488. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Market_garden&oldid=1298472488#Spain_and_Portugal " Categories : Types of garden Urban agriculture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2021 Articles needing additional references from January 2017 All articles needing additional references Pages with Spanish IPA Pages with Catalan IPA Pages with Portuguese IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 18:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Market garden 21 languages Add topic

