Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concepts Toggle Concepts subsection 1.1 Formal language 1.2 Deductive system 1.2.1 Proof system 1.2.2 Formal semantics of logical system 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Formal system 32 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca Català Чӑвашла Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Gàidhlig 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Deductive system ) Mathematical model for deduction or proof systems This article relies excessively on references to tertiary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or primary sources .

Find sources: "Formal system" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A formal system is an abstract structure and formalization of an axiomatic system used for deducing , using rules of inference , theorems from axioms .

[ 1 ] In 1921, David Hilbert proposed to use formal systems as the foundation of knowledge in mathematics .

[ 2 ] However, in 1931 Kurt Gödel proved that any consistent formal system sufficiently powerful to express basic arithmetic cannot prove its own completeness . This effectively showed that Hilbert's program was impossible as stated.

The term formalism is sometimes a rough synonym for formal system , but it also refers to a given style of notation , for example, Paul Dirac 's bra–ket notation .

Concepts [ edit ] This diagram shows the syntactic entities that may be constructed from formal languages . The symbols and strings of symbols may be broadly divided into nonsense and well-formed formulas . A formal language can be thought of as identical to the set of its well-formed formulas, which may be broadly divided into theorems and non-theorems.

A formal system has the following components, as a minimum: [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Formal language , which is a set of well-formed formulas , which are strings of symbols from an alphabet , formed by a formal grammar (consisting of production rules or formation rules ).

Deductive system , deductive apparatus, or proof system , which has rules of inference that take axioms and infers theorems , both of which are part of the formal language.

In some cases an inductive system , used to derive a proof by first establishing a simple case, then generalizing it.

A formal system is said to be recursive (i.e. effective) or recursively enumerable if the set of axioms and the set of inference rules are decidable sets or semidecidable sets , respectively.

Formal language [ edit ] Part of a series on Formal languages Key concepts Formal system Alphabet Syntax Formal semantics Semantics (programming languages) Formal grammar Formation rule Well-formed formula Automata theory Regular expression Production Ground expression Atomic formula Applications Formal methods Propositional calculus Predicate logic Mathematical notation Natural language processing Programming language theory Mathematical linguistics Computational linguistics Syntax analysis Formal verification Automated theorem proving v t e Main articles: Formal language , Formal grammar , Syntax (logic) , and Logical form A formal language is a language uses a set of strings whose symbols are taken from a specific alphabet, and operations used to form sentences from them.
. Like languages in linguistics , formal languages generally have two aspects: the syntax is what the language looks like (more formally: the set of possible expressions that are valid utterances in the language) the semantics are what the utterances of the language mean (which is formalized in various ways, depending on the type of language in question) Usually only the syntax of a formal language is considered via the notion of a formal grammar . The two main categories of formal grammar are that of generative grammars , which are sets of rules for how strings in a language can be written, and that of analytic grammars (or reductive grammar [ 6 ] [ unreliable source?

] [ 7 ] ), which are sets of rules for how a string can be analyzed to determine whether it is a member of the language.

Deductive system [ edit ] Main articles: Inference , Logical consequence , and Deductive reasoning This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: This section needs better organization and more citations.

Please help improve this section if you can.

( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A deductive system , also called a deductive apparatus , [ 8 ] consists of the axioms (or axiom schemata ) and rules of inference that can be used to derive theorems of the system.

[ 1 ] In order to sustain its deductive integrity, a deductive apparatus must be definable without reference to any intended interpretation of the language. The aim is to ensure that each line of a derivation is merely a logical consequence of the lines that precede it. There should be no element of any interpretation of the language that gets involved with the deductive nature of the system.

The logical consequence (or entailment) of the system by its logical foundation is what distinguishes a formal system from others which may have some basis in an abstract model. Often the formal system will be the basis for or even identified with a larger theory or field (e.g.

Euclidean geometry ) consistent with the usage in modern mathematics such as model theory .

[ clarification needed ] An example of a deductive system would be the rules of inference and axioms regarding equality used in first order logic .

The two main types of deductive systems are proof systems and formal semantics.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Proof system [ edit ] Main articles: Proof system and Formal proof Formal proofs are sequences of well-formed formulas (or WFF for short) that might either be an axiom or be the product of applying an inference rule on previous WFFs in the proof sequence.

Once a formal system is given, one can define the set of statements which can be proved inside the formal system. This set consists of all WFFs for which there is a proof. Unlike the grammar for WFFs, there is no guarantee that there will be a decision procedure for deciding whether a given WFF is a theorem or not.

The point of view that generating formal proofs is all there is to mathematics is often called formalism .

David Hilbert founded metamathematics as a discipline for discussing formal systems. Any language that one uses to talk about a formal system is called a metalanguage . The metalanguage may be a natural language, or it may be partially formalized itself, but it is generally less completely formalized than the formal language component of the formal system under examination, which is then called the object language , that is, the object of the discussion in question. The notion of theorem just defined should not be confused with theorems about the formal system , which, in order to avoid confusion, are usually called metatheorems .

Formal semantics of logical system [ edit ] Main articles: Semantics of logic , Interpretation (logic) , and Model theory A logical system is a deductive system (most commonly first order logic ) together with additional non-logical axioms . According to model theory , a logical system may be given interpretations which describe whether a given structure - the mapping of formulas to a particular meaning - satisfies a well-formed formula. A structure that satisfies all the axioms of the formal system is known as a model of the logical system.

A logical system is: Sound , if each well-formed formula that can be inferred from the axioms is satisfied by every model of the logical system.

Semantically complete , if each well-formed formula that is satisfied by every model of the logical system can be inferred from the axioms.

An example of a logical system is Peano arithmetic . The standard model of arithmetic sets the domain of discourse to be the nonnegative integers and gives the symbols their usual meaning.

[ 10 ] There are also non-standard models of arithmetic .

History [ edit ] Main articles: Formalism (philosophy of mathematics) and Formal logical systems Early logic systems includes Indian logic of Pāṇini , syllogistic logic of Aristotle, propositional logic of Stoicism, 
and Chinese logic of Gongsun Long (c. 325–250 BCE).

[ citation needed ] In more recent times, contributors include George Boole , Augustus De Morgan , and Gottlob Frege .

Mathematical logic was developed in 19th century Europe .

David Hilbert instigated a formalist movement called Hilbert’s program as a proposed solution to the foundational crisis of mathematics , that was eventually tempered by Gödel's incompleteness theorems .

[ 2 ] The QED manifesto represented a subsequent, as yet unsuccessful, effort at formalization of known mathematics.

See also [ edit ] Systems science portal Philosophy portal List of formal systems Formal method – Mathematical program specifications Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Formal science – Study of abstract structures described by formal systems Logic translation – Translation of a text into a logical system Rewriting system – Replacing subterm in a formula with another term Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Substitution instance – Concept in logic Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Theory (mathematical logic) – Set of sentences in a formal language References [ edit ] ^ a b Hunter 1996 , p. 7.

^ a b Zach, Richard (31 July 2003).

"Hilbert's Program" .

Hilbert's Program, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ "Formal System" .

PlanetMath .

^ Rapaport, William J. (25 March 2010).

"Syntax & Semantics of Formal Systems" .

University of Buffalo .

^ "Formal System" .

Pr ∞ ∞ {\displaystyle \infty } fWiki .

^ "Reductive grammar" .

Dictionary of Scientific and Technical Terms (6th ed.). McGraw-Hill.

Reductive grammar:  ( computer science ) A set of syntactic rules for the analysis of strings to determine whether the strings exist in a language.

^ Rulifson, Johns F.

(April 1968).

"A Tree Meta for the XDS 940" (PDF) .

Augmentation Research Center . Retrieved 30 November 2024 .

There are two classes of formal-language definition compiler-writing schemes. The productive grammar approach is the most common. A productive grammar consists primarrly of a set of rules that describe a method of generating all possible strings of the language. The reductive or analytical grammar technique states a set of rules that describe a method of analyzing any string of characters and deciding whether that string is in the language.

^ a b "Deductive Apparatus" .

Pr ∞ ∞ {\displaystyle \infty } fWiki . Retrieved 30 November 2024 .

^ van Fraassen, Bas C.

(2016) [1971].

Formal Semantics and Logic (PDF) . Nousoul Digital Publishers. p. 12.

Metalogic can in turn be roughly divided into two parts: proof theory and formal semantics... The division is not exact; many questions have been dealt with from both points of view, and some proof-theoretic methods and results are indispensable in semantics.

^ Kaye, Richard (1991). "1. The Standard Model".

Models of Peano arithmetic . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 10.

ISBN 9780198532132 .

Sources [ edit ] Hunter, Geoffrey (1996) [1971].

Metalogic: An Introduction to the Metatheory of Standard First-Order Logic . University of California Press (published 1973).

ISBN 9780520023567 .

OCLC 36312727 .

( accessible to patrons with print disabilities ) Further reading [ edit ] Hofstadter, Douglas , 1979.

Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid ISBN 978-0-465-02656-2 . 777 pages.

Kleene, Stephen C.

, 1967.

Mathematical Logic Reprinted by Dover, 2002.

ISBN 0-486-42533-9 Smullyan, Raymond M.

, 1961.

Theory of Formal Systems: Annals of Mathematics Studies , Princeton University Press (April 1, 1961) 156 pages ISBN 0-691-08047-X External links [ edit ] Look up formalisation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Formal systems at Wikimedia Commons Encyclopædia Britannica, Formal system definition, 2007.

Daniel Richardson, Formal systems, logic and semantics Formal System at PlanetMath .

Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Formal system Peter Suber, Formal Systems and Machines: An Isomorphism Archived 2011-05-24 at the Wayback Machine , 1997.

Ray Taol, Formal Systems What is a Formal System?

: Some quotes from John Haugeland's `Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea' (1985), pp. 48–64.

v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons v t e Major topics in Foundations of Mathematics Mathematical logic Peano axioms Mathematical induction Formal system Axiomatic system Hilbert system Natural deduction Mathematical proof Model theory Mathematical constructivism Modal logic List of mathematical logic topics Set theory Set Naive set theory Axiomatic set theory Zermelo set theory Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory Constructive set theory Descriptive set theory Determinacy Russell's paradox List of set theory topics Type theory Axiom of reducibility Simple type theory Dependent type theory Intuitionistic type theory Homotopy type theory Univalent foundations Girard's paradox Category theory Category Topos theory Category of sets Higher category theory ∞-groupoid ∞-topos theory Mathematical structuralism Glossary of category theory List of category theory topics NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐gn75c
Cached time: 20250816235917
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.680 seconds
Real time usage: 1.054 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3685/1000000
Revision size: 14574/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 151419/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5323/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 83171/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.429/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17753324/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  873.228      1 -total
 26.34%  229.967      7 Template:Annotated_link
 18.50%  161.590      1 Template:Reflist
  9.58%   83.618      4 Template:Cite_book
  9.06%   79.158      7 Template:Navbox
  8.47%   73.986      1 Template:Formal_languages
  8.23%   71.848      1 Template:Short_description
  8.21%   71.654      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.73%   58.808      2 Template:Ambox
  6.25%   54.614      1 Template:Mathematical_logic Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:396102:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816235917 and revision id 1305261950. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Formal_system&oldid=1305261950#Deductive_system " Categories : 4th century BC in India Metalogic Syntax (logic) Formal systems Formal languages 1st-millennium BC introductions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from December 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from February 2015 Articles needing cleanup from October 2023 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from October 2023 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from October 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 01:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Formal system 32 languages Add topic

