Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Example 2 Reading a forest plot Toggle Reading a forest plot subsection 2.1 Study identities 2.2 Standardized mean difference 2.2.1 Confidence interval whiskers 2.2.2 Weight 2.3 Heterogeneity 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Forest plot 9 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Graphical display of scientific results For private plots producing forest products, see Woodlot .

An example forest plot of five odds ratios (squares, proportional to weights used in meta-analysis), with the summary measure (centre line of diamond) and associated confidence intervals (lateral tips of diamond), and solid vertical line of no effect. Names of (fictional) studies are shown on the left, odds ratios and confidence intervals on the right.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Forest plots .

A forest plot , also known as a blobbogram , is a graphical display of estimated results from a number of scientific studies addressing the same question, along with the overall results.

[ 1 ] It was developed for use in medical research as a means of graphically representing a meta-analysis of the results of randomized controlled trials . In the last twenty years, similar meta-analytical techniques have been applied in observational studies (e.g.

environmental epidemiology ) and forest plots are often used in presenting the results of such studies also.

Although forest plots can take several forms, they are commonly presented with two columns. The left-hand column lists the names of the studies (frequently randomized controlled trials or epidemiological studies ), commonly in chronological order from the top downwards. The right-hand column is a plot of the measure of effect ( e.g.

an odds ratio ) for each of these studies (often represented by a square) incorporating confidence intervals represented by horizontal lines. The graph may be plotted on a natural logarithmic scale when using odds ratios or other ratio-based effect measures, so that the confidence intervals are symmetrical about the means from each study and to ensure undue emphasis is not given to odds ratios greater than 1 when compared to those less than 1. The area of each square is proportional to the study's weight in the meta-analysis. The overall meta-analysed measure of effect is often represented on the plot as a dashed vertical line. This meta-analysed measure of effect is commonly plotted as a diamond, the lateral points of which indicate confidence intervals for this estimate.

A vertical line representing no effect is also plotted. If the confidence intervals for individual studies overlap with this line, it demonstrates that at the given level of confidence their effect sizes do not differ from no effect for the individual study. The same applies for the meta-analysed measure of effect: if the points of the diamond overlap the line of no effect the overall meta-analysed result cannot be said to differ from no effect at the given level of confidence.

Forest plots date back to at least the 1970s. One plot is shown in a 1985 book about meta-analysis.

[ 2 ] : 252 The first use in print of the expression "forest plot" may be in an abstract for a poster at the Pittsburgh (US) meeting of the Society for Clinical Trials in May 1996.

[ 3 ] An informative investigation on the origin of the notion "forest plot" was published in 2001.

[ 4 ] The name refers to the forest of lines produced. In September 1990, Richard Peto joked that the plot was named after a breast cancer researcher called Pat Forrest and as a result the name has sometimes been spelled " forrest plot ".

[ 4 ] Example [ edit ] This blobbogram uses seven studies to show that corticosteroids can hasten lung development in pregnancies where a baby is likely to be born prematurely . An odds ratio (OR) of one indicates no effect; studies with confidence intervals (horizontal lines) crossing one (vertical line) are inconclusive. Powerful studies (here, those with more participants ) have narrower (shorter) confidence intervals. A study with an odds ratio of one and a very narrow confidence interval would indicate no significant effect. Here the summary and the Auckland study have narrow confidence intervals that do not cross one, indicating that these studies would be judged statistically significant .

This blobbogram is from an iconic systematic review ; it shows clinical trials of the use of corticosteroids to hasten lung development in pregnancies where a baby is likely to be born prematurely . Long after there was enough evidence to show that this treatment saved babies' lives, the evidence was not widely known and the treatment was not widely used. After a systematic review made the evidence better-known, the treatment was used more, preventing thousands of pre-term babies from dying of infant respiratory distress syndrome . However, when the treatment was rolled out in lower- and middle-income countries, it was found that more pre-term babies died. It is thought that this may be because of the higher risk of infection, which is more likely to kill a baby in places with lower-quality medical care.

[ 5 ] A 2017 systematic review states that there is "little need" for further research into the usefulness of the treatment in higher-income countries, but further research is needed on how best to treat lower-income and higher-risk mothers, and optimal dosage.

[ 6 ] Reading a forest plot [ edit ] Study identities [ edit ] Studies included in the meta-analysis and incorporated into the forest plot will generally be identified in chronological order on the left hand side by author and date.  There is no significance given to the vertical position assumed by a particular study.

Standardized mean difference [ edit ] The chart portion of the forest plot will be on the right hand side and will indicate the mean difference in effect between the test and control groups in the studies.  A more precise rendering of the data shows up in number form in the text of each line, while a somewhat less precise graphic representation shows up in chart form on the right.  The vertical line ( y-axis ) indicates no effect.  The horizontal distance of a box from the y-axis demonstrates the difference between the test and control (the experimental data with control data subtracted out) in relation to no observable effect, otherwise known as the magnitude of the experimental effect.

Confidence interval whiskers [ edit ] The thin horizontal lines—sometimes referred to as whiskers—emerging from the box indicate the magnitude of the confidence interval .  The longer the lines, the wider the confidence interval, and the less reliable the data.  The shorter the lines, the narrower the confidence interval and the more reliable the data.

If either the box or the confidence interval whiskers pass through the y-axis of no effect, the study data is said to be statistically insignificant .

Weight [ edit ] The meaningfulness of the study data, or power , is indicated by the weight (size) of the box.  More meaningful data, such as those from studies with greater sample sizes and smaller confidence intervals, is indicated by a larger sized box than data from less meaningful studies, and they contribute to the pooled result to a greater degree.

Heterogeneity [ edit ] The forest plot is able to demonstrate the degree to which data from multiple studies observing the same effect overlap with one another.  Results that fail to overlap well are termed heterogeneous and is referred to as the heterogeneity of the data—such data is less conclusive.  If the results are similar between various studies, the data is said to be homogeneous , and the tendency is for these data to be more conclusive.

The heterogeneity is indicated by the I 2 .  A heterogeneity of less than 50% is termed low, and indicates a greater degree of similarity between study data than an I 2 value above 50%, which indicates more dissimilarity.

See also [ edit ] Galbraith plot Funnel plot The Cochrane (organisation) logo is a forest plot A forest plot helps determine whether further research is needed References [ edit ] ^ Lalkhen, AG (2008).

"Statistics V: Introduction to clinical trials and systematic reviews" .

Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care & Pain .

8 (4): 143– 146.

doi : 10.1093/bjaceaccp/mkn023 .

^ Larry V. Hedges and Ingram Olkin (1985).

Statistical Methods for Meta-Analysis . Orlando: Academic Press .

ISBN 978-0-12-336380-0 .

^ Bijnens L, Collette L, Ivanov A, Hoctin Boes G, Sylvester R (1996). Can the forest plot be simplified without losing relevant information in meta-analyses? Communication at the meeting of the SCT, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 5–8 May 1996. Controlled Clinical Trials 17(2S): 124.

^ a b Steff Lewis & Mike Clarke (June 2001).

"Forest plots: trying to see the wood and the trees" .

BMJ .

322 (7300): 1479– 1480.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.322.7300.1479 .

PMC 1120528 .

PMID 11408310 .

^ Iain Chalmers (October 4, 2016).

"Should the Cochrane logo be accompanied by a health warning?" .

Evidently Cochrane .

^ Roberts, Devender; Brown, Julie; Medley, Nancy; Dalziel, Stuart R (21 March 2017).

"Antenatal corticosteroids for accelerating fetal lung maturation for women at risk of preterm birth" .

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD004454.pub3 .

hdl : 2292/34738 .

PMC 8094626 .

External links [ edit ] MIX 2.0 – software to perform meta-analysis and create forest plots in Excel.

MetaXL – Software that can create forest plots and run bias adjusted meta-analyses v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forest_plot&oldid=1306525618 " Categories : Meta-analysis Statistical charts and diagrams Systematic review Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 06:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forest plot 9 languages Add topic

