Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background and details 2 Usage in popular culture 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Dystheism 12 languages العربية বাংলা Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Suomi Türkçe Zazaki Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief that a deity is not wholly good and is possibly evil Part of a series on Theodicy Key concepts Absence of good Augustinian theodicy Best of all possible worlds Divine retribution Dystheism Epicurean paradox Free will Irenaean theodicy Misotheism Moral evil Natural evil Problem of evil Notable figures Saint Augustine Ehrman Epicurus Hick Hume Saint Irenaeus Leibniz Maistre Nietzsche Plantinga Rowe Swinburne Wiesel v t e Dystheism (from Ancient Greek : δυσ- , romanized : dus- , lit.

'bad'; θεός , theos , 'god') is the belief that a god is not wholly good and can even be considered evil . Definitions of the term somewhat vary, with one author defining it as "where God decides to become malevolent".

[ 1 ] The broad theme of dystheism has existed for millennia, as shown by tricksters found in ethnic religions and by various interpretations of the Supreme Being of monotheistic religions. For example, the Abrahamic creator deity is an evil god according to gnostic traditions.

[ 2 ] Background and details [ edit ] The concept has been used frequently in popular culture and is a part of several religious traditions in the world. Tricksters found in ethnic religions often have a dystheistic nature. One example is Eshu , a trickster in Yoruba religion who deliberately fostered violence between groups of people for his amusement.

[ citation needed ] Another example is Loki in old Norse religion , though Odin has these qualities as well.

Zoroastrianism involves belief in an ongoing struggle between a creator god of goodness, Ahura Mazda , and a destroying god of hatred, Angra Mainyu , neither of which is omnipotent , which is a form of dualistic cosmology . The ancient Greek god Ares , depending on time and region, was associated with all the horrors of war.

Dystheists may themselves be theists or atheists , and in the case of either, concerning the nature of the Abrahamic god, will assert that God is not good, and is possibly, although not necessarily, malevolent , particularly but not exclusively to those who do not wish to follow any of the Abrahamic religions . For example, in his Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God (1741), the revivalist Christian preacher Jonathan Edwards describes a God full of vengeful rage and contempt. However, Edwards' theology presumes a God whose vengeance and contempt are directed toward evil and its manifestation in fallen humanity . To Edwards, a deity that ignores moral corruption or shows indifference to evil would be closer to the deity espoused by dystheism, that is, evil, because justice is an extension of love and moral goodness.

One particular view of dystheism, an atheistic approach, is summarized by the prominent revolutionary philosopher Mikhail Bakunin , who wrote in God and the State that "if God really existed, it would be necessary to abolish him". Bakunin argued that, as a "jealous lover of human liberty, and deeming it the absolute condition of all that we admire and respect in humanity", the "idea of God" constitutes metaphysical oppression of the idea of human choice.

[ 3 ] This argument is an inversion of Voltaire 's phrase "If God did not exist, it would be necessary for man to invent Him".

Political theorist and activist Thomas Paine similarly wrote in The Age of Reason , "Whenever we read the obscene stories, the voluptuous debaucheries, the cruel and torturous executions, the unrelenting vindictiveness, with which more than half the Bible is filled, it would be more consistent that we called it the word of a demon, than the word of God." He added, "It is a history of wickedness, that has served to corrupt and brutalize mankind; and, for my part, I sincerely detest it, as I detest everything that is cruel." [ 4 ] Unlike Bakunin, however, Paine's condemnation of the purported nature of the divine from his time did not extend to outright atheism and disbelief in all spirituality: Paine stated that he accepted the deistic notion of an almighty mover behind all things.

Usage in popular culture [ edit ] Dystheism as a concept, although often not labeled as such, has been referred to in many aspects of popular culture . As stated before, related ideas date back many decades, with the Victorian era figure Algernon Charles Swinburne writing in his work Anactoria about the ancient Greek poet Sappho and her lover Anactoria in explicitly dystheistic imagery that includes cannibalism and sadomasochism .

[ 5 ] More recent examples include the popular Star Trek television series . Fictional character Worf claims that his race, the Klingons , have no gods, because they killed them centuries ago for being "more trouble than they were worth." [ 6 ] Various music bands approached themes related to or directly touching dystheism; for example, thrash metal band Slayer condensed it in the album God Hates Us All , while melodic death metal band At the Gates explored it in various works such as Terminal Spirit Disease , The Nightmare of Being or Slaughter of the Soul .

See also [ edit ] Religion portal Argument from morality Atenism The Bible and violence Comparative religion Conceptions of God Creationism Demiurge Deus absconditus (Christian theology) Deus otiosus Ethical monotheism Evil God challenge False god Gnosticism God and the State God in Abrahamic religions Holocaust theology Misotheism Moralistic therapeutic deism Names of God Outline of theology Problem of evil Problem of Hell Satanic Verses Theistic Satanism Theodicy Urmonotheismus (primitive monotheism) Violence in the Quran References [ edit ] ^ Human, Dirk J. (2012).

Psalmody and Poetry in Old Testament Ethics .

Bloomsbury Publishing USA . p. 25.

^ https://iep.utm.edu/gnostic/ [ bare URL ] ^ Mikhail Alexandrovich Bakunin (Jan 1, 2009).

God and the State . Cosimo, Inc. p. 28.

^ Paine, Thomas (1877).

The Age of Reason . Citadel Press.

^ Morgan, Thaïs E. (1984). "Swinburne's Dramatic Monologues: Sex and Ideology".

Victorian Poetry .

22 (2): 175–195.

ISSN 1530-7190.

JSTOR 40002965.

^ Michael Okuda; Denise Okuda; Debbie Mirek (May 17, 2011).

The Star Trek Encyclopedia .

Simon & Schuster .

v t e God Deity Divinity Goddess List Conceptions of God Existence Gender of God Agnostic theism Animism Antitheism Apatheism Atheism Agnostic atheism Christian atheism Implicit and explicit atheism Jewish atheism Negative and positive atheism New Atheism Theological noncognitivism Binitarianism Classical theism Deism Ceremonial deism Christian deism Pandeism Polydeism Dipolar theism Dystheism Egotheism Misotheism Henotheism Ietsism Kathenotheism Liberal theism Monolatry Monotheism Ethical monotheism Post-monotheism Mysticism Nontheism Post-theism Nontrinitarianism Open theism Panentheism Pantheism Classical pantheism Hylotheism Naturalistic pantheism Philosophical theism Physitheism Euhemerism Polytheism Skeptical theism Spiritualism Theism Theistic finitism Transtheism Trinitarianism Tritheism Unitarianism Religion portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dystheism&oldid=1305935697 " Categories : Conceptions of God Theism Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 23:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dystheism 12 languages Add topic

