Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Olympians 2 Twelve gods 3 List 4 Genealogy 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Twelve Olympians 86 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски मराठी مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Major deities of the Greek pantheon Fragment of a Hellenistic relief (1st century BC–1st century AD) depicting the twelve Olympians carrying their attributes in procession; from left to right: Hestia (scepter), Hermes (winged cap and staff), Aphrodite (veiled), Ares (helmet and spear), Demeter (scepter and wheat sheaf), Hephaestus (staff), Hera (scepter), Poseidon (trident), Athena (owl and helmet), Zeus (thunderbolt and staff), Artemis (bow and quiver) and Apollo (lyre) from the Walters Art Museum .

[ 1 ] Part of a series on Greek mythology Theseus slays the Minotaur under the gaze of Athena Deities Primordial Titans Olympians Nymphs Water Chthonic Heroes and heroism Heracles Labours Achilles Hector Diomedes Trojan War Odysseus Odyssey Jason Argonauts Golden Fleece Perseus Medusa Gorgon Oedipus Sphinx Orpheus Orphism Theseus Minotaur Bellerophon Pegasus Chimera Daedalus Labyrinth Atalanta Hippomenes Golden apple Cadmus Thebes Aeneas Aeneid Phaethon Triptolemus Eleusinian Mysteries Pelops Ancient Olympic Games Pirithous Centauromachy Amphitryon Teumessian fox Narcissus Meleager Calydonian boar hunt Otrera Amazons Related Satyrs Centaurs Dragons Demogorgon Ancient Greek religion List of Mycenaean deities Ancient Greece portal Myths portal v t e In ancient Greek religion and mythology , the twelve Olympians are the major deities of the Greek pantheon , commonly considered to be Zeus , Poseidon , Hera , Demeter , Aphrodite , Athena , Artemis , Apollo , Ares , Hephaestus , Hermes , and either Hestia or Dionysus .

[ 2 ] They were called Olympians because, according to tradition, they resided on Mount Olympus .

Besides the twelve Olympians, there were many other cultic groupings of twelve gods.

Olympians [ edit ] The Olympians are a race of deities , primarily consisting of a third and fourth generation of immortal beings, worshipped as the principal gods of the Greek pantheon and so named because of their residency atop Mount Olympus . They gained their supremacy in a ten-year-long war of gods , in which Zeus led his siblings to victory over the previous generation of ruling immortal beings, the Titans , children of the primordial deities Gaia and Uranus . They were a family of gods, the most important consisting of the first generation of Olympians, offspring of the Titans Cronus and Rhea : Zeus, Poseidon , Hera , Demeter and Hestia , along with the principal offspring of Zeus: Aphrodite , [ 3 ] Athena , Artemis , Apollo , Ares , Hephaestus , Hermes and Dionysus . Although Hades was a major deity in the Greek pantheon and was the brother of Zeus and the other first generation of Olympians, his realm was far away from Olympus in the underworld , and thus he was not usually considered to be one of the Olympians.

[ 4 ] Olympic gods can be contrasted to chthonic gods [ 5 ] including Hades and his wife Persephone , by mode of sacrifice, the latter receiving sacrifices in a bothros ( βόθρος , "pit") or megaron ( μέγαρον , "sunken chamber") [ 6 ] rather than at an altar.

The canonical number of Olympian gods was twelve, but besides the (thirteen) principal Olympians listed above, there were many other residents of Olympus, who thus might be considered to be Olympians.

[ 7 ] Heracles became a resident of Olympus after his apotheosis and married another Olympian resident Hebe .

[ 8 ] According to Diodorus Siculus , some said that Heracles was offered a place among the twelve, but refused as it would mean one of the original twelve being "cast out".

[ 9 ] In the Iliad , the goddess Themis , who is listed among the twelve Titans , dwells on Olympus alongside the other gods, [ 10 ] making her a Titan and an Olympian at the same time. According to Hesiod, the children of Styx — Zelus (Envy), Nike (Victory), Kratos (Strength), and Bia (Force)—"have no house apart from Zeus, nor any dwelling nor path except that wherein God leads them, but they dwell always with Zeus".

[ 11 ] Some others who might be considered Olympians include the Horae , the Graces , the Muses , Eileithyia , Iris , Dione , and Ganymede .

[ 12 ] Twelve gods [ edit ] Throughout ancient Greece, there were many cultic groupings of twelve gods, with varying members. The earliest evidence of Greek religious practice involving twelve gods ( Greek : δωδεκάθεον , dōdekátheon , from δώδεκα dōdeka , "twelve", and θεοί theoi , "gods") comes no earlier than the late sixth century BC.

[ 13 ] According to Thucydides , an altar of the twelve gods was established in the agora of Athens by the archon Pisistratus (son of Hippias and the grandson of the tyrant Pisistratus ), around 522 BC.

[ 14 ] The altar became the central point from which distances from Athens were measured and a place of supplication and refuge.

[ 15 ] Olympia apparently also had an early tradition of twelve gods.

[ 16 ] The Homeric Hymn to Hermes ( c.

500 BC ) has the god Hermes divide a sacrifice of two cows he has stolen from Apollo, into twelve parts, on the banks of the river Alpheus (presumably at Olympia): Next glad-hearted Hermes dragged the rich meats he had prepared and put them on a smooth, flat stone, and divided them into twelve portions distributed by lot, making each portion wholly honorable.

[ 17 ] Pindar, in an ode written to be sung at Olympia c. 480 BC, has Heracles sacrificing, alongside the Alpheus, to the "twelve ruling gods": [ 18 ] [Heracles] enclosed the Altis all around and marked it off in the open, and he made the encircling area a resting-place for feasting, honoring the stream of the Alpheus along with the twelve ruling gods.

[ 19 ] Another of Pindar's Olympian odes mentions "six double altars".

[ 20 ] Herodorus of Heraclea (c. 400 BC) also has Heracles founding a shrine at Olympia, with six pairs of gods, each pair sharing a single altar.

[ 21 ] Many other places had cults of the twelve gods, including Delos , Chalcedon , Magnesia on the Maeander , and Leontinoi in Sicily .

[ 22 ] As with the twelve Olympians, although the number of gods was fixed at twelve, the membership varied.

[ 23 ] While the majority of the gods included as members of these other cults of twelve gods were Olympians, non-Olympians were also sometimes included. For example, Herodorus of Heraclea identified the six pairs of gods at Olympia as: Zeus and Poseidon, Hera and Athena, Hermes and Apollo, the Graces and Dionysus, Artemis and Alpheus , and Cronus and Rhea .

[ 24 ] Thus, while this list includes the eight Olympians: Zeus, Poseidon, Hera, Athena, Hermes, Apollo, Artemis, and Dionysus, it also contains three clear non-Olympians: the Titan parents of the first generation of Olympians, Cronus and Rhea, and the river god Alpheus, with the status of the Graces (here apparently counted as one god) being unclear.

Plato connected "twelve gods" with the twelve months and implies that he considered Pluto (or Hades) one of the twelve in proposing that the final month be devoted to him and the spirits of the dead.

[ 25 ] The Roman poet Ennius gives the Roman equivalents (the Dii Consentes ) as six male-female complements, [ 26 ] preserving the place of Vesta (Greek Hestia), who played a crucial role in Roman religion as a state goddess maintained by the Vestals .

List [ edit ] There is no single canonical list of the twelve Olympian gods. The thirteen Greek gods and goddesses, along with their Roman counterparts, most commonly considered to be one of the twelve Olympians are listed below.

Greek Roman Image Functions and attributes Zeus Jupiter King of the gods and ruler of Mount Olympus ; god of the sky, lightning, thunder, law, order and justice.

The youngest child of the Titans Cronus and Rhea. Brother and husband of Hera and brother of Poseidon, Hades, Demeter, and Hestia. He had many affairs with goddesses and mortals, such as his sister Demeter and Leto , mortals Leda and Alcmene , and more.

[ 27 ] His symbols include the thunderbolt, eagle, oak tree, bull, scepter, and scales.

Hera Juno Queen of the gods and the goddess of marriage, women, childbirth and family.

The youngest daughter of Cronus and Rhea. Sister and wife of Zeus. Being the goddess of marriage, she frequently tried to get revenge on Zeus' lovers and their children.

Her symbols include the peacock, cuckoo, and cow.

Poseidon Neptune God of the seas, water, storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and horses.

The middle son of Cronus and Rhea. Brother of Zeus and Hades. Married to the Nereid Amphitrite ; although, as with many of the male Greek gods, he had many lovers.

His symbols include the trident, horse, bull, and dolphin.

Demeter Ceres Goddess of the harvest, fertility, agriculture, nature and the seasons. She presided over grains and the fertility of the earth.

The middle daughter of Cronus and Rhea. Also the lover of Zeus and Poseidon, and the mother of Persephone , Despoine , Arion .

Her symbols include the poppy, wheat, torch, cornucopia, and pig.

Apollo Apollo God of Sun, light, prophecy , philosophy , archery, truth, inspiration, poetry, music, arts, manly beauty, medicine, healing, and plague.

The son of Zeus and Leto , and the twin brother of Artemis.

His symbols include bow and arrow, lyre, raven, swan and wolf.

Artemis Diana Goddess of the hunt, the wilderness, virginity, the Moon, archery, childbirth, protection and plague.

The daughter of Zeus and Leto , and the twin sister of Apollo.

Her symbols include the Moon, horse, deer, hound, she-bear, snake, cypress tree, and bow and arrow.

Ares Mars God of war, violence, bloodshed and manly virtues.

The son of Zeus and Hera, all the other gods despised him except Aphrodite. His Latin name, Mars, gave us the word " martial ".

His symbols include the boar, serpent, dog, vulture, spear, and shield.

Athena Minerva Goddess of wisdom, handicraft, and warfare.

[ 28 ] The daughter of Zeus and the Oceanid Metis , she rose from her father's head fully grown and in full battle armor.

Her symbols include the owl and the olive tree.

Hephaestus Vulcan Master blacksmith and craftsman of the gods; god of the forge, craftsmanship, invention, fire and volcanoes.

The son of Hera, either by Zeus or through parthenogenesis . Married to Aphrodite. His Latin name, Vulcan, gave us the word " volcano ".

His symbols include fire, anvil, axe, donkey, hammer, tongs, and quail.

Aphrodite Venus Goddess of love, pleasure, passion, procreation, fertility, beauty and desire.

The daughter of Zeus and the Oceanid or Titaness Dione , or perhaps born from the sea foam after Uranus ' blood dripped into the sea after being castrated by his youngest son, Cronus , who then threw his father's genitals into the sea. Married to Hephaestus, although she had many adulterous affairs, most notably with Ares. Her name gave us the word " aphrodisiac ", while her Latin name, Venus, gave us the word " venereal ".

Her symbols include the dove, bird, apple, bee, swan, myrtle , and rose.

Hermes Mercury Messenger of the gods; god of travel, commerce, communication, borders, eloquence, diplomacy, thieves, and games. He was also the guide of dead souls.

The son of Zeus and the nymph Maia . The second-youngest Olympian, just older than Dionysus.

His symbols include the caduceus (staff entwined with two snakes), winged sandals and cap, stork, and tortoise (whose shell he used to invent the lyre).

Most lists of the "twelve Olympians" consist of the above eleven plus either Hestia or Dionysus Hestia Vesta Goddess of the hearth, fire and of the right ordering of domesticity and the family; she was born into the first Olympian generation and was one of the original twelve Olympians.

She is the first child of Cronus and Rhea, the elder sister of Hades, Demeter, Poseidon, Hera, and Zeus.

Some lists of the Twelve Olympians omit her in favor of Dionysus, but the speculation that she gave her throne to him in order to keep the peace seems to be a modern invention.

[ citation needed ] Dionysus Liber God of wine, the grapevine, fertility, festivity, ecstasy, madness and resurrection. Patron god of the art of theatre .

The son of Zeus and the mortal Theban princess Semele , and the youngest Olympian god. Married to the Cretan princess Ariadne .

His symbols include the grapevine, ivy, cup, tiger, panther, leopard, dolphin, goat, and pinecone.

Genealogy [ edit ] Family tree of the major Olympians [ 29 ] Gaia Uranus Uranus' genitals Coeus Phoebe Cronus Rhea Leto ZEUS HERA POSEIDON Hades DEMETER HESTIA APOLLO ARTEMIS a [ 30 ] b [ 31 ] ARES HEPHAESTUS Metis ATHENA [ 32 ] Maia HERMES Semele DIONYSUS Dione a [ 33 ] b [ 34 ] APHRODITE See also [ edit ] Ancient Greece portal Religion portal Dii Consentes , the Roman equivalent of the twelve Olympians Family tree of the Greek gods Interpretatio graeca , including a table of mythological equivalents List of Greek mythological characters Supreme Council of Ethnikoi Hellenes Hellenismos Olympia Greek mythology in popular culture Olympian spirits Æsir Tuatha Dé Danann Anunnaki Elohim Adityas Notes [ edit ] ^ Walters Art Museum , accession number 23.40 .

^ Hansen, p. 250 ; Burkert, pp. 125 ff.; Dowden, p. 43 ; Chadwick, p. 85 ; Müller, pp. 419 ff.

; Pache, pp. 308 ff.

; Thomas, p. 12 ; Shapiro, p. 362 ; Long, pp. 140–141 ; Morford, p. 113; Hard, p. 80 .

^ According to Homer , Aphrodite was the daughter of Zeus ( Iliad 3.374 , 20.105 ; Odyssey 8.308 , 320 ) and Dione ( Iliad 5.370–71 ), see Gantz, pp. 99–100. However, According to Hesiod , Theogony 183–200 , Aphrodite was born from Uranus' severed genitals, see Gantz, pp. 99–100.

^ Hansen, p. 250 ; Morford, p. 113; Hard p. 80 .

^ Chadwick, p. 85 .

^ Dillon, p. 114 .

^ Ogden, pp. 2–3 ; Dowden, p. 43 ; Hansen, p. 250 ; Burkert, p. 125.

^ Herodotus , 2.43–44 .

^ Diodorus Siculus , 4.39.4 .

^ Homer , Iliad 15.88 ^ Hesiod , Theogony 386–388 .

^ Just who might be called an Olympian is not entirely clear. For example, Dowden, p. 43 , describes Heracles, Hebe, the Muses, and the Graces as Olympians, and on p. 45 , lists Iris, Dione, and Eileithyia among the Homeric Olympians, while Hansen, p. 250 , describes Heracles, Hebe, the Horae, and Ganymede as notable residents of Olympus, but says they "are not ordinarily classified as Olympians".

^ Dowden, p. 43 ; Rutherford, p. 43.

^ Rutherford, pp. 43–44; Thucydides , 6.54.6–7 .

^ Gadbery, p. 447.

^ Dowden, p. 43 ; Rutherford, p. 44; Long, pp. 58–62 (T 13), 154–157.

^ Long, pp. 61–62 (T 13 G), 156–157; Homeric Hymn to Hermes , 128–129 .

^ Dowden, p. 43 ; Rutherford, p. 44; Long, pp. 59–60 (T 13 C), 154–155.

^ Pindar , Olympian 10.49 .

^ Rutherford, p. 44; Long, pp. 58 (T 13 A), 154; Pindar , Olympian 5.5 .

^ Dowden, p. 43 ; Rutherford, p. 47; Long, pp. 58–59 (T 13 B), 154; FGrH 31 F34a-b.

^ Rutherford, p. 45; Delos: Long, pp.

11 , 87–90 (T 26), 182 ; Chalcedon: Long, pp.

56 – 57 (T 11 D), 217 – 218 ; Magnesia on the Maeander: Long, pp. 53–54 (T 7), 221 – 223 ; Leontinoi: Long, pp.

95 – 96 (T 32), p. 157 .

^ Long, pp. 360–361, lists 54 Greek (and Roman) gods, including the thirteen Olympians mentioned above, who have been identified as members of one or more cultic groupings of twelve gods.

^ Dowden, p. 43 ; Rutherford, p. 47; Hard, p. 81 ; Long, pp. 58–59 (T 13 B), 141, 154; FGrH 31 F34a-b.

^ Rutherford, pp. 45–46; Plato , The Laws 828 b-d .

^ "Greek mythology".

Encyclopedia Americana . Vol. 13. 1993. p. 431.

^ Hamilton, Edith (September 26, 2017).

Mythology: Timeless Tales of Gods and Heroes . Illustrated by Tierney, Jim. (75th anniversary illustrated ed.). New York: Black Dog & Leventhal Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-316-43852-0 .

OCLC 1004059928 .

^ Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of Literature . Merriam-Webster. 1995. p.

81 .

ISBN 9780877790426 .

^ This chart is based upon Hesiod 's Theogony , unless otherwise noted.

^ According to Homer , Iliad 1.570–579 , 14.338 , Odyssey 8.312 , Hephaestus was apparently the son of Hera and Zeus, see Gantz, p. 74.

^ According to Hesiod , Theogony 927–929 , Hephaestus was produced by Hera alone, with no father, see Gantz, p. 74.

^ According to Hesiod 's Theogony 886–890 , of Zeus' children by his seven wives, Athena was the first to be conceived, but the last to be born; Zeus impregnated Metis then swallowed her, later Zeus himself gave birth to Athena "from his head", see Gantz, pp. 51–52, 83–84.

^ According to Hesiod , Theogony 183–200 , Aphrodite was born from Uranus' severed genitals, see Gantz, pp. 99–100.

^ According to Homer , Aphrodite was the daughter of Zeus ( Iliad 3.374 , 20.105 ; Odyssey 8.308 , 320 ) and Dione ( Iliad 5.370–71 ), see Gantz, pp. 99–100.

References [ edit ] Burkert, Walter , Greek Religion , Harvard University Press , 1985.

ISBN 0-674-36281-0 .

Chadwick, John, The Mycenaean World , Cambridge University Press, 1976.

ISBN 9780521290371 .

Dillon, Matthew, Girls and Women in Classical Greek Religion . London: Routledge. (2002).

ISBN 0415202728 .

Diodorus Siculus , Library of History, Volume III: Books 4.59-8 , translated by C. H. Oldfather , Loeb Classical Library No. 340. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press , 1939.

ISBN 978-0-674-99375-4 .

Online version at Harvard University Press .

Online version by Bill Thayer .

Dowden, Ken, "Olympian Gods, Olympian Pantheon", in A Companion to Greek Religion , Daniel Ogden editor, John Wiley & Sons, 2010.

ISBN 9781444334173 .

Gadbery, Laura M., "The Sanctuary of the Twelve Gods in the Athenian Agora: A Revised View", Hesperia 61 (1992), pp. 447–489.

Gantz, Timothy, Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources , Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: ISBN 978-0-8018-5360-9 (Vol. 1), ISBN 978-0-8018-5362-3 (Vol. 2).

Hansen, William , William F. Hansen, Classical Mythology: A Guide to the Mythical World of the Greeks and Romans , Oxford University Press, 2005.

ISBN 9780195300352 .

Hard, Robin (2004), The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose's "Handbook of Greek Mythology" , Psychology Press, 2004, ISBN 9780415186360 .

Google Books .

Herodotus ; Histories , A. D. Godley (translator), Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1920; ISBN 0674991338 .

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Hesiod , Theogony , in The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White , Cambridge, Massachusetts., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Homer , The Iliad with an English Translation by A. T. Murray, Ph.D., in two volumes . Cambridge, Massachusetts., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

The Iliad (Murray) – via Wikisource .

Homer ; The Odyssey with an English Translation by A. T. Murray, Ph.D., in two volumes . Cambridge, Massachusetts., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Vol. I , Vol. II at the Internet Archive .

Homeric Hymn to Hermes (4) , in The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White , Cambridge, Massachusetts., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Long, Charlotte R., The Twelve Gods of Greece and Rome , Brill Archive, Jan 1, 1987.

Google Books .

Morford, Mark P. O., Robert J. Lenardon, Classical Mythology , Eighth Edition, Oxford University Press, 2007.

ISBN 978-0-19-530805-1 .

Müller, Karl Otfried, Ancient Art and Its Remains: Or, A Manual of the Archaeology of Art , translated by John Leitch, B. Quaritch, 1852.

Ogden, Daniel "Introduction" to A Companion to Greek Religion , Daniel Ogden editor, John Wiley & Sons, 2010.

ISBN 9781444334173 .

Pache, Corinne Ondine, "Gods, Greek" in The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece and Rome, Volume 3 , Oxford University Press. 2010.

ISBN 9780195170726 .

Pindar , Odes , Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990.

Plato , Laws in Plato in Twelve Volumes , Vols. 10 & 11 translated by R. G. Bury. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press ; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1967 & 1968.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Rutherford, Ian, "Canonizing the Pantheon: the Dodekatheon in Greek Religion and its Origins" in The Gods of Ancient Greece: Identities and Transformations , editors Jan N. Bremmer, Andrew Erskine, Edinburgh University Press 2010.

ISBN 978-0748637980 .

Shapiro, H. A., "Chapter 20: Olympian Gods at Home and Abroad" in A Companion to Greek Art , editors Tyler Jo Smith , Dimitris Plantzos, John Wiley & Sons, 2012.

ISBN 9781118273371 .

Thomas, Edmund, "From the pantheon of the gods to the Pantheon of Rome" in Pantheons: Transformations of a Monumental Idea , editors Richard Wrigley, Matthew Craske , Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2004.

ISBN 9780754608080 .

Thucydides , Thucydides translated into English; with introduction, marginal analysis, notes, and indices. Volume 1.

, Benjamin Jowett. translator. Oxford. Clarendon Press. 1881.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Further reading [ edit ] Berger-Doer, Gratia, "Dodekatheoi", in Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae (LIMC). III.1: Atherion – Eros , pp. 646–658, Zurich and Munich, Artemis Verlag, 1986.

ISBN 3760887511 .

Internet Archive .

v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis v t e Greek deities series Primordial deities Titan deities Water deities Chthonic deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Category Ancient Greece portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vmpwj
Cached time: 20250816114913
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.967 seconds
Real time usage: 1.192 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4712/1000000
Revision size: 29381/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 524902/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2876/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 112654/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.442/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25220851/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  756.039      1 -total
 28.17%  212.967     29 Template:Navbox
 15.33%  115.886      1 Template:Greek_mythology_sidebar
 15.05%  113.748      1 Template:Sidebar
 13.93%  105.336      7 Template:Lang
 13.48%  101.916      1 Template:Reflist
 11.05%   83.574      1 Template:Greek_religion
  9.30%   70.298      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  8.07%   61.008      1 Template:Short_description
  7.26%   54.858      1 Template:Family_tree_of_the_Olympians Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:574742:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816114913 and revision id 1305808033. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Twelve_Olympians&oldid=1305808033 " Categories : Twelve Olympians Cultural lists 12 (number) Olympian deities Mount Olympus Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from October 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from October 2022 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 06:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Twelve Olympians 86 languages Add topic

