Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organization 3 Activities 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents American Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family and Property Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Catholic American advocacy group founded in 1973 This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "American Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family and Property" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) American Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family, and Property (TFP) Founded 1973 ( 1973 ) Type 501(c)(3) Charity Registration no.

23-7325778  ( EIN ) Location Spring Grove, Pennsylvania , U.S.

Area served United States Key people Raymond E. Drake, President John Horvat II, Vice-President Revenue $8,530,115 (FY 2012) [ 1 ] Employees 100 Volunteers 75 Website tfp .org This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The American Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family and Property , also known as The American TFP , and legally incorporated as The Foundation for a Christian Civilization, Inc.

is a Traditionalist Catholic American advocacy group.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is an autonomous organization which forms part of the larger social conservative , anticommunist and monarchist [ 4 ] international Tradition, Family, Property (TFP) movement founded by Brazilian intellectual, politician, and activist Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira .

History [ edit ] Founded in 1973, it is one of many "Tradition, Family and Property" groups (TFPs) and like-minded organizations worldwide, all of which are inspired by the work of the Brazilian intellectual, politician, and activist Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira . The first American group was incorporated in 1975 and established its first hermitage in 1977 in Yonkers , New York . The Yonkers location was subsequently closed and the hermits established their permanent hermitage on 70 acres in Spring Grove , Pennsylvania .

[ 5 ] The Foundation for a Christian Civilization ("Foundation") was incorporated in 1973, drawing on earlier ties between Brazilians, who traveled to the US to develop a North American affiliate. The American TFP developed early connections with leaders of the religious and political right , including Paul Weyrich of The Heritage Foundation and the Free Congress Foundation and Morton Blackwell of the College Republican National Committee and the Reagan administration .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In 1984, President Ronald Reagan expressed the hope for the movement’s “continued growth and prosperity.” “With your help and the help of all patriotic Americans,” said the President, “I know our nation can surmount all the challenges which lie ahead.” [ 8 ] Founded to help fundraising for a Catholic counterrevolution against left-wing ideologies and communism, it subsequently became a civil cultural organization that aims to uphold and promote what they consider to be the values of Christian civilization . The Foundation later merged in June 1992 with American TFP to form a single corporation identified as The Foundation for a Christian Civilization.

[ 5 ] Organization [ edit ] The organization solicits funds as a non-profit charity, [ 2 ] not as a diocesan organization.

[ 9 ] Its annual public reports to the Internal Revenue Service indicate that between 2002 and 2014 it disbursed $1,800,000 to support the St. Louis de Montfort Academy and $1,500,000 to support related organizations in North and South America, most significantly Canada Needs Our Lady, Associação dos Fundadores and the Tradición y Acción organizations of Colombia and Peru.

[ 10 ] Activities [ edit ] TFP has continued its ties with the political right as a participating sponsor of the Conservative Political Action Conference , [ 11 ] and by signing statements issued by the Heartland Institute that opposed housing finance reform legislation, [ 12 ] and discussions of climate change in comprehensive energy legislation [ 13 ] and in the State Department funding authorization.

[ 14 ] TFP Student Action is the university campus outreach of the TFP.

[ 15 ] Its activities include distributing fliers and other literature on the streets of universities, sponsoring speakers on campuses, hosting student conferences, and organizing protests and petitions, especially against abortion and LGBT student groups at Catholic universities. Its most recent campaign is against the 96 Catholic colleges and universities that allow LGBT student groups.

[ 16 ] In April 2009, volunteers of TFP Student Action traveled to the major cities of New Hampshire [ 17 ] and Maine [ 18 ] to distribute literature against same-sex marriage.

The American TFP provides the staff to run Saint Louis de Montfort Academy, a boys' boarding school in Herndon, Pennsylvania , that provides students with a traditional Catholic education .

[ 19 ] It also operates Call to Chivalry summer camps, which express Oliveira's view [ 20 ] of nobility , chivalry , and the benefits of the feudal past.

[ 21 ] The Return to Order campaign is an offshoot of the US Foundation for a Christian Civilisation. In 2019, it organized a petition against the Good Omens miniseries as mocking God's wisdom and making Satanism appear normal, light, and acceptable, but they targeted the petition at Netflix rather than Amazon Prime Video which distributes the series.

[ 22 ] In 2021, they staged a protest at the 59th New York Film Festival due to the festival showing the Paul Verhoeven film Benedetta , which they deemed blasphemous for its portrayal of lesbianism within the confines of a convent.

[ 23 ] Criticism [ edit ] The American TFP has been cited in several articles by the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) for their anti-LGBT views.

[ 24 ] According to the SPLC the TFP is a "virulently anti-LGBT".

[ 25 ] Jesuit priest James Martin , referring to the American TFP and to the organization Church Militant commented that “These online extremist hate groups are now more powerful than local churches”.

[ 26 ] See also [ edit ] America Needs Fatima Alliance Defending Freedom Catholic League Christian Institute Family Research Council References [ edit ] ^ "Charity Ratings and Donor Resources" .

Charity Navigator .

^ a b " "Fundraising Disclosure Notice", TFP Student Action" . Archived from the original on January 3, 2011.

^ "The Counter-Revolution: Who We Are" .

The American TFP . 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 1 September 2021 .

^ "The Colonial TFP" (PDF) , Crusade Magazine , 65 , Hanover, PA: The American Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family and Property: [1], September–October 2003 ^ a b " "Mary Queen of the Third Millennium, Inc. v. The Foundation for a Christian Civilization, Inc.", United States Patent And Trademark Office, December 3, 2008" (PDF) .

^ Power, Margaret (2011), "Transnational, Conservative, Catholic, and Anti-Communist: Tradition, Family, and Property (TFP)", in Durham, Martin; Power, Margaret (eds.), New Perspectives on the Transnational Right , New York: Palgrave-MacMillan, pp.

96– 97, ISBN 978-0-230-62370-5 ^ Lernoux, Penny (1989), People of God: The Struggle for World Catholicism , New York: Viking, p.

343 , ISBN 0-670-81529-2 ^ Lernoux, Penny (1990).

People of God: the struggle for world Catholicism . New York, N.Y., U.S.A: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-14-009816-7 .

^ " "Office of the Chancellor", Pastoral Bulletin , Archdiocese of Miami, October 17, 2007" (PDF) .

^ The Foundation for a Christian Civilization, Return of Organization Exempt From Income Tax (IRS Form 990N) , New York: Foundation Center, 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 . Retrieved 25 April 2015 ^ Rick Santorum to CPAC: "Let's Talk About How We Can Build a Great America Again" , The American Conservative Union , March 7, 2014, archived from the original on 2016-01-11 , retrieved March 6, 2015 , Participating Sponsors: … Tradition, Family, Property… ^ Free-Market Leaders Urge Senate to Reject Housing Finance Overhaul , The Heartland Institute , April 23, 2014 , retrieved March 6, 2015 , Coalition members include leaders from … Tradition, Family, Property, Inc.

^ "[Open Letter to Senator Pete Domenici]" (PDF) , Environment & Climate News , 6 (4), The Heartland Institute: 7, May 2003 ^ "[Open Letter to Congressman Henry Hyde]" (PDF) , Environment & Climate News , 6 (6), The Heartland Institute: 15, July 2003 ^ "TFP Student Action" .

TFP Student Action .

^ " "Scandal: Research finds pro-homosexual clubs at 96 Catholic universities" " . Archived from the original on September 7, 2009.

^ " "Gay marriage protesters make noise in Nashua" " .

^ "Protesters take aim at bill for gay marriage — Politics — Bangor Dail…" .

archive.ph . July 19, 2012.

^ "Saint Louis de Montfort Academy" .

^ Lernoux, Penny (1989), People of God: The Struggle for World Catholicism , New York: Viking, p.

339 , ISBN 0-670-81529-2 ^ Power, Margaret (2011), "Transnational, Conservative, Catholic, and Anti-Communist: Tradition, Family, and Property (TFP)", in Durham, Martin; Power, Margaret (eds.), New Perspectives on the Transnational Right , New York: Palgrave-MacMillan, p. 99, ISBN 978-0-230-62370-5 ^ Flood, Alison (June 20, 2019).

"Thousands petition Netflix to cancel Amazon Prime's Good Omens" .

The Guardian . Retrieved June 23, 2019 .

^ Shafer, Ellise (26 September 2021).

"Catholic Protesters Congregate Outside 'Benedetta's' New York Film Festival Premiere" .

Variety . Retrieved 29 September 2021 .

^ "Extremists of Many Stripes Gather at Values Voter Summit 2011" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved 2018-07-23 .

^ "National Organization for Marriage Has a Rough Start to 2013" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved 2018-07-23 .

^ Bruni, Frank (3 February 2018).

"Opinion | The Scariest Catholic in America (Published 2018)" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 7 February 2018 . Retrieved 30 January 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Official website America Needs Fatima TFP Student Action St. Louis de Montfort Academy "American Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family and Property", Charity Navigator Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Latvia Poland Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Society_for_the_Defense_of_Tradition,_Family_and_Property&oldid=1302376000 " Categories : Traditionalist Catholicism in the United States Anti-communist organizations in the United States Anti-abortion organizations in the United States Intelligent design movement Political advocacy groups in the United States Catholic Church in the United States Organizations established in 1973 1973 establishments in the United States Organizations that oppose LGBTQ rights in the United States Catholic advocacy groups Conservative organizations in the United States Tradition, Family, Property Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from September 2011 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 01:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family and Property Add languages Add topic

