Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Historical perspective 1.2 Atmospheric forcing 2 Structure and evolution Toggle Structure and evolution subsection 2.1 Winter season structure 2.2 Summer season structure 2.3 Evolution 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Indian Monsoon Current 9 languages Español فارسی 한국어 Italiano मराठी 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Seasonally-varying ocean current regime found in the tropical regions of the northern Indian Ocean The Indian Monsoon Current refers to the seasonally varying ocean current regime found in the tropical regions of the northern Indian Ocean .  During winter, the flow of the upper ocean is directed westward from near the Indonesian Archipelago to the Arabian Sea .  During the summer, the direction reverses, with eastward flow extending from Somalia into the Bay of Bengal .  These variations are due to changes in the wind stress associated with the Indian monsoon .  The seasonally reversing open ocean currents that pass south of India are referred to as the Winter Monsoon Current and the Summer Monsoon Current (alternately, the Northeast Monsoon Current and the Southwest Monsoon Current).

[ 1 ] The cold Somali Current , which is strongly linked to the Indian monsoon , is also discussed in this article.

(topmost current) The Southwest and Northeast Monsoon Drift Overview [ edit ] Historical perspective [ edit ] Although Mariners have been aware of the existence of the Monsoon current for nearly one thousand years, a detailed understanding did not emerge until after the International Indian Ocean Expedition of the 1960s.

[ 1 ] The World Ocean Circulation Experiment of the mid 1990s permitted detailed measurement of these currents through an extensive field campaign.

[ 2 ] Atmospheric forcing [ edit ] In the northern hemisphere tropical regions of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, surface winds blow predominantly from the northeast year round, with westward-flowing ocean currents underneath. The Indian Ocean differs from the Atlantic and Pacific in that a continental landmass forms a complete northern boundary at relatively low latitudes. Monsoonal circulations are driven by the differences in temperature between land masses and adjacent oceans.

[ 3 ] Because water has a larger thermal capacity than air, land surfaces will heat more rapidly during the summer season.  The Indian monsoon consists of two phases.  During the northern hemisphere winter, the cool Asian landmass contains a broad area of high pressure, whereas lower pressures prevail over the warmer Indian Ocean and hot Australian continent.  This pressure pattern helps to reinforce the northeasterly trade winds.  During the northern hemisphere summer, the Asian landmass (especially the Indian subcontinent) heats considerably, generating an area of low pressure to the north.  Circulation about this low generates strong winds from the southwest over the Arabian Sea and along the Somali coast.  These winds are enhanced by the formation of an atmospheric western boundary current created by the high terrain over eastern Africa.

A consequence of the Coriolis effect , Ekman theory explains that oceanic flow at the surface is directed at 45 degrees to the right of the wind stress in the Northern Hemisphere.  Thus, winds blowing from the southwest result in eastward currents, while winds blowing from the northeast result in westward currents.

Structure and evolution [ edit ] Winter season structure [ edit ] The Winter Monsoon Current extends from the Bay of Bengal, around India and Sri Lanka, and across the Arabian Sea at a latitude of approximately 8 degrees North .  Currents flow to the southwest along the coast of Somalia to the equator.

Measurements of the strengths of these currents have been obtained from ship drift records. The Northeast Monsoon Current is westward only during the months of January through March, and is strongest in February when it reaches 50 cm s −1 .

[ 4 ] Estimates of westward volume transport range from 7 to 14 Sverdrups .

[ 1 ] Summer season structure [ edit ] The Somali Current, which describes the flow along the Horn of Africa from the equator to around 9 degrees north , [ 5 ] also shifts direction seasonally with the monsoon winds.  It eventually separates from the coastline, turning to the right as it enters the Arabian Sea.  The Summer Monsoon Current, located between 10 and 15 North latitude in the Arabian Sea, bends around India and Sri Lanka, and enters the Bay of Bengal.  The Great Whirl is a gyre located around 10 N and 55 E, and is only present during the summer season.

During the summer when the current flows toward the northeast, Ekman transport (to the right of the flow in the Northern Hemisphere) is offshore, transporting warmer waters deeper into the Arabian sea, and permitting upwelling of cooler waters along the coast.  This sea surface temperature pattern (cooler waters west of warmer waters) reinforces the northward current through geostrophic flow.
The Southwest Monsoon Current is eastward from April through November, and reaches a peak intensity of 30 cm s −1 during the summer months.

[ 4 ] During a 1995 field campaign, the Somali current was measured to transport 37 +/- 5 Sv during mid-September.

[ 6 ] Evolution [ edit ] The rapid initiation of seasonal currents (over the time period of several weeks) can be explained theoretically in terms of linear theory with a Rossby wave response.

[ 5 ] The Monsoon Current can also be viewed in terms of local forcing processes that act in concert to create the mature, basin-wide system.

[ 1 ] The evolution of these currents have been reproduced in dynamical models of the ocean-atmosphere system.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Asian brown cloud Monsoon of South Asia Ocean current Ocean gyre Physical oceanography References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Shankar, D.,  P. N. Vinayachandran and A. S. Unnikrishnan, 2002: The monsoon current in the north Indian Ocean, Progress In Oceanography, Volume 52, Issue 1, Pages 63–120.

^ a b Schott, Friedrich A. and Julian P. McCreary, Jr., 2001: The monsoon circulation of the Indian Ocean, Progress In Oceanography, Volume 51, Issue 1, Pages 1–123.

^ Savtchenko, Andrey.

"An assessment of the Indian Ocean, Monsoon, and Somali Current using NASA's AIRS, MODIS, and QuikSCAT data" Archived 2008-09-17 at the Wayback Machine . NASA Goddard Earth Sciences Data and Information Services Center, Code 610.2, L-3 Communications Government Service Inc. Retrieved on 2008-11-03.

^ a b Hastenrath, Stefan and Lawrence Greischar, 1991: The Monsoonal Current Regimes of the Tropical Indian Ocean: Observed Surface Flow Fields and Their Geostrophic and Wind-Driven Components, Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 96, No. C7, Pages 12,619–12,633.

^ a b Lighthill, M.J., 1969: Dynamic Response of the Indian Ocean to Onset of the Southwest Monsoon, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Vol. 265, No. 1159, pp. 45–92.

^ Beal, Lisa and Theresa K. Chereskin, 2003: The volume transport of the Somali Current during the 1995 southwest monsoon, Deep-Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in Oceanography, Volume 50, Issues 12–13, Pages 2077–2089.

External links [ edit ] Scott Fitzpatrick & Richard Callaghan.

Islands of Inquiry, Seafaring simulations and the origin of  prehistoric settlers to Madagascar . 2009 Rules for Maldivian Trading Ships Travelling Abroad (1925) v t e Ocean currents and gyres Currents Arctic Ocean East Greenland North Icelandic Norwegian Transpolar Drift Stream Atlantic Ocean Angola Antilles Azores Baffin Island Benguela Brazil Canary Cape Horn Caribbean East Greenland East Iceland Falkland Florida Guinea Gulf Stream Irminger Labrador Lomonosov Loop North Atlantic North Brazil North Equatorial Norwegian Portugal South Atlantic South Equatorial West Greenland West Spitsbergen Indian Ocean Agulhas Agulhas Return East Madagascar Equatorial Counter Indian Monsoon Indonesian Throughflow Leeuwin Madagascar Mozambique North Madagascar Somali South Equatorial West Australian Pacific Ocean Alaska Aleutian California Cromwell Davidson East Australian East Korea Warm Equatorial Counter Humboldt Indonesian Throughflow Kamchatka Kuroshio Mindanao North Equatorial North Korea Cold North Pacific Oyashio South Equatorial Tasman Front Southern Ocean Antarctic Circumpolar Tasman Outflow Gyres Major gyres Indian Ocean Gyre North Atlantic Gyre South Atlantic Gyre North Pacific Gyre South Pacific Gyre Other gyres Beaufort Gyre Ross Gyre Weddell Gyre Related Atmospheric circulation Boundary current Coriolis force Ekman transport Marine debris Marine garbage patches Great Pacific Indian Ocean North Atlantic South Pacific Thermohaline circulation Environment portal Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indian_Monsoon_Current&oldid=1170475082 " Categories : Physical oceanography Indian Ocean Currents of the Indian Ocean Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2023, at 07:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indian Monsoon Current 9 languages Add topic

