Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Properties 2 Technique monitoring physical stability 3 Accelerating methods for shelf life prediction 4 Examples 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Suspension (chemistry) 63 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Heterogeneous mixture of solid particles dispersed in a medium A suspension of flour mixed in a glass of water, showing the Tyndall effect In chemistry , a suspension is a heterogeneous mixture of a fluid that contains solid particles sufficiently large for sedimentation . The particles may be visible to the naked eye , usually must be larger than one micrometer , and will eventually settle , although the mixture is only classified as a suspension when and while the particles have not settled out.

Properties [ edit ] A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture in which the solid particles do not dissolve , but get suspended throughout the bulk of the solvent , left floating around freely in the medium.

[ 1 ] The internal phase (solid) is dispersed throughout the external phase (fluid) through mechanical agitation , with the use of certain excipients or suspending agents.

An example of a suspension would be sand in water. The suspended particles are visible under a microscope and will settle over time if left undisturbed. This distinguishes a suspension from a colloid , in which the colloid particles are smaller and do not settle.

[ 2 ] Colloids and suspensions are different from solution , in which the dissolved substance (solute) does not exist as a solid, and solvent and solute are homogeneously mixed.

A suspension of liquid droplets or fine solid particles in a gas is called an aerosol . In the atmosphere , the suspended particles are called particulates and consist of fine dust and soot particles, sea salt , biogenic and volcanogenic sulfates , nitrates , and cloud droplets.

Suspensions are classified on the basis of the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium , where the former is essentially solid while the latter may either be a solid, a liquid, or a gas.

In modern chemical process industries, high-shear mixing technology has been used to create many novel suspensions.

Suspensions are unstable from a thermodynamic point of view but can be kinetically stable over a longer period of time, which in turn can determine a suspension's shelf life. This time span needs to be measured in order to provide accurate information to the consumer and ensure the best product quality.

"Dispersion stability refers to the ability of a dispersion to resist change in its properties over time." [ 3 ] IUPAC definition Dispersion of solid particles in a liquid.

Note : Definition based on that in ref.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Technique monitoring physical stability [ edit ] Multiple light scattering coupled with vertical scanning is the most widely used technique to monitor the dispersion state of a product, hence identifying and quantifying destabilization phenomena.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] It works on concentrated dispersions without dilution. When light is sent through the sample, it is back scattered by the particles. The backscattering intensity is directly proportional to the size and volume fraction of the dispersed phase. Therefore, local changes in concentration ( sedimentation ) and global changes in size ( flocculation , aggregation ) are detected and monitored. Of primary importance in the analysis of stability in particle suspensions is the value of the zeta potential exhibited by suspended solids. This parameter indicates the magnitude of interparticle electrostatic repulsion and is commonly analyzed to determine how the use of adsorbates and pH modification affect particle repulsion and suspension stabilization or destabilization.

Accelerating methods for shelf life prediction [ edit ] The kinetic process of destabilisation can be rather long (up to several months or even years for some products) and it is often required for the formulator to use further accelerating methods in order to reach reasonable development time for new product design. Thermal methods are the most commonly used and consists in increasing temperature to accelerate destabilisation (below critical temperatures of phase and degradation). Temperature affects not only the viscosity, but also interfacial tension in the case of non-ionic surfactants or more generally interactions forces inside the system. Storing a dispersion at high temperatures enables simulation of real life conditions for a product (e.g. tube of sunscreen cream in a car in the summer), but also to accelerate destabilisation processes up to 200 times including vibration, centrifugation and agitation are sometimes used. They subject the product to different forces that pushes the particles / film drainage. However, some emulsions would never coalesce in normal gravity, while they do under artificial gravity.

[ 10 ] Moreover, segregation of different populations of particles have been highlighted when using centrifugation and vibration.

[ 11 ] Examples [ edit ] Common examples of suspensions include: Mud or muddy water: where soil, clay, or silt particles are suspended in water Flour suspended in water Chalk suspended in water Sand suspended in water Oil incorporated in water Pulp suspended in lemonade Blood suspended in plasma See also [ edit ] Sol – Colloidal suspension of very small solid particles in a continuous liquid medium Emulsion – Mixture of two or more immiscible liquids Zeta potential – Electrokinetic potential in colloidal dispersions Turbidity – Cloudiness of a fluid Settleable solids – Process by which particulates move towards the bottom of a liquid and form a sediment Froth flotation – Process for selectively separating of hydrophobic materials from hydrophilic Sediment transport – Movement of solid particles, typically by gravity and fluid entrainment Tyndall effect – Scattering of light by tiny particles in a colloidal suspension Farris effect (rheology) References [ edit ] ^ Chemistry: Matter and Its Changes, 4th Ed. by Brady, Senese, ISBN 0-471-21517-1 ^ The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th ed.

^ “Food emulsions, principles, practices and techniques” CRC Press 2005.2- M. P. C. Silvestre, E. A. Decker, McClements Food hydrocolloids 13 (1999) 419–424.

^ Alan D. MacNaught, Andrew R. Wilkinson, ed. (1997).

Compendium of Chemical Terminology: IUPAC Recommendations (2nd ed.). Blackwell Science.

ISBN 978-0865426849 .

^ Slomkowski, Stanislaw; Alemán, José V.; Gilbert, Robert G.; Hess, Michael; Horie, Kazuyuki; Jones, Richard G.; Kubisa, Przemyslaw; Meisel, Ingrid; Mormann, Werner; Penczek, Stanisław; Stepto, Robert F. T. (2011).

"Terminology of polymers and polymerization processes in dispersed systems (IUPAC Recommendations 2011)" (PDF) .

Pure and Applied Chemistry .

83 (12): 2229– 2259.

doi : 10.1351/PAC-REC-10-06-03 .

S2CID 96812603 .

^ I. Roland, G. Piel, L. Delattre, B. Evrard International Journal of Pharmaceutics 263 (2003) 85-94 ^ C. Lemarchand, P. Couvreur, M. Besnard, D. Costantini, R. Gref, Pharmaceutical Research, 20-8 (2003) 1284-1292 ^ O. Mengual, G. Meunier, I. Cayre, K. Puech, P. Snabre, Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 152 (1999) 111–123 ^ P. Bru, L. Brunel, H. Buron, I. Cayré, X. Ducarre, A. Fraux, O. Mengual, G. Meunier, A. de Sainte Marie and P. Snabre Particle sizing and characterization Ed T. Provder and J. Texter (2004) ^ J-L Salager, Pharmaceutical emulsions and suspensions Ed Françoise Nielloud,Gilberte Marti-Mestres (2000) ^ P. Snabre, B. Pouligny Langmuir, 24 (2008) 13338-13347 v t e Routes of administration , dosage forms Oral Digestive tract ( enteral ) Solids Tablet Capsule Pastille Time release technology Osmotic delivery system Liquids Decoction Elixir Electuary Emulsion Effervescent powder or tablet Herbal tea Hydrogel Molecular encapsulation Powder Softgel Solution Suspension Syrup Tincture Oral mucosa ( buccal , sublabial , sublingual , supralingual ) Solids Orally disintegrating tablet Film Lollipop Sublingual drops Lozenges Effervescent tablet Chewing gum Liquids Mouthwash Toothpaste Ointment Spray Respiratory tract ( inhalation ) Solids Dry-powder inhaler Smoking 0 0 Liquids Anesthetic vaporizer Heated humidified high-flow therapy Medical inhalants Metered-dose inhaler (MDI) Nebulizer Vaporizer Gas Oxygen mask and Nasal cannula Oxygen concentrator Anaesthetic machine Medical inhalants Relative analgesia machine Ophthalmic , otic , nasal Nasal spray Ear drops Eye drops Ointment Hydrogel Insufflation Mucoadhesive microdisc Urogenital Ointment Pessary Vaginal ring Douche Intrauterine device (IUD) Extra-amniotic infusion Intravesical infusion Rectal ( enteral ) Ointment Suppository Enema Solution Hydrogel Murphy drip Nutrient enema Dermal ( topical ) Ointment Topical cream Topical gel Liniment Paste Film DMSO solution Iontophoresis Hydrogel Liposomes Transfersome vesicles Cream Lotion Lip balm Medicated shampoo Dermal patch Transdermal patch Transdermal spray Jet injector Parenterals Injections infusions (into tissue/blood) Skin ( transdermal ) Intradermal Subcutaneous Injector pen Transdermal implant Organs Intracavernous Intravitreal Intra-articular Central nervous system Intracerebral Intrathecal Epidural Circulatory , musculoskeletal Intravenous Intracardiac Intramuscular Intraosseous Intraperitoneal Nanocell injection Patient-controlled analgesia pump PIC line v t e Chemical solutions Solution Ideal solution Aqueous solution Solid solution Buffer solution Flory–Huggins Mixture Suspension Colloid Phase diagram Phase separation Eutectic point Alloy Saturation Supersaturation Serial dilution Dilution (equation) Apparent molar property Miscibility gap Concentration and related quantities Molar concentration Mass concentration Number concentration Volume concentration Normality Molality Mole fraction Mass fraction Isotopic abundance Mixing ratio Ternary plot Total dissolved solids Solubility Solubility equilibrium Solvation Solvation shell Enthalpy of solution Lattice energy Raoult's law Henry's law Solubility table (data) Solubility chart Miscibility Solvent ( Category ) Acid dissociation constant Protic solvent Polar aprotic solvent Inorganic nonaqueous solvent Solvation List of boiling and freezing information of solvents Partition coefficient Polarity Hydrophobe Hydrophile Lipophilic Amphiphile Lyonium ion Lyate ion Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Suspension_(chemistry)&oldid=1305348143 " Categories : Colloidal chemistry Drug delivery devices Dosage forms Heterogeneous chemical mixtures Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 14:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Suspension (chemistry) 63 languages Add topic

