Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Childhood: 1870–1887 1.2 University and political radicalisation: 1887–1893 2 Revolutionary activity Toggle Revolutionary activity subsection 2.1 Early activism and imprisonment: 1893–1900 2.2 Munich, London, and Geneva: 1900–1905 2.3 Revolution of 1905 and its aftermath: 1905–1914 2.4 First World War: 1914–1917 2.5 February Revolution and the July Days: 1917 2.6 October Revolution: 1917 3 Lenin's government Toggle Lenin's government subsection 3.1 Organising the Soviet government: 1917–1918 3.2 Social, legal, and economic reform: 1917–1918 3.3 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk: 1917–1918 3.4 Anti-Kulak campaigns, Cheka, and Red Terror: 1918–1922 3.5 Civil War and the Polish–Soviet War: 1918–1920 3.6 Comintern and world revolution: 1919–1920 3.7 Famine and the New Economic Policy: 1920–1922 4 Later life Toggle Later life subsection 4.1 Declining health and conflict with Stalin: 1920–1923 4.2 Death and funeral: 1923–1924 5 Political ideology Toggle Political ideology subsection 5.1 Marxism and Leninism 5.2 Democracy and the national question 6 Personal life and characteristics 7 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 7.1 Within the Soviet Union 7.2 In the international communist movement 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Footnotes 10.2 Bibliography 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Vladimir Lenin 208 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ अंगिका Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Авар Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Dolnoserbski डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 ગુજરાતી 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Iñupiatun Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Коми Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Li Niha Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova La .lojban.

Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Ποντιακά Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Sesotho Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Тыва дыл Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Multilingual Wikisource Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Leader of the Soviet Union from 1922 to 1924 "Lenin" and "Vladimir Ilyich Lenin" redirect here. For other uses, see Lenin (disambiguation) . For the poem, see Vladimir Ilyich Lenin (poem) .

Vladimir Lenin Владимир Ленин Lenin in 1920 Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the Soviet Union In office 6 July 1923 – 21 January 1924 Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Alexei Rykov Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the Russian SFSR In office 9 November 1917 – 21 January 1924 Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Alexei Rykov Personal details Born Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov 22 April 1870 Simbirsk , Russia Died 21 January 1924 (1924-01-21) (aged 53) Gorki , Soviet Union Resting place Lenin's Mausoleum , Moscow Political party RCP(b) [ a ] (from 1912) Other political affiliations RSDLP (1898‍–‍1912; Bolshevik faction from 1903) SBORK (1895‍–‍1898) Spouse Nadezhda Krupskaya ​ ( m.

1898) ​ Parents Ilya Ulyanov Maria Blank Relatives Anna Ulyanova (sister) Aleksandr Ulyanov (brother) Olga Ilyinichna Ulyanova (sister) Dmitry Ilyich Ulyanov (brother) Maria Ilyinichna Ulyanova (sister) Alma mater Kazan Imperial University Saint Petersburg Imperial University Signature Vladimir Lenin's voice Recorded 1919 Central institution membership 1917–1924: Full member, 6th – 12th Politburo of RCP(b) 1912–1924: Full member, 6th – 12th Central Committee of RCP(b) 1903–1905: Full member, 2nd and 3rd Central Committee of RSDLP 1907–1912: Candidate member, 5th Central Committee of RSDLP Other offices held 1917–1918: Member of the Russian Constituent Assembly for Baltic Fleet 1918–1920: Chairman, Council of Labour and Defence Leader of the Soviet Union First holder Stalin → Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov [ b ] [ c ] (22 April [ O.S.

10 April] 1870 – 21 January 1924), better known as Vladimir Lenin , [ d ] was a Russian revolutionary, politician and political theorist. He was the first head of government of Soviet Russia from 1917 until his death in 1924, and of the Soviet Union from 1922 until his death. As the founder and leader of the Bolsheviks , Lenin led the October Revolution which established the world's first socialist state . His government won the Russian Civil War and created a one-party state under the Communist Party . Ideologically a Marxist , his developments to the ideology are called Leninism .

Born into a middle-class family in Simbirsk in the Russian Empire , Lenin embraced revolutionary socialist politics after his brother was executed in 1887 for plotting to assassinate the tsar . He was expelled from Kazan Imperial University for participating in student protests, and earned a law degree before moving to Saint Petersburg in 1893 and becoming a prominent Marxist activist. In 1897, Lenin was arrested and exiled to Siberia for three years, after which he moved to Western Europe and became a leading figure in the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party . In 1903, the party split between Lenin's Bolshevik faction and the Mensheviks , with Lenin advocating for a vanguard party to lead the proletariat in overthrowing capitalism and establishing socialism . Lenin briefly returned to Russia during the Revolution of 1905 .

During the First World War he campaigned for its transformation into a Europe-wide proletarian revolution . After the February Revolution of 1917 ousted Tsar Nicholas II , Lenin returned to Russia and played a leading role in the October Revolution, in which the Bolsheviks overthrew the Provisional Government .

Lenin's government abolished private ownership of land, nationalised major industry and banks, withdrew from the war by signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , and promoted world revolution through the Communist International . The Bolsheviks initially shared power with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries , but during the Russian Civil War centralised power in the Communist Party and suppressed opposition in the Red Terror , in which tens of thousands were killed or imprisoned. Responding to famine and popular uprisings, Lenin reversed his policy of war communism in 1921 and stabilised the economy with the New Economic Policy . The Red Army defeated numerous anti-Bolshevik and separatist armies in the civil war, after which some of the non-Russian nations which had broken away from the empire were reunited in the Soviet Union in 1922; others, notably Poland , gained independence. Lenin suffered three debilitating strokes in 1922 and 1923 before his death in 1924, beginning a power struggle which ended in Joseph Stalin 's rise to power .

Lenin was the posthumous subject of a pervasive personality cult within the Soviet Union until its dissolution in 1991. Under Stalin, he became an ideological figurehead of Marxism–Leninism and a prominent influence over the international communist movement . A controversial and highly divisive figure, Lenin is praised by his supporters for establishing a revolutionary government which took steps towards socialism, while his critics condemn him for establishing a dictatorship which oversaw mass killings and political repression . Today, he is widely considered one of the most significant and influential figures of the 20th century.

Early life Main article: Early life of Vladimir Lenin Childhood: 1870–1887 Lenin ( left ) at the age of three with his sister, Olga This article is part of a series about Vladimir Lenin Personal Early life Death and state funeral Mausoleum Testament Brain Speeches Revolutionary activity Bolsheviks Tampere conference of 1905 1907 Tiflis bank robbery Communist Party of the Soviet Union Revolutionary situation Revolutionary defeatism Locomotive H2 293 April Theses October Revolution Government Revolutions of 1917–1923 Assassination attempts 1918 May 1 Parade Hanging order Communist International Twenty-one Conditions Treaty of Moscow Trial of the Socialist Revolutionaries First and second government Political ideology Leninism Marxism–Leninism atheism Bolshevism Trotskyism De-Leninization Bibliography The Development of Capitalism in Russia What Is to Be Done?

One Step Forward, Two Steps Back Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution Materialism and Empirio-criticism Philosophical Notebooks The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism The Right of Nations to Self-Determination Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism The State and Revolution The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder Legacy Eponymous places Statues Monument demolitions in Ukraine Lenin Prize Lenin Peace Prize Order of Lenin Swedish Lenin Award v t e Lenin was born Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov in Streletskaya Ulitsa, Simbirsk, now Ulyanovsk , on 22 April 1870, and baptised six days later; [ 2 ] as a child he was known as Volodya , the common nickname variant of Vladimir.

[ 3 ] He was the third of eight children, having two older siblings, Anna (born 1864) and Alexander (born 1866). They were followed by three more children, Olga (born 1871), Dmitry (born 1874), and Maria (born 1878). Two later siblings died in infancy.

[ 4 ] His father, Ilya Nikolayevich Ulyanov , was a devout member of the Russian Orthodox Church and baptised his children into it, although his mother, Maria Alexandrovna Ulyanova (née Blank), a Lutheran by upbringing, was largely indifferent to Christianity , a view that influenced her children.

[ 5 ] Ilya Ulyanov was from a family of former serfs ; Ilya's father's ethnicity remains unclear, with suggestions that he was of Russian , Chuvash , Mordvin , or Kalmyk ancestry.

[ 6 ] Despite a lower-class background, he had risen to middle-class status, studying physics and mathematics at Kazan University before teaching at the Penza Institute for the Nobility .

[ 7 ] In mid-1863, Ilya married Maria, [ 8 ] the well-educated daughter of a wealthy Swedish Lutheran mother and a Russian Jewish father who had converted to Christianity and worked as a physician.

[ 9 ] According to historian Petrovsky-Shtern , it is likely that Lenin was unaware of his mother's half-Jewish ancestry, which was only discovered by Anna after his death.

[ 10 ] Soon after their wedding, Ilya obtained a job in Nizhny Novgorod , rising to become Director of Primary Schools in the Simbirsk district six years later. Five years after that, he was promoted to Director of Public Schools for the province, overseeing the foundation of over 450 schools as a part of the government's plans for modernisation. In January 1882, his dedication to education earned him the Order of Saint Vladimir , which bestowed on him the status of hereditary nobleman .

[ 11 ] Both of Lenin's parents were monarchists and liberal conservatives , being committed to the emancipation reform of 1861 introduced by the reformist Tsar Alexander II ; they avoided political radicals and there is no evidence that the police ever put them under surveillance for subversive thought.

[ 12 ] Every summer they holidayed at a rural manor in Kokushkino .

[ 13 ] Among his siblings, Lenin was closest to his sister Olga, whom he often bossed around; he had an extremely competitive nature and could be destructive, but usually admitted his misbehaviour.

[ 14 ] A keen sportsman, he spent much of his free time outdoors or playing chess, and excelled at school, the disciplinarian and conservative Simbirsk Classical Gymnasium.

[ 15 ] In January 1886, when Lenin was 15, his father died of a brain haemorrhage.

[ 16 ] Subsequently, his behaviour became erratic and confrontational, and he renounced his belief in God.

[ 17 ] At the time, Lenin's elder brother Alexander, whom he affectionately knew as Sasha, was studying at Saint Petersburg University . Involved in political agitation against the absolute monarchy of the reactionary Tsar Alexander III , Alexander studied the writings of banned leftists and organised anti-government protests. He joined a revolutionary cell bent on assassinating the Tsar and was selected to construct a bomb. Before the attack could take place, the conspirators were arrested and tried, and Alexander was executed by hanging in May 1887.

[ 18 ] Despite the emotional trauma of his father's and brother's deaths, Lenin continued studying, graduated from school at the top of his class with a gold medal for exceptional performance, and decided to study law at Kazan University.

[ 19 ] University and political radicalisation: 1887–1893 Upon entering Kazan University in August 1887, Lenin moved into a nearby flat.

[ 20 ] While there, he joined a revolutionary cell run by the militant agrarian socialist Lazar Bogoraz, composed of leftists seeking to revive the Narodnaya Volya ( People's Will ). At the same time, he joined a zemlyachestvo , a form of university society that represented the men of a particular region.

[ 21 ] The group elected him as its representative to the university's zemlyachestvo council, and he took part in a December demonstration against government restrictions that banned student societies. The police arrested Lenin and accused him of being a ringleader in the demonstration; he was expelled from the university, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs exiled him to his family's Kokushkino estate.

[ 22 ] There, he read voraciously, becoming enamoured with Nikolay Chernyshevsky 's 1863 pro-revolutionary novel What Is to Be Done?

[ 23 ] Lenin's mother was concerned by her son's radicalisation, and was instrumental in convincing the Interior Ministry to allow him to return to the city of Kazan , but not the university.

[ 24 ] Soviet historiography would later claim that, on his return to Kazan, Lenin became involved with Nikolai Fedoseev 's Marxist revolutionary circle, through which he would discover Karl Marx 's 1867 book Capital . However, it was not until 1888 that Fedoseev founded a Marxist study group, at which time Lenin had already left the city; this meant that Lenin and Fedoseev did not meet.

[ 25 ] Lenin was influenced by the works of Karl Marx .

In September 1889, the Ulyanov family moved to the city of Samara , where Lenin joined Alexei Sklyarenko 's socialist discussion circle.

[ 26 ] Wary of his political views, his mother had previously bought a country estate in Alakaevka village, Samara Oblast , in the hope that her son would turn his attention to agriculture. He had little interest in farm management, and his mother soon sold the land, keeping the house as a summer home.

[ 27 ] While in Samara, Lenin began to embrace Marxism, producing a Russian language translation of Marx and Friedrich Engels 's 1848 political pamphlet, The Communist Manifesto .

[ 28 ] He began to read the works of the Russian Marxist Georgi Plekhanov , agreeing with Plekhanov's argument that Russia was moving from feudalism to capitalism and so socialism would be implemented by the proletariat , or urban working class, rather than the peasantry.

[ 29 ] This Marxist perspective contrasted with the view of the agrarian-socialist Narodnik movement, which held that the peasantry could establish socialism in Russia by forming peasant communes, thereby bypassing capitalism. This Narodnik view developed in the 1860s with the Narodnaya Volya and was then dominant within the Russian revolutionary movement.

[ 30 ] Lenin rejected the premise of the agrarian-socialist argument but was influenced by agrarian-socialists like Pyotr Tkachev and Sergei Nechaev and befriended several Narodniks.

[ 31 ] In May 1890, Maria, who retained societal influence as the widow of a nobleman, persuaded the authorities to allow Lenin to take his exams externally at the University of St Petersburg, where he obtained the equivalent of a first-class degree with honours. The graduation celebrations were marred when his sister Olga died of typhoid .

[ 32 ] Lenin remained in Samara for several years, working first as a legal assistant for a regional court and then for a local lawyer.

[ 33 ] He devoted much time to radical politics, remaining active in Sklyarenko's group and formulating ideas about how Marxism applied to Russia. Inspired by Plekhanov's work, Lenin collected data on Russian society, using it to support a Marxist interpretation of societal development and counter the claims of the Narodniks.

[ 34 ] He wrote a paper on peasant economics; it was rejected by the liberal journal Russian Thought .

[ 35 ] Revolutionary activity Main article: Revolutionary activity of Vladimir Lenin Early activism and imprisonment: 1893–1900 Police mugshot of Vladimir Lenin, 1895 In late 1893, Lenin moved to Saint Petersburg .

[ 36 ] There, he worked as a barrister's assistant and rose to a senior position in a Marxist revolutionary cell that called itself the Social-Democrats after the Marxist Social Democratic Party of Germany .

[ 37 ] Championing Marxism within the socialist movement, he encouraged the founding of revolutionary cells in Russia's industrial centres.

[ 38 ] By late 1894, he was leading a Marxist workers' circle, and meticulously covered his tracks to evade police spies.

[ 39 ] He began a romantic relationship with Nadezhda "Nadya" Krupskaya , a Marxist school teacher.

[ 40 ] He also authored a political tract criticising the Narodnik agrarian-socialists, What the "Friends of the People" Are and How They Fight the Social-Democrats ; around 200 copies were illegally printed in 1894.

[ 41 ] Hoping to cement connections between his Social-Democrats and Emancipation of Labour , a group of Russian Marxists based in Switzerland , Lenin visited the country to meet group members Plekhanov and Pavel Axelrod .

[ 42 ] He proceeded to Paris to meet Marx's son-in-law Paul Lafargue and to research the Paris Commune of 1871 , which he considered an early prototype for a proletarian government.

[ 43 ] Financed by his mother, he stayed in a Swiss health spa before travelling to Berlin , where he studied for six weeks at the Staatsbibliothek and met the Marxist Wilhelm Liebknecht .

[ 44 ] Returning to Russia with a stash of illegal revolutionary publications, he travelled to various cities distributing literature to striking workers.

[ 45 ] While involved in producing a news sheet, Rabochee delo ( Workers' Cause ), he was among 40 activists arrested in St. Petersburg and charged with sedition.

[ 46 ] Lenin (seated centre) with other members of the League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class , 1897 Refused legal representation or bail, Lenin denied all charges against him but remained imprisoned for a year before sentencing.

[ 47 ] He spent this time theorising and writing. In this work he noted that the rise of industrial capitalism in Russia had caused large numbers of peasants to move to the cities, where they formed a proletariat. From his Marxist perspective, Lenin argued that this Russian proletariat would develop class consciousness , which would in turn lead them to violently overthrow Tsarism , the aristocracy , and the bourgeoisie and to establish a dictatorship of the proletariat that would move toward socialism.

[ 48 ] In February 1897, Lenin was sentenced without trial to three years' exile in eastern Siberia. He was granted a few days in Saint Petersburg to put his affairs in order and used this time to meet with the Social-Democrats, who had renamed themselves the League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class .

[ 49 ] His journey to eastern Siberia took 11 weeks, for much of which he was accompanied by his mother and sisters. Deemed only a minor threat to the government, he was exiled to Shushenskoye , Minusinsky District , where he was kept under police surveillance; he was nevertheless able to correspond with other revolutionaries, many of whom visited him, and permitted to go on trips to swim in the Yenisei River and to hunt duck and snipe .

[ 50 ] In May 1898, Nadya joined him in exile, having been arrested in August 1896 for organising a strike. She was initially posted to Ufa , but persuaded the authorities to move her to Shushenskoye, where she and Lenin married on 10 July 1898.

[ 51 ] Settling into a family life with Nadya's mother Elizaveta Vasilyevna, in Shushenskoye the couple translated English socialist literature into Russian.

[ 52 ] There, Lenin wrote A Protest by Russian Social-Democrats to criticise German Marxist revisionists like Eduard Bernstein who advocated a peaceful, electoral path to socialism.

[ 53 ] He also finished The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899), his longest book to date, which criticised the agrarian-socialists and promoted a Marxist analysis of Russian economic development. Published under the pseudonym of Vladimir Ilin, upon publication it received predominantly poor reviews.

[ 54 ] Munich, London, and Geneva: 1900–1905 Lenin in 1900 After his exile, Lenin settled in Pskov in early 1900.

[ 55 ] There, he began raising funds for a newspaper, Iskra ( Spark ), a new organ of the Russian Marxist party, now calling itself the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP).

[ 56 ] In July 1900, Lenin left Russia for Western Europe; in Switzerland he met other Russian Marxists, and at a Corsier conference they agreed to launch the paper from Munich , where Lenin relocated in September.

[ 57 ] Containing contributions from prominent European Marxists, Iskra was smuggled into Russia, [ 58 ] becoming the country's most successful underground publication since 1850s.

[ 59 ] He first adopted the pseudonym Lenin in December 1901, possibly based on the Siberian River Lena ; [ 60 ] he often used the fuller pseudonym of N. Lenin, and while the N did not stand for anything, a popular misconception later arose that it represented Nikolai .

[ 61 ] Under this pseudonym, in 1902 he published his most influential publication to date, the pamphlet What Is to Be Done?

, which outlined his thoughts on the need for a vanguard party to lead the proletariat to revolution.

[ 62 ] He also used the name " Jacob Richter " to get a reader's ticket at the British Museum Reading Room .

[ 63 ] Nadya joined Lenin in Munich and became his secretary.

[ 64 ] They continued their political agitation, as Lenin wrote for Iskra and drafted the RSDLP programme, attacking ideological dissenters and external critics, particularly the Socialist Revolutionary Party (SR), [ 65 ] a Narodnik agrarian-socialist group founded in 1901.

[ 66 ] Despite remaining a Marxist, he accepted the Narodnik view on the revolutionary power of the Russian peasantry, accordingly, penning the 1903 pamphlet To the Village Poor .

[ 67 ] To evade Bavarian police, Lenin moved to London with Iskra in April 1902, [ 68 ] where he befriended fellow Russian-Ukrainian Marxist Leon Trotsky .

[ 69 ] Lenin fell ill with erysipelas and was unable to take such a leading role on the Iskra editorial board; in his absence, the board moved its base of operations to Geneva .

[ 70 ] The second RSDLP Congress was held in London in July 1903.

[ 71 ] At the conference, a schism emerged between Lenin's supporters and those of Julius Martov . Martov argued that party members should be able to express themselves independently of the party leadership; Lenin disagreed, emphasising the need for a strong leadership with complete control over the party.

[ 72 ] Lenin's supporters were in the majority, and he termed them the "majoritarians" ( bol'sheviki in Russian; Bolsheviks ); in response, Martov termed his followers the "minoritarians" ( men'sheviki ; Mensheviks ).

[ 73 ] Arguments between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks continued after the conference; the Bolsheviks accused their rivals of being opportunists and reformists who lacked discipline, while the Mensheviks accused Lenin of being a despot and autocrat.

[ 74 ] Enraged at the Mensheviks, Lenin resigned from the Iskra editorial board and in May 1904 published the anti-Menshevik tract One Step Forward, Two Steps Back .

[ 75 ] The stress made Lenin ill, and to recuperate he holidayed in Switzerland.

[ 76 ] The Bolshevik faction grew in strength; by spring 1905, the whole RSDLP Central Committee was Bolshevik, [ 77 ] and in December they founded the newspaper Vperyod ( Forward ).

[ 78 ] Revolution of 1905 and its aftermath: 1905–1914 See also: Tampere conference of 1905 In January 1905, the Bloody Sunday massacre of protesters in St. Petersburg sparked a spate of civil unrest in the Russian Empire known as the Revolution of 1905 .

[ 79 ] Lenin urged Bolsheviks to take a greater role in the events, encouraging violent insurrection.

[ 80 ] In doing so, he adopted SR slogans regarding "armed insurrection", "mass terror", and "the expropriation of gentry land", resulting in Menshevik accusations that he had deviated from orthodox Marxism.

[ 81 ] In turn, he insisted that the Bolsheviks split completely with the Mensheviks; many Bolsheviks refused, and both groups attended the Third RSDLP Congress , held in London in April 1905.

[ 82 ] Lenin presented many of his ideas in the pamphlet Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution , published in August 1905. Here, he predicted that Russia's liberal bourgeoisie would be sated by a transition to constitutional monarchy and thus betray the revolution; instead, he argued that the proletariat would have to build an alliance with the peasantry to overthrow the Tsarist regime and establish the "provisional revolutionary democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry".

[ 83 ] The uprising has begun. Force against Force. Street fighting is raging, barricades are being thrown up, rifles are cracking, guns are booming. Rivers of blood are flowing, the civil war for freedom is blazing up. Moscow and the South, the Caucasus and Poland are ready to join the proletariat of St. Petersburg. The slogan of the workers has become: Death or Freedom!

— Lenin on the Revolution of 1905 [ 84 ] In response to the revolution of 1905, which had failed to overthrow the government, Tsar Nicholas II accepted a series of liberal reforms in his October Manifesto . In this climate, Lenin felt it safe to return to Saint Petersburg.

[ 85 ] Joining the editorial board of Novaya Zhizn ( New Life ), a radical legal newspaper run by Maria Andreyeva , he used it to discuss issues facing the RSDLP.

[ 86 ] He encouraged the party to seek out a much wider membership, and advocated the continual escalation of violent confrontation, believing both to be necessary for a successful revolution.

[ 87 ] Recognising that membership fees and donations from a few wealthy sympathisers were insufficient to finance the Bolsheviks' activities, Lenin endorsed the idea of robbing post offices, railway stations, trains, and banks. Under the lead of Leonid Krasin , a group of Bolsheviks began carrying out such criminal actions, the best-known taking place in June 1907, when a group of Bolsheviks acting under the leadership of Joseph Stalin committed an armed robbery of the State Bank in Tiflis , Georgia.

[ 88 ] Although he briefly supported the idea of reconciliation between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, [ 89 ] Lenin's advocacy of violence and robbery was condemned by the Mensheviks at the Fourth RSDLP Congress , held in Stockholm in April 1906.

[ 90 ] After Lenin escaped to Finland from Russia, he was involved in setting up a Bolshevik Centre in Kuokkala , Grand Duchy of Finland , which was at the time an autonomous state controlled by the Russian Empire, before the Bolsheviks regained dominance of the RSDLP at its Fifth Congress , held in London in May 1907.

[ 91 ] As the Tsarist government cracked down on opposition, both by disbanding Russia's legislative assembly, the Second Duma , and by ordering its secret police, the Okhrana , to arrest revolutionaries, Lenin fled Finland for Switzerland.

[ 92 ] There, he tried to exchange those banknotes stolen in Tiflis that had identifiable serial numbers on them.

[ 93 ] Alexander Bogdanov and other prominent Bolsheviks decided to relocate the Bolshevik Centre to Paris; although Lenin disagreed, he moved to the city in December 1908.

[ 94 ] Lenin disliked Paris, lambasting it as "a foul hole", and while there he sued a motorist who knocked him off his bike.

[ 95 ] Lenin became very critical of Bogdanov's view that Russia's proletariat had to develop a socialist culture to become a successful revolutionary vehicle. Instead, Lenin favoured a vanguard of socialist intelligentsia who would lead the working-classes in revolution. Furthermore, Bogdanov, influenced by Ernst Mach , believed that all concepts of the world were relative, whereas Lenin stuck to the orthodox Marxist view that there was an objective reality independent of human observation.

[ 96 ] Bogdanov and Lenin holidayed together at Maxim Gorky 's villa in Capri in April 1908; [ 97 ] on returning to Paris, Lenin encouraged a split within the Bolshevik faction between his and Bogdanov's followers, accusing the latter of deviating from Marxism.

[ 98 ] Lenin in 1914 In May 1908, Lenin lived briefly in London, where he used the British Museum Reading Room to write Materialism and Empirio-criticism , an attack on what he described as the "bourgeois-reactionary falsehood" of Bogdanov's relativism.

[ 99 ] Lenin's factionalism began to alienate increasing numbers of Bolsheviks, including his former close supporters Alexei Rykov and Lev Kamenev .

[ 100 ] The Okhrana exploited his factionalist attitude by sending a spy, Roman Malinovsky , to act as a vocal Lenin supporter within the party. Various Bolsheviks expressed their suspicions about Malinovsky to Lenin, although it is unclear if the latter was aware of the spy's duplicity; it is possible that he used Malinovsky to feed false information to the Okhrana.

[ 101 ] In August 1910, Lenin attended the 8th Congress of the Second International , an international meeting of socialists, in Copenhagen as the RSDLP's representative, following this with a holiday in Stockholm with his mother.

[ 102 ] With his wife and sisters, he then moved to France, settling first in Bombon and then Paris.

[ 103 ] Here, he became a close friend to the French Bolshevik Inessa Armand ; some biographers suggest that they had an extra-marital affair from 1910 to 1912.

[ 104 ] Meanwhile, at a Paris meeting in June 1911, the RSDLP Central Committee decided to move their focus of operations back to Russia, ordering the closure of the Bolshevik Centre and its newspaper, Proletari .

[ 105 ] Seeking to rebuild his influence in the party, Lenin arranged for a party conference to be held in Prague in January 1912, and although 16 of the 18 attendants were Bolsheviks, he was heavily criticised for his factionalist tendencies and failed to boost his status within the party.

[ 106 ] Moving to Kraków in the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria , a culturally Polish part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire , he used Jagiellonian University 's library to conduct research.

[ 107 ] He stayed in close contact with the RSDLP, which was operating in the Russian Empire, convincing the Duma's Bolshevik members to split from their parliamentary alliance with the Mensheviks.

[ 108 ] In January 1913, Stalin, whom Lenin referred to as the "wonderful Georgian", visited him, and they discussed the future of non-Russian ethnic groups in the Empire.

[ 109 ] Due to the ailing health of both Lenin and his wife, they moved to the rural town of Biały Dunajec , [ 110 ] before heading to Bern for Nadya to have surgery on her goitre .

[ 111 ] First World War: 1914–1917 The [First World] war is being waged for the division of colonies and the robbery of foreign territory; thieves have fallen out–and to refer to the defeats at a given moment of one of the thieves in order to identify the interests of all thieves with the interests of the nation or the fatherland is an unconscionable bourgeois lie.

— Lenin on his interpretation of the First World War [ 112 ] Lenin was in Galicia when the First World War broke out.

[ 113 ] The war pitted the Russian Empire against the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and due to his Russian citizenship, Lenin was arrested and briefly imprisoned until his anti-Tsarist credentials were explained.

[ 114 ] Lenin and his wife returned to Bern, [ 115 ] before relocating to Zürich in February 1916.

[ 116 ] Lenin was angry that the German Social Democratic Party was supporting the German war effort, which was a direct contravention of the Second International's Stuttgart resolution that socialist parties would oppose the conflict and saw the Second International as defunct.

[ 117 ] He attended the Zimmerwald Conference in September 1915 and the Kienthal Conference in April 1916, [ 118 ] urging socialists across the continent to convert the "imperialist war" into a continent-wide "civil war" with the proletariat pitted against the bourgeoisie and aristocracy.

[ 119 ] In July 1916, Lenin's mother died, but he was unable to attend her funeral.

[ 120 ] Her death deeply affected him, and he became depressed, fearing that he too would die before seeing the proletarian revolution.

[ 121 ] In September 1917, Lenin published Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism , which argued that imperialism was a product of monopoly capitalism , as capitalists sought to increase their profits by extending into new territories where wages were lower and raw materials cheaper. He believed that competition and conflict would increase and that war between the imperialist powers would continue until they were overthrown by proletariat revolution and socialism established.

[ 122 ] He spent much of this time reading the works of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , Ludwig Feuerbach , and Aristotle , all of whom had been key influences on Marx.

[ 123 ] This changed Lenin's interpretation of Marxism; whereas he once believed that policies could be developed based on predetermined scientific principles, he concluded that the only test of whether a policy was correct was its practice.

[ 124 ] He still perceived himself as an orthodox Marxist, but he began to diverge from some of Marx's predictions about societal development; whereas Marx had believed that a "bourgeoisie-democratic revolution" of the middle classes had to take place before a "socialist revolution" of the proletariat, Lenin believed that in Russia the proletariat could overthrow the Tsarist regime without an intermediate revolution.

[ 125 ] February Revolution and the July Days: 1917 Lenin's travel route from Zurich to Saint Petersburg in April 1917, including the ride in a sealed train through German territory In February 1917, the February Revolution broke out in Saint Petersburg, renamed Petrograd at the beginning of the First World War, as industrial workers went on strike over food shortages and deteriorating factory conditions. The unrest spread to other parts of Russia, and fearing that he would be violently overthrown, Tsar Nicholas II abdicated. The State Duma took over control of the country, establishing the Russian Provisional Government and converting the Empire into a new Russian Republic .

[ 126 ] When Lenin learned of this from his base in Switzerland, he celebrated with other dissidents.

[ 127 ] He decided to return to Russia to take charge of the Bolsheviks but found that most passages into the country were blocked due to the ongoing conflict. He organised a plan with other dissidents to negotiate a passage for them through Germany, with which Russia was then at war. Recognising that these dissidents could cause problems for their Russian enemies, the German government agreed to permit 32 Russian citizens to travel by train through their territory, among them Lenin and his wife.

[ 128 ] For political reasons, Lenin and the Germans agreed to a cover story that Lenin had travelled by sealed train carriage through German territory, but in fact the train was not truly sealed, and the passengers were allowed to disembark to, for example, spend the night in Frankfurt.

[ 129 ] The group travelled by train from Zürich to Sassnitz , proceeding by ferry to Trelleborg , Sweden, and from there to the Haparanda – Tornio border crossing and then to Helsinki before taking the final train to Petrograd.

[ 130 ] The engine that pulled the train on which Lenin arrived at Petrograd's Finland Station in April 1917 was not preserved. So Engine No. 293, by which Lenin escaped to Finland and then returned to Russia later in the year, serves as the permanent exhibit, installed at a platform on the station.

[ 131 ] Arriving at Petrograd's Finland Station in April, Lenin gave a speech to Bolshevik supporters condemning the Provisional Government and again calling for a continent-wide European proletarian revolution.

[ 132 ] Over the following days, he spoke at Bolshevik meetings, lambasting those who wanted reconciliation with the Mensheviks and revealing his " April Theses ", an outline of his plans for the Bolsheviks, which he had written on the journey from Switzerland.

[ 133 ] He publicly condemned both the Mensheviks and the Social Revolutionaries, who dominated the influential Petrograd Soviet , for supporting the Provisional Government, denouncing them as traitors to socialism. Considering the government to be just as imperialist as the Tsarist regime, he advocated immediate peace with Germany and Austria-Hungary, rule by soviets , the nationalisation of industry and banks, and the state expropriation of land, all with the intention of establishing a proletariat government and pushing toward a socialist society. By contrast, the Mensheviks believed that Russia was insufficiently developed to transition to socialism and accused Lenin of trying to plunge the new Republic into civil war.

[ 134 ] Over the coming months Lenin campaigned for his policies, attending the meetings of the Bolshevik Central Committee, prolifically writing for the Bolshevik newspaper Pravda , and giving public speeches in Petrograd aimed at converting workers, soldiers, sailors, and peasants to his cause.

[ 135 ] Sensing growing frustration among Bolshevik supporters, Lenin suggested an armed political demonstration in Petrograd to test the government's response.

[ 136 ] Amid deteriorating health, he left the city to recuperate in the Finnish village of Neivola.

[ 137 ] The Bolsheviks' armed demonstration, the July Days , took place while Lenin was away, but upon learning that demonstrators had violently clashed with government forces, he returned to Petrograd and called for calm.

[ 138 ] Responding to the violence, the government ordered the arrest of Lenin and other prominent Bolsheviks, raiding their offices, and publicly alleging that he was a German agent provocateur .

[ 139 ] Evading arrest, Lenin hid in a series of Petrograd safe houses.

[ 140 ] Fearing that he would be killed, Lenin and fellow senior Bolshevik Grigory Zinoviev escaped Petrograd in disguise, relocating to Razliv .

[ 141 ] There, Lenin began work on the book that became The State and Revolution , an exposition on how he believed the socialist state would develop after the proletariat revolution, and how from then on the state would gradually wither away, leaving a pure communist society .

[ 142 ] He began arguing for a Bolshevik-led armed insurrection to topple the government, but at a clandestine meeting of the party's central committee this idea was rejected.

[ 143 ] Lenin then headed by train and by foot to Finland, arriving at Helsinki on 10 August, where he hid away in safe houses belonging to Bolshevik sympathisers.

[ 144 ] October Revolution: 1917 Main article: October Revolution Painting of Lenin in front of the Smolny Institute by Isaak Brodsky In August 1917, while Lenin was in Finland, General Lavr Kornilov , the commander-in-chief of the Russian Army, sent troops to Petrograd in what appeared to be a military coup attempt against the Provisional Government. Premier Alexander Kerensky turned to the Petrograd Soviet, including its Bolshevik members, for help, allowing the revolutionaries to organise workers as Red Guards to defend the city. The coup petered out before it reached Petrograd, but the events had allowed the Bolsheviks to return to the open political arena.

[ 145 ] Fearing a counter-revolution from right-wing forces hostile to socialism, the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries who dominated the Petrograd Soviet had been instrumental in pressuring the government to normalise relations with the Bolsheviks.

[ 146 ] Both the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries had lost much popular support because of their affiliation with the Provisional Government and its unpopular continuation of the war. The Bolsheviks capitalised on this, and soon the pro-Bolshevik Marxist Trotsky was elected leader of the Petrograd Soviet.

[ 147 ] In September, the Bolsheviks gained a majority in the workers' sections of both the Moscow and Petrograd Soviets.

[ 148 ] Recognising that the situation was safer for him, Lenin returned to Petrograd.

[ 149 ] There he attended a meeting of the Bolshevik Central Committee on 10 October, where he again argued that the party should lead an armed insurrection to topple the Provisional Government. This time the argument won with ten votes against two.

[ 150 ] Critics of the plan, Zinoviev and Kamenev, argued that Russian workers would not support a violent coup against the regime and that there was no clear evidence for Lenin's assertion that all of Europe was on the verge of proletarian revolution.

[ 151 ] The party began plans to organise the offensive, holding a final meeting at the Smolny Institute on 24 October.

[ 152 ] This was the base of the Military Revolutionary Committee (MRC), an armed militia largely loyal to the Bolsheviks that had been established by the Petrograd Soviet during Kornilov's alleged coup.

[ 153 ] In October, the MRC was ordered to take control of Petrograd's key transport, communication, printing and utilities hubs, and did so without bloodshed.

[ 154 ] Bolsheviks besieged the government in the Winter Palace and overcame it and arrested its ministers after the cruiser Aurora , controlled by Bolshevik seamen, fired a blank shot to signal the start of the revolution.

[ 155 ] During the insurrection, Lenin gave a speech to the Petrograd Soviet announcing that the Provisional Government had been overthrown.

[ 156 ] The Bolsheviks declared the formation of a new government, the Council of People's Commissars , or Sovnarkom. Lenin initially turned down the leading position of Chairman , suggesting Trotsky for the job, but other Bolsheviks insisted and ultimately Lenin relented.

[ 157 ] Lenin and other Bolsheviks then attended the Second Congress of Soviets on 26 and 27 October and announced the creation of the new government. Menshevik attendees condemned the illegitimate seizure of power and the risk of civil war.

[ 158 ] In the early days of the regime, Lenin adjusted his rhetoric so as not to alienate Russia's population, and spoke about having a country controlled by the workers and power to the Soviets.

[ 159 ] Lenin and many other Bolsheviks expected proletariat revolution to sweep across Europe in days or months.

[ 160 ] Lenin's government Main article: Government of Vladimir Lenin Organising the Soviet government: 1917–1918 The Provisional Government had planned for a Constituent Assembly to be elected in November 1917; despite Lenin's objections, Sovnarkom allowed the vote as scheduled.

[ 161 ] In the election , the Bolsheviks gained about a quarter of the vote, losing to the agrarian-focused Socialist-Revolutionaries.

[ 162 ] Lenin argued that the election did not reflect the people's will, claiming the electorate was unaware of the Bolsheviks' programme, and that candidacy lists were outdated, having been drawn up before the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries split from the Socialist-Revolutionaries.

[ 163 ] Nevertheless, the newly elected Russian Constituent Assembly convened in Petrograd in January 1918.

[ 164 ] Sovnarkom claimed it was counter-revolutionary because it sought to remove power from the soviets, but the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks denied this.

[ 165 ] The Bolsheviks presented a motion to strip the Assembly of most of its legal powers; when the Assembly rejected this, Sovnarkom declared it counter-revolutionary and forcibly disbanded it.

[ 166 ] Lenin rejected repeated calls, including from some Bolsheviks, to establish a coalition government with other socialist parties.

[ 167 ] Though Sovnarkom refused a coalition with the Mensheviks or Socialist-Revolutionaries, it allowed the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries five cabinet posts in December 1917. This coalition lasted only until March 1918, when the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries left the government over disagreements about the Bolsheviks' approach to ending the First World War.

[ 168 ] At their 7th Congress in March 1918, the Bolsheviks changed their name from the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party to the Russian Communist Party, as Lenin wanted to distance his group from the increasingly reformist German Social Democratic Party and emphasize its goal of a communist society.

[ 169 ] The Moscow Kremlin , which Lenin moved into in 1918 (pictured in 1987) Although ultimate power officially rested with Sovnarkom and the Executive Committee (VTSIK) elected by the All-Russian Congress of Soviets (ARCS), the Communist Party was de facto in control of Russia, as acknowledged by its members at the time.

[ 170 ] By 1918, Sovnarkom began acting unilaterally, citing a need for expediency, with the ARCS and VTSIK becoming increasingly marginalized, [ 171 ] so the soviets no longer had a role in governing Russia.

[ 172 ] During 1918 and 1919, the government expelled Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries from the soviets.

[ 173 ] Russia had become a one-party state .

[ 174 ] Within the party, a Political Bureau (Politburo) and Organisation Bureau (Orgburo) were established to accompany the existing Central Committee ; decisions of these bodies had to be adopted by Sovnarkom and the Council of Labour and Defence .

[ 175 ] Lenin was the most significant figure in this governance structure, being Chairman of Sovnarkom and sitting on the Council of Labour and Defence, the Central Committee, and the Politburo.

[ 176 ] The only individual with comparable influence was Lenin's right-hand man, Yakov Sverdlov , who died in March 1919 as a result of the Spanish flu pandemic.

[ 177 ] In November 1917, Lenin and his wife took a two-room flat within the Smolny Institute; the following month, they went on a brief holiday in Halila, Finland.

[ 178 ] In January 1918, he survived an assassination attempt in Petrograd; Fritz Platten , who was with Lenin at the time, shielded him and was injured by a bullet.

[ 179 ] Concerned by Petrograd's vulnerability to German attack, Sovnarkom began relocating to Moscow in March 1918.

[ 180 ] Lenin, Trotsky, and other Bolshevik leaders moved into the Kremlin .

[ 181 ] He survived another assassination attempt in August 1918.

[ 182 ] Social, legal, and economic reform: 1917–1918 To All Workers, Soldiers and Peasants. The Soviet authority will at once propose a democratic peace to all nations and an immediate armistice on all fronts. It will safeguard the transfer without compensation of all land—landlord, imperial, and monastery—to the peasants' committees; it will defend the soldiers' rights, introducing a complete democratisation of the army; it will establish workers' control over industry; it will ensure the convocation of the Constituent Assembly on the date set; it will supply the cities with bread and the villages with articles of first necessity; and it will secure to all nationalities inhabiting Russia the right of self-determination ... Long live the revolution!

— Lenin's political programme, October 1917 [ 183 ] Upon taking power, Lenin's regime issued several decrees. The first was the Decree on Land , nationalizing the landed estates of the aristocracy and the Orthodox Church for redistribution to peasants by local governments. This contrasted with Lenin's preference for agricultural collectivisation but acknowledged the widespread peasant land seizures that had already taken place.

[ 184 ] In November 1917, the government issued the Decree on the Press, closing opposition media outlets deemed counter-revolutionary. Although claimed to be temporary, the decree faced criticism, including from Bolsheviks, for undermining freedom of the press .

[ 185 ] In November 1917, Lenin issued the Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia , granting non-Russian ethnic groups the right to secede and form independent nation-states.

[ 186 ] Many declared independence ( Finland , Lithuania in December 1917, Latvia and Ukraine in January 1918, Estonia in February 1918, Transcaucasia in April 1918, and Poland in November 1918).

[ 187 ] The Bolsheviks then promoted communist parties in these new states, [ 188 ] while at the Fifth All-Russian Congress of the Soviets in July 1918, a constitution reformed the Russian Republic into the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic .

[ 189 ] The government also switched from the Julian calendar to the Gregorian calendar , aligning Russia with Europe.

[ 190 ] In November 1917, Sovnarkom abolished Russia's legal system, replacing it with "revolutionary conscience".

[ 191 ] Courts were replaced by Revolutionary Tribunals for counter-revolutionary crimes, [ 192 ] and People's Courts for civil and criminal cases, instructed to follow Sovnarkom decrees and a "socialist sense of justice".

[ 193 ] November also saw the military restructured with egalitarian measures, abolition of previous ranks, titles, and medals, and the establishment of soldiers' committees to elect commanders.

[ 194 ] Bolshevik propaganda poster from 1920, with a political cartoon depicting Lenin sweeping away monarchs, clergy, and capitalists. The caption reads "Comrade Lenin Cleanses the Earth of Filth".

In October 1917, Lenin decreed an eight-hour workday for all Russians.

[ 195 ] He also issued the Decree on Popular Education, guaranteeing free, secular education for all children, [ 195 ] and a decree establishing state orphanages.

[ 196 ] A literacy campaign was launched to combat mass illiteracy, with an estimated 5 million people enrolling in courses from 1920 to 1926.

[ 197 ] Embracing gender equality, laws were passed to emancipate women, giving them economic autonomy and easing divorce restrictions.

[ 198 ] The Zhenotdel was established to promote these aims.

[ 199 ] Lenin's Russia became the first country to legalize first-trimester abortion on demand.

[ 200 ] The regime was militantly atheist, seeking to dismantle organized religion.

[ 201 ] In January 1918, the government decreed the separation of church and state and banned religious instruction in schools.

[ 202 ] In November 1917, Lenin issued the Decree on Workers' Control, calling on workers to form elected committees to monitor their enterprise's management.

[ 203 ] That month, Sovnarkom also requisitioned the country's gold, [ 204 ] and nationalized banks, viewing this as a key step toward socialism.

[ 205 ] In December, Sovnarkom established the Supreme Council of the National Economy (VSNKh), overseeing industry, banking, agriculture, and trade.

[ 206 ] The factory committees were subordinated to trade unions, which were in turn subordinate to VSNKh, prioritizing the state's central economic plan over local workers' interests.

[ 207 ] In early 1918, Sovnarkom canceled all foreign debts and refused to pay interest.

[ 208 ] In April 1918, it nationalized foreign trade, establishing a state monopoly on imports and exports.

[ 209 ] In June 1918, it nationalized public utilities, railways, engineering, textiles, metallurgy, and mining, though often only in name.

[ 210 ] Full-scale nationalization did not occur until November 1920, when small-scale industrial enterprises were brought under state control.

[ 211 ] The Left Communists criticized Sovnarkom's economic policy as too moderate, advocating for the immediate nationalization of all industry, agriculture, trade, finance, transport, and communication.

[ 212 ] Lenin deemed this impractical and argued for the nationalization of only large-scale capitalist enterprises, allowing smaller businesses to operate privately until they could be successfully nationalized.

[ 212 ] Lenin also opposed the Left Communists' syndicalist approach, arguing in June 1918 for centralized economic control, rather than factory-level worker control.

[ 213 ] Both Left Communists and other Communist Party factions critiqued the decline of democratic institutions in Russia from a left-libertarian perspective.

[ 214 ] Internationally, many socialists condemned Lenin's regime, highlighting the lack of widespread political participation, popular consultation, and industrial democracy.

[ 215 ] In late 1918, Czech-Austrian Marxist Karl Kautsky authored an anti-Leninist pamphlet criticizing Soviet Russia's anti-democratic nature, to which Lenin responded with The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky .

[ 216 ] German Marxist Rosa Luxemburg echoed Kautsky's views, [ 217 ] while Russian anarchist Peter Kropotkin described the Bolshevik seizure of power as "the burial of the Russian Revolution".

[ 218 ] Treaty of Brest-Litovsk: 1917–1918 [By prolonging the war] we unusually strengthen German imperialism, and the peace will have to be concluded anyway, but then the peace will be worse because it will be concluded by someone other than ourselves. No doubt the peace which we are now being forced to conclude is an indecent peace, but if war commences our government will be swept away and the peace will be concluded by another government.

— Lenin on peace with the Central Powers [ 219 ] Upon taking power, Lenin believed that a key policy of his government must be to withdraw from the First World War by establishing an armistice with the Central Powers of Germany and Austria-Hungary.

[ 220 ] He believed that ongoing war would create resentment among war-weary Russian troops, to whom he had promised peace, and that these troops and the advancing German Army threatened both his own government and the cause of international socialism.

[ 221 ] By contrast, other Bolsheviks, in particular Nikolai Bukharin and the Left Communists, believed that peace with the Central Powers would be a betrayal of international socialism and that Russia should instead wage "a war of revolutionary defence" that would provoke an uprising of the German proletariat against their own government.

[ 222 ] Signing of the armistice between Russia and Germany on 15 December 1917 Lenin proposed a three-month armistice in his Decree on Peace of November 1917, which was approved by the Second Congress of Soviets and presented to the German and Austro-Hungarian governments.

[ 223 ] The Germans responded positively, viewing this as an opportunity to focus on the Western Front and stave off looming defeat.

[ 224 ] In November, armistice talks began at Brest-Litovsk , the headquarters of the German high command on the Eastern Front , with the Russian delegation being led by Trotsky and Adolph Joffe .

[ 225 ] Meanwhile, a ceasefire until January was agreed.

[ 226 ] During negotiations, the Germans insisted on keeping their wartime conquests, which included Poland, Lithuania, and Courland , whereas the Russians countered that this was a violation of these nations' rights to self-determination.

[ 227 ] Some Bolsheviks had expressed hopes of dragging out negotiations until proletarian revolution broke out throughout Europe.

[ 228 ] On 7 January 1918, Trotsky returned from Brest-Litovsk to Saint Petersburg with an ultimatum from the Central Powers: either Russia accept Germany's territorial demands or the war would resume.

[ 229 ] In January and again in February, Lenin urged the Bolsheviks to accept Germany's proposals. He argued that the territorial losses were acceptable if it ensured the survival of the Bolshevik-led government. The majority of Bolsheviks rejected his position, hoping to prolong the armistice and call Germany's bluff.

[ 230 ] On 18 February, the German Army launched Operation Faustschlag , advancing further into Russian-controlled territory and conquering Dvinsk within a day.

[ 231 ] At this point, Lenin finally convinced a small majority of the Bolshevik Central Committee to accept the Central Powers' demands.

[ 232 ] On 23 February, the Central Powers issued a new ultimatum: Russia had to recognise German control not only of Poland and the Baltic states but also of Ukraine or face a full-scale invasion.

[ 233 ] On 3 March, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed.

[ 234 ] It resulted in massive territorial losses for Russia, with 26% of the former Empire's population, 37% of its agricultural harvest area, 28% of its industry, 26% of its railway tracks, and three-quarters of its coal and iron deposits being transferred to German control.

[ 235 ] Accordingly, the Treaty was deeply unpopular across Russia's political spectrum, [ 236 ] and several Bolsheviks and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries resigned from Sovnarkom in protest.

[ 237 ] After the Treaty, Sovnarkom focused on trying to foment proletarian revolution in Germany, issuing an array of anti-war and anti-government publications in the country; the German government retaliated by expelling Russia's diplomats.

[ 238 ] The Treaty nevertheless failed to stop the Central Powers' defeat; in November 1918, the German emperor Wilhelm II abdicated and the country's new administration signed the Armistice with the Allies . As a result, Sovnarkom proclaimed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk void.

[ 239 ] Anti-Kulak campaigns, Cheka, and Red Terror: 1918–1922 See also: De-Cossackization [The bourgeoisie] practised terror against the workers, soldiers and peasants in the interests of a small group of landowners and bankers, whereas the Soviet regime applies decisive measures against landowners, plunderers and their accomplices in the interests of the workers, soldiers and peasants .

— Lenin on the Red Terror [ 240 ] By early 1918, many cities in western Russia faced famine as a result of chronic food shortages.

[ 241 ] Lenin blamed this on the kulaks , or wealthier peasants, who allegedly hoarded the grain that they had produced to increase its financial value. In May 1918, he issued a requisitioning order that established armed detachments to confiscate grain from kulaks for distribution in the cities, and in June called for the formation of Committees of Poor Peasants to aid in requisitioning.

[ 242 ] This policy resulted in vast social disorder and violence, as armed detachments often clashed with peasant groups, helping to set the stage for the civil war.

[ 243 ] A prominent example of Lenin's views was his August 1918 telegram to the Bolsheviks of Penza , which called upon them to suppress a peasant insurrection by publicly hanging at least 100 "known kulaks, rich men, [and] bloodsuckers".

[ 244 ] The requisitions disincentivised peasants from producing more grain than they could personally consume, and thus production slumped.

[ 245 ] A booming black market supplemented the official state-sanctioned economy, [ 246 ] and Lenin called on speculators , black marketeers and looters to be shot.

[ 247 ] Both the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries condemned the armed appropriations of grain at the Fifth All-Russian Congress of Soviets in July 1918.

[ 248 ] Realising that the Committees of the Poor Peasants were also persecuting peasants who were not kulaks and thus contributing to anti-government feeling among the peasantry, in December 1918 Lenin abolished them.

[ 249 ] Lenin repeatedly emphasised the need for terror and violence in overthrowing the old order and ensuring the success of the revolution.

[ 250 ] Speaking to the All-Russian Central Executive Committee of the Soviets in November 1917, he declared that "the state is an institution built up for the sake of exercising violence. Previously, this violence was exercised by a handful of moneybags over the entire people; now we want [...] to organise violence in the interests of the people." [ 251 ] He strongly opposed suggestions to abolish capital punishment.

[ 252 ] Fearing anti-Bolshevik forces would overthrow his administration, in December 1917 Lenin ordered the establishment of the Emergency Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution and Sabotage , or Cheka, a political police force led by Felix Dzerzhinsky .

[ 253 ] Lenin with his wife and sister in a car at a Red Army parade at Khodynka Field in Moscow, May Day 1918 In September 1918, Sovnarkom passed a decree that inaugurated the Red Terror , a system of repression orchestrated by the Cheka secret police.

[ 254 ] Although sometimes described as an attempt to eliminate the entire bourgeoisie, [ 255 ] Lenin did not want to exterminate all members of this class, merely those who sought to reinstate their rule.

[ 256 ] The majority of the Terror's victims were well-to-do citizens or former members of the Tsarist administration; [ 257 ] others were non-bourgeois anti-Bolsheviks and perceived social undesirables such as prostitutes.

[ 258 ] The Cheka claimed the right to both sentence and execute anyone whom it deemed to be an enemy of the government, without recourse to the Revolutionary Tribunals.

[ 259 ] Accordingly, throughout Soviet Russia the Cheka carried out killings, often in large numbers.

[ 260 ] For example, the Petrograd Cheka executed 512 people in a few days.

[ 261 ] There are no surviving records to provide an accurate figure of how many perished in the Red Terror; [ 262 ] later estimates of historians have ranged between 10,000 and 15,000, [ 263 ] and 50,000 to 140,000.

[ 264 ] Lenin never witnessed this violence or participated in it first-hand, [ 265 ] and publicly distanced himself from it.

[ 266 ] His published articles and speeches rarely called for executions, but he regularly did so in his coded telegrams and confidential notes.

[ 267 ] Many Bolsheviks expressed disapproval of the Cheka's mass executions and feared the organisation's apparent unaccountability.

[ 268 ] The Communist Party tried to restrain its activities in February 1919, stripping it of its powers of tribunal and execution in those areas not under official martial law , but the Cheka continued as before in swathes of the country.

[ 269 ] By 1920, the Cheka had become the most powerful institution in Soviet Russia, exerting influence over all other state apparatus.

[ 270 ] A decree in April 1919 resulted in the establishment of concentration camps , which were entrusted to the Cheka, [ 271 ] later administered by a new government agency, Gulag .

[ 272 ] By the end of 1920, 84 camps had been established across Soviet Russia, holding about 50,000 prisoners; by October 1923, this had grown to 315 camps and about 70,000 inmates.

[ 273 ] Those interned in the camps were used as slave labour .

[ 274 ] From July 1922, intellectuals deemed to be opposing the Bolshevik government were exiled to inhospitable regions or deported from Russia altogether; Lenin personally scrutinised the lists of those to be dealt with in this manner.

[ 275 ] In May 1922, Lenin issued a decree calling for the execution of anti-Bolshevik priests, causing between 14,000 and 20,000 deaths.

[ 276 ] The Russian Orthodox Church was worst affected; the government's anti-religious policies also harmed Catholic and Protestant churches, Jewish synagogues, and Islamic mosques.

[ 277 ] Civil War and the Polish–Soviet War: 1918–1920 The existence of the Soviet Republic alongside the imperialist states over the long run is unthinkable. In the end, either the one or the other will triumph. And until that end will have arrived, a series of the most terrible conflicts between the Soviet Republic and the bourgeois governments is unavoidable. This means that the ruling class, the proletariat, if it only wishes to rule and is to rule, must demonstrate this also with its military organization.

— Lenin on war [ 278 ] Lenin expected Russia's aristocracy and bourgeoisie to oppose his government but believed that the numerical superiority of the lower classes, coupled with the Bolsheviks' organizational skills, would ensure a swift victory.

[ 279 ] He did not anticipate the intensity of the violent opposition that ensued.

[ 279 ] The resulting Russian Civil War (1917–1923) pitted the Bolshevik Red Army against the anti-Bolshevik Whites , with the Reds ultimately emerging victorious. The conflict also included ethnic clashes and anti-Bolshevik peasant and left-wing uprisings across the former Empire.

[ 280 ] Historians often view the civil war as two conflicts: one between revolutionaries and counter-revolutionaries, and another among different revolutionary factions.

[ 281 ] The White armies were formed by former Tsarist officers, [ 282 ] including Anton Denikin 's Volunteer Army in South Russia , [ 283 ] Alexander Kolchak 's forces in Siberia, [ 284 ] and Nikolai Yudenich 's troops in the Baltic states.

[ 285 ] The Whites gained support from 35,000 members of the Czech Legion , who allied with the Committee of Members of the Constituent Assembly (Komuch), an anti-Bolshevik government in Samara.

[ 286 ] Western governments, angered by the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk and fearing Bolshevik calls for world revolution, also backed the Whites.

[ 287 ] In 1918, Britain, France, the U.S., Canada, Italy, and Serbia landed 10,000 troops in Murmansk and Kandalaksha , while British, American, and Japanese forces landed in Vladivostok .

[ 288 ] Western troops soon withdrew, offering only material support, but Japan remained, seeking territorial gains.

[ 289 ] Lenin tasked Trotsky with forming the Red Army , with Trotsky organizing a Revolutionary Military Council in September 1918 and serving as chairman until 1925.

[ 290 ] Lenin allowed former Tsarist officers to serve in the Red Army, monitored by military councils.

[ 291 ] The Reds controlled Moscow, Petrograd, and most of Great Russia , while the Whites were fragmented and geographically scattered on the peripheries.

[ 292 ] The Whites' Russian supremacism alienated national minorities.

[ 293 ] The White Terror was more spontaneous than the state-sanctioned Red Terror.

[ 294 ] Antisemitism proved to be a major issue during the Civil War, and while both sides attacked Jewish communities (see Pogroms during the Russian Civil War ), the Whites successfully used antisemitism in anti-Bolshevik propaganda by blaming the Jews for the revolution and the alleged conspiracy behind it . Lenin, in his turn, blamed capitalists for inflaming antisemitism and condemned it in general.

[ 295 ] [ 296 ] White anti-Bolshevik propaganda poster, depicting Lenin aiding Bolsheviks in sacrificing Russia to a statue of Marx, c.

1918–1919 In July 1918, Sverdlov informed Sovnarkom that the Ural Regional Soviet had overseen the execution of the former Tsar and his family in Yekaterinburg to prevent their rescue by White troops.

[ 297 ] Some historians believe Lenin sanctioned the killings, [ 298 ] while others, like James Ryan, argue there is "no reason" to believe so.

[ 299 ] Lenin viewed the execution as necessary, likening it to the execution of Louis XVI during the French Revolution .

[ 300 ] After the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries saw the Bolsheviks as traitors.

[ 301 ] In July 1918, the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Yakov Blumkin assassinated German ambassador Wilhelm von Mirbach to provoke a revolutionary war against Germany.

[ 302 ] They then launched a coup in Moscow , shelling the Kremlin and seizing the central post office before Trotsky's forces suppressed them.

[ 303 ] The party's leaders were arrested but treated more leniently than other Bolshevik opponents.

[ 304 ] By 1919, the White armies were in retreat, and by 1920, they were defeated on all fronts.

[ 305 ] The Russian state's territorial extent was reduced as non-Russian ethnic groups sought national independence.

[ 306 ] In March 1921, during the Polish–Soviet War , the Peace of Riga split disputed territories in Belarus and Ukraine between Poland and Soviet Russia. Soviet Russia aimed to re-conquer newly independent nations but had limited success.

Estonia , Finland , Latvia , and Lithuania repelled Soviet invasions, while Ukraine , Belarus (as a result of the Polish–Soviet War ), Armenia , Azerbaijan , and Georgia were occupied by the Red Army.

[ 281 ] [ 307 ] By 1921, Soviet Russia had defeated the Ukrainian national movements and occupied the Caucasus , though anti-Bolshevik uprisings in Central Asia persisted into the late 1920s.

[ 308 ] Following the Armistice and the withdrawal of German Ober Ost garrisons, Soviet and Polish armies moved to fill the vacuum.

[ 309 ] Both Soviet Russia and the new Polish state sought territorial expansion.

[ 310 ] Polish and Russian troops first clashed in February 1919, [ 311 ] escalating into the Polish–Soviet War .

[ 312 ] Unlike previous conflicts, this war had significant implications for the export of revolution and Europe's future.

[ 313 ] Polish forces advanced into Ukraine, taking Kiev by May 1920.

[ 314 ] After forcing the Polish Army back, Lenin urged the Red Army to invade Poland, expecting a proletarian uprising that would ignite a European revolution. Despite scepticism from Trotsky and others, the invasion proceeded, but the Polish proletariat did not rise, and the Red Army was defeated at the Battle of Warsaw .

[ 315 ] The Polish Army pushed the Red Army back into Russia, forcing Sovnarkom to sue for peace, culminating in the Peace of Riga , where Russia ceded territory to Poland.

[ 316 ] Comintern and world revolution: 1919–1920 Main article: Revolutions of 1917–1923 Lenin in July 1920 After the Armistice on the Western Front, Lenin believed that the breakout of the European revolution was imminent.

[ 317 ] Seeking to promote this, Sovnarkom supported the establishment of Béla Kun 's soviet government in Hungary in March 1919, followed by the soviet government in Bavaria and various revolutionary socialist uprisings in other parts of Germany, including that of the Spartacus League .

[ 318 ] During Russia's Civil War, the Red Army was sent into the newly independent national republics on Russia's borders to aid Marxists there in establishing soviet systems of government.

[ 319 ] In Europe, this resulted in the creation of new communist-led states in Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Belarus , and Ukraine , all of which were nominally independent from Russia but in fact controlled from Moscow, [ 319 ] while further east it led to the creation of communist governments in Outer Mongolia .

[ 320 ] Various senior Bolsheviks wanted these absorbed into the Russian state; Lenin insisted that national sensibilities should be respected, but reassured his comrades that these nations' new Communist Party administrations were under the de facto authority of Sovnarkom.

[ 321 ] In late 1918, the British Labour Party called for the establishment of an international conference of socialist parties, the Labour and Socialist International .

[ 322 ] Lenin saw this as a revival of the Second International, which he had despised, and formulated his own rival international socialist conference to offset its impact.

[ 323 ] Organised with the aid of Zinoviev, Nikolai Bukharin , Trotsky, Christian Rakovsky , and Angelica Balabanoff , [ 323 ] the First Congress of this Communist International (Comintern) opened in Moscow in March 1919.

[ 324 ] It lacked global coverage; most of the delegates resided within the countries of the former Russian Empire, and most of the international delegates were not recognised by any socialist parties in their own nations.

[ 325 ] Accordingly, the Bolsheviks dominated proceedings, [ 326 ] with Lenin subsequently authoring a series of regulations that meant that only socialist parties endorsing the Bolsheviks' views were permitted to join Comintern.

[ 327 ] During the first conference, Lenin spoke to the delegates, lambasting the parliamentary path to socialism espoused by revisionist Marxists like Kautsky and repeating his calls for a violent overthrow of Europe's bourgeoisie governments.

[ 328 ] While Zinoviev became Comintern's president, Lenin retained significant influence over it.

[ 329 ] Lenin in one of the committees of the II Congress of the Comintern The Second Congress of the Communist International opened in Petrograd's Smolny Institute in July 1920, representing the last time that Lenin visited a city other than Moscow.

[ 330 ] There, he encouraged foreign delegates to emulate the Bolsheviks' seizure of power and abandoned his longstanding viewpoint that capitalism was a necessary stage in societal development, instead, encouraging those nations under colonial occupation to transform their pre-capitalist societies directly into socialist ones.

[ 331 ] For this conference, he authored "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder , a short book articulating his criticism of elements within the British and German communist parties who refused to enter their nations' parliamentary systems and trade unions; instead, he urged them to do so to advance the revolutionary cause.

[ 332 ] The conference had to be suspended for several days due to the ongoing war with Poland, [ 333 ] and was relocated to Moscow, where it continued to hold sessions until August.

[ 334 ] Lenin's predicted world revolution did not materialise, as the Hungarian communist government was overthrown, and the German Marxist uprisings suppressed.

[ 335 ] Famine and the New Economic Policy: 1920–1922 Within the Communist Party, there was dissent from two factions, the Group of Democratic Centralism and the Workers' Opposition , both of which accused the Russian state of being too centralised and bureaucratic.

[ 336 ] The Workers' Opposition, which had connections to the official state trade unions, also expressed the concern that the government had lost the trust of the Russian working class.

[ 337 ] They were angered by Trotsky's suggestion that the trade unions be eliminated. He deemed the unions to be superfluous in a " workers' state ", but Lenin disagreed, believing it best to retain them; most Bolsheviks embraced Lenin's view in the 'trade union discussion'.

[ 338 ] To deal with the dissent, at the Tenth Party Congress in February 1921, Lenin introduced a ban on factional activity within the party, under pain of expulsion.

[ 339 ] Victims of the famine in Buzuluk, Orenburg Oblast , winter 1921/1922 Caused in part by a drought, the Russian famine of 1921 resulted in around five million deaths.

[ 340 ] The famine was exacerbated by government requisitioning, as well as the export of large quantities of Russian grain.

[ 341 ] To aid the famine victims, the US government established the American Relief Administration to distribute food; [ 342 ] Lenin was suspicious of this aid and had it closely monitored.

[ 343 ] During the famine, Patriarch Tikhon called on Orthodox churches to sell unnecessary items to help feed the starving, an action endorsed by the government.

[ 344 ] In February 1922, Sovnarkom went further by calling on all valuables belonging to religious institutions to be forcibly appropriated and sold .

[ 345 ] Tikhon opposed the sale of items used within the Eucharist and many clergy resisted the appropriations, resulting in violence.

[ 346 ] In 1920 and 1921, local opposition to requisitioning resulted in anti-Bolshevik peasant uprisings breaking out across Russia, which were suppressed.

[ 347 ] Among the most significant was the Tambov Rebellion , which was put down by the Red Army.

[ 348 ] In February 1921, workers went on strike in Petrograd, resulting in the government proclaiming martial law in the city and sending in the Red Army to quell demonstrations.

[ 349 ] In March, the Kronstadt rebellion began when sailors in Kronstadt revolted against the Bolshevik government, demanding that all socialists be allowed to publish freely, that independent trade unions be given freedom of assembly and that peasants be allowed free markets and not be subject to requisitioning. Lenin declared that the mutineers had been misled by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and foreign imperialists, calling for violent reprisals.

[ 350 ] Under Trotsky's leadership, the Red Army put down the rebellion on 17 March, resulting in thousands of deaths and the internment of survivors in labour camps.

[ 351 ] You must attempt first to build small bridges which shall lead to a land of small peasant holdings through State Capitalism to Socialism. Otherwise you will never lead tens of millions of people to Communism. This is what the objective forces of the development of the Revolution have taught.

— Lenin on the NEP, 1921 [ 352 ] In February 1921, Lenin introduced a New Economic Policy (NEP) to the Politburo; he convinced most senior Bolsheviks of its necessity and it passed into law in April.

[ 353 ] Lenin explained the policy in a booklet, On the Food Tax , in which he stated that the NEP represented a return to the original Bolshevik economic plans; he claimed that these had been derailed by the civil war, in which Sovnarkom had been forced to resort to the economic policies of war communism , which involved the nationalization of industry, centralized distribution of output, coercive or forced requisition of agricultural production, and attempts to eliminate money circulation, private enterprises and free trade , leading to the severe economic collapse.

[ 354 ] [ 355 ] The NEP allowed some private enterprise within Russia, permitting the reintroduction of the wage system and allowing peasants to sell produce on the open market while being taxed on their earnings.

[ 356 ] The policy also allowed for a return to privately owned small industry; basic industry, transport and foreign trade remained under state control.

[ 357 ] Lenin termed this " state capitalism ", [ 358 ] and many Bolsheviks thought it to be a betrayal of socialist principles.

[ 359 ] Lenin biographers have often characterised the introduction of the NEP as one of his most significant achievements, and some believe that had it not been implemented then Sovnarkom would have been quickly overthrown by popular uprisings.

[ 360 ] In January 1920, the government brought in universal labour conscription, ensuring that all citizens aged between 16 and 50 had to work.

[ 361 ] Lenin also called for a mass electrification project of Russia, the GOELRO plan , which began in February 1920; Lenin's declaration that "communism is Soviet power plus the electrification of the whole country" was widely cited in later years.

[ 362 ] Seeking to advance the Russian economy through foreign trade, Sovnarkom sent delegates to the Genoa Conference ; Lenin had hoped to attend but was prevented by ill health.

[ 363 ] The conference resulted in a Russian agreement with Germany , which followed on from an earlier trade agreement with the United Kingdom .

[ 364 ] Lenin hoped that by allowing foreign corporations to invest in Russia, Sovnarkom would exacerbate rivalries between the capitalist nations and hasten their downfall; he tried to rent the oil fields of Kamchatka to an American corporation to heighten tensions between the US and Japan, who desired Kamchatka for their empire.

[ 365 ] Later life Declining health and conflict with Stalin: 1920–1923 Lenin in a wheelchair shortly after his third stroke in March 1923 To Lenin's embarrassment and horror, in April 1920 the Bolsheviks held a large party to celebrate his 50th birthday, which was also marked by widespread celebrations across Russia and the publication of poems and biographies dedicated to him.

[ 366 ] Between 1920 and 1926, twenty volumes of Lenin's Collected Works were published; some material was omitted.

[ 367 ] During 1920, several prominent Western figures visited Lenin in Russia; these included the author H. G. Wells and the philosopher Bertrand Russell , [ 368 ] as well as the anarchists Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman .

[ 369 ] Lenin was also visited at the Kremlin by Armand , who was in increasingly poor health.

[ 370 ] He sent her to a sanatorium in Kislovodsk in the Northern Caucasus to recover, but she died there in September 1920 during a cholera epidemic.

[ 371 ] Her body was transported to Moscow, where a visibly grief-stricken Lenin oversaw her burial beneath the Kremlin Wall.

[ 372 ] Lenin became seriously ill by the latter half of 1921, [ 373 ] experiencing hyperacusis , insomnia , and regular headaches.

[ 374 ] At the Politburo's insistence, in July he left Moscow for a month's leave at his Gorki mansion, where he was cared for by his wife and sister.

[ 375 ] Lenin began to contemplate the possibility of suicide, asking both Krupskaya and Stalin to acquire potassium cyanide for him.

[ 376 ] Twenty-six physicians were hired to help Lenin during his final years; many of them were foreign and had been hired at great expense.

[ 377 ] Some suggested that his sickness could have been caused by metal oxidation from the bullets that were lodged in his body from the 1918 assassination attempt; in April 1922 he underwent a surgical operation to successfully remove them.

[ 378 ] The symptoms continued after this, with Lenin's doctors unsure of the cause; some suggested that he had neurasthenia or cerebral arteriosclerosis . In May 1922, he had his first stroke, temporarily losing his ability to speak and being paralysed on his right side.

[ 379 ] He convalesced at Gorki and had largely recovered by July.

[ 380 ] In October, he returned to Moscow; in December, he had a second stroke and returned to Gorki.

[ 381 ] Lenin's Gorki mansion, where he spent much of his final years ( pictured in 2022 ) Despite his illness, Lenin remained keenly interested in political developments. When the Socialist Revolutionary Party 's leadership was found guilty of conspiring against the government in a trial held between June and August 1922 , Lenin called for their execution; they were instead imprisoned indefinitely, only being executed during the Great Purge of Stalin's leadership.

[ 382 ] With Lenin's support, the government also succeeded in virtually eradicating Menshevism in Russia by expelling all Mensheviks from state institutions and enterprises in March 1923 and then imprisoning the party's membership in concentration camps.

[ 383 ] Lenin was concerned by the survival of the Tsarist bureaucratic system in Soviet Russia, [ 384 ] particularly during his final years.

[ 385 ] Condemning bureaucratic attitudes, he suggested a total overhaul to deal with such problems, [ 386 ] in one letter complaining that "we are being sucked into a foul bureaucratic swamp".

[ 387 ] During December 1922 and January 1923, Lenin dictated " Lenin's Testament ", in which he discussed the personal qualities of his comrades, particularly Trotsky and Stalin.

[ 388 ] He recommended that Stalin be removed from the position of General Secretary of the Communist Party, deeming him ill-suited for the position.

[ 389 ] He highlighted Trotsky's superior intellect but at the same time criticised his self-assurance and inclination toward excess administration.

[ 390 ] During this period he dictated a criticism of the bureaucratic nature of the Workers' and Peasants' Inspectorate, calling for the recruitment of new, working-class staff as an antidote to this problem, [ 391 ] while in another article he called for the state to combat illiteracy, promote punctuality and conscientiousness within the populace, and encourage peasants to join co‑operatives.

[ 392 ] Stalin is too crude, and this defect which is entirely acceptable in our milieu and in relationships among us as communists, becomes unacceptable in the position of General Secretary. I therefore propose to comrades that they should devise a means of removing him from this job and should appoint to this job someone else who is distinguished from comrade Stalin in all other respects only by the single superior aspect that he should be more tolerant, more polite and more attentive towards comrades, less capricious, etc.

— Lenin, 4 January 1923 [ 393 ] In Lenin's absence, Stalin had begun consolidating his power both by appointing his supporters to prominent positions, [ 394 ] and by cultivating an image of himself as Lenin's closest intimate and deserving successor.

[ 395 ] In December 1922, Stalin took responsibility for Lenin's regimen, being tasked by the Politburo with controlling who had access to him.

[ 396 ] Lenin was increasingly critical of Stalin; while Lenin was insisting that the state should retain its monopoly on international trade during mid-1922, Stalin was leading other Bolsheviks in unsuccessfully opposing this.

[ 397 ] There were personal arguments between the two as well; Stalin had upset Krupskaya by shouting at her during a phone conversation, which in turn greatly angered Lenin, who sent Stalin a letter expressing his annoyance.

[ 398 ] The most significant political division between the two emerged during the Georgian Affair . Stalin had suggested that both the forcibly Sovietized Georgia and neighbouring countries like Azerbaijan and Armenia , which were all invaded and occupied by the Red Army, should be merged into the Russian state, despite the protestations of their local Soviet-installed governments.

[ 399 ] Lenin saw this as an expression of Great Russian ethnic chauvinism by Stalin and his supporters, instead calling for these nation-states to join Russia as semi-independent parts of a greater union, which he suggested be called the Union of Soviet Republics of Europe and Asia.

[ 400 ] After some resistance to the proposal, Stalin eventually accepted it but, with Lenin's agreement, he changed the name of the newly proposed state to " Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)".

[ 401 ] Lenin sent Trotsky to speak on his behalf at a Central Committee plenum in December, where the plans for the Soviet Union were sanctioned; these plans were then ratified on 30 December by the Congress of Soviets, resulting in the formation of the Soviet Union.

[ 402 ] Despite his poor health, Lenin was elected chairman of the new government of the Soviet Union.

[ 403 ] Death and funeral: 1923–1924 Main article: Death and state funeral of Vladimir Lenin Lenin's funeral, as painted by Isaac Brodsky , 1925 In March 1923, Lenin had a third stroke and lost his ability to speak ; [ 404 ] that month, he experienced partial paralysis on his right side and began exhibiting sensory aphasia .

[ 405 ] By May, he appeared to be making a slow recovery, regaining some of his mobility, speech, and writing skills.

[ 406 ] In October, he made a final visit to the Kremlin.

[ 407 ] In his final weeks, Lenin was visited by Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Bukharin; the latter visited him at his Gorki mansion on the day of his death.

[ 408 ] On 21 January 1924, Lenin fell into a coma and died later that day at age 53.

[ 409 ] His official cause of death was recorded as an incurable disease of the blood vessels.

[ 410 ] The Soviet government publicly announced Lenin's death the following day.

[ 411 ] On 23 January, mourners from the Communist Party, trade unions, and Soviets visited his Gorki home to inspect the body, which was carried aloft in a red coffin by leading Bolsheviks.

[ 412 ] Transported by train to Moscow, the coffin was taken to the House of Trade Unions , where the body lay in state .

[ 413 ] Over the next three days, around a million mourners came to see the body, many queuing for hours in the freezing conditions.

[ 414 ] On 26 January, the eleventh All-Union Congress of Soviets met to pay respects, with speeches by Kalinin, Zinoviev, and Stalin.

[ 414 ] Notably, Trotsky was absent; he had been convalescing in the Caucasus, and he later claimed that Stalin sent him a telegram with the incorrect date of the planned funeral, making it impossible for him to arrive in time.

[ 415 ] Lenin's funeral took place the following day, when his body was carried to Red Square , accompanied by martial music, where assembled crowds listened to a series of speeches before the corpse was placed into the vault of a specially erected mausoleum.

[ 416 ] Despite the freezing temperatures, tens of thousands attended.

[ 417 ] Against Krupskaya's protestations, Lenin's body was embalmed to preserve it for long-term public display in the Red Square mausoleum.

[ 418 ] During this process, Lenin's brain was removed; in 1925 an institute was established to dissect it, revealing that Lenin had had severe sclerosis .

[ 419 ] In July 1929, the Politburo agreed to replace the temporary mausoleum with a permanent one in granite, which was finished in 1933.

[ 420 ] His sarcophagus was replaced in 1940 and again in 1970.

[ 421 ] For safety amid the Second World War , from 1941 to 1945 the body was temporarily moved to Tyumen .

[ 422 ] As of 2025, his body remains on public display in Lenin's Mausoleum on Red Square.

[ 423 ] Political ideology Marxism and Leninism Main articles: Leninism and Marxism–Leninism We do not pretend that Marx or Marxists know the road to socialism in all its concreteness. That is nonsense. We know the direction of the road, we know what class forces will lead it, but concretely, practically, this will be shown by the experience of the millions when they undertake the act.

—Lenin, 11 September 1917 [ 424 ] Lenin was a devout Marxist, [ 425 ] and believed that his interpretation of Marxism, first termed "Leninism" by Martov in 1904, [ 426 ] was the sole authentic and orthodox one.

[ 427 ] According to his Marxist perspective, humanity would eventually reach pure communism, becoming a stateless, classless, egalitarian society of workers who were free from exploitation and alienation , controlled their own destiny, and abided by the rule " from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs ".

[ 428 ] According to Volkogonov, Lenin "deeply and sincerely" believed that the path he was setting Russia on would ultimately lead to the establishment of this communist society.

[ 429 ] Lenin's Marxist beliefs led him to the view that society could not transform directly from its present state to communism, but must first enter a period of socialism, and so his main concern was how to convert Russia into a socialist society. To do so, he believed that a dictatorship of the proletariat was necessary to suppress the bourgeoisie and develop a socialist economy.

[ 430 ] He defined socialism as "an order of civilized co-operators in which the means of production are socially owned", [ 431 ] and believed that this economic system had to be expanded until it could create a society of abundance .

[ 428 ] To achieve this, he saw bringing the Russian economy under state control to be his central concern, with "all citizens" becoming "hired employees of the state" in his words.

[ 432 ] Lenin openly endorsed the unlimited issuance of fiat currency to fund the state, stating that "the best way to destroy the Capitalist System is to debauch the currency." [ 433 ] He believed it was a necessary step during the revolutionary transition stating that eventually, "even the simplest peasant will realize that it is only a scrap of paper." [ 434 ] Lenin's interpretation of socialism was centralised, planned, and statist, with both production and distribution strictly controlled.

[ 428 ] He believed that all workers throughout the country would voluntarily join to enable the state's economic and political centralisation.

[ 435 ] In this way, his calls for "workers' control" of the means of production referred not to the direct control of enterprises by their workers, but the operation of all enterprises under the control of a "workers' state".

[ 436 ] This resulted in what some perceive as two conflicting themes within Lenin's thought: popular workers' control, and a centralised, hierarchical, coercive state apparatus.

[ 437 ] Lenin speaking in 1919 Before 1914, Lenin's views were largely in accordance with mainstream European Marxist orthodoxy.

[ 425 ] Although he derided Marxists who adopted ideas from contemporary non-Marxist philosophers and sociologists, [ 438 ] his own ideas were influenced not only by Russian Marxist theory but also by wider ideas from the Russian revolutionary movement, [ 439 ] including those of the Narodnik agrarian-socialists.

[ 440 ] He adapted his ideas according to changing circumstances, [ 441 ] including the pragmatic realities of governing Russia amid war, famine, and economic collapse.

[ 442 ] As Leninism developed, Lenin revised the established Marxist orthodoxy and introduced innovations in Marxist thought.

[ 425 ] In his theoretical writings, particularly Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism , Lenin discussed what he regarded as developments in capitalism since Marx's death; in his view, it had reached the new stage of state monopoly capitalism .

[ 443 ] He believed that although Russia's economy was dominated by the peasantry, the presence of monopoly capitalism in Russia meant that the country was sufficiently materially developed to move to socialism.

[ 444 ] Leninism adopted a more absolutist and doctrinaire perspective than other variants of Marxism, [ 425 ] and distinguished itself by the emotional intensity of its liberationist vision.

[ 445 ] It also stood out by emphasising the role of a vanguard who could lead the proletariat to revolution, [ 445 ] and elevated the role of violence as a revolutionary instrument.

[ 446 ] Democracy and the national question [Lenin] accepted truth as handed down by Marx and selected data and arguments to bolster that truth. He did not question old Marxist scripture, he merely commented, and the comments have become a new scripture.

— Louis Fischer , 1964 [ 447 ] Lenin believed that the representative democracy of capitalist countries gave the illusion of democracy while maintaining the "dictatorship of the bourgeoisie"; describing the representative democratic system of the United States, he referred to the "spectacular and meaningless duels between two bourgeois parties", both of whom were led by "astute multimillionaires" that exploited the American proletariat.

[ 448 ] He opposed liberalism, what, according to Dmitri Volkogonov , was "a mark" of his general antipathy toward liberty as a value, [ 449 ] and believing that liberalism's freedoms were fraudulent because it did not free labourers from capitalist exploitation.

[ 450 ] Lenin declared that "Soviet government is many millions of times more democratic than the most democratic-bourgeois republic", the latter of which was simply "a democracy for the rich".

[ 451 ] Lenin's belief as to what a proletarian state should look like nevertheless deviated from that adopted by the Marxist mainstream; European Marxists like Kautsky envisioned a democratically elected parliamentary government in which the proletariat had a majority, whereas Lenin called for a strong, centralised state apparatus that excluded any input from the bourgeois.

[ 445 ] He regarded his dictatorship of the proletariat as democratic because, he claimed, it involved the election of representatives to the soviets , workers electing their own officials, and the regular rotation and involvement of all workers in the administration of the state.

[ 452 ] However, as the Soviet state faced international isolation by the end of its victory in the Civil War and adopted NEP policies, which were also seen as a source of danger for the regime, Lenin stated that his government could "promise neither freedom nor democracy" until the threat of war or attack on the Soviet state was gone, just as any other government, he said, would act "in war", intending the denial of political freedoms to be provisional.

[ 453 ] [ 454 ] Lenin speaking to a crowd in Moscow's Sverdlov Square with Leon Trotsky and Lev Kamenev beside him, May 1920 Lenin was an internationalist and a keen supporter of world revolution , deeming national borders to be an outdated concept and nationalism a distraction from class struggle.

[ 455 ] He believed that in a socialist society, the world's nations would inevitably merge and result in a single world government .

[ 456 ] He believed that this socialist state would need to be a centralised, unitary one , and regarded federalism as a bourgeois concept.

[ 457 ] In his writings, Lenin espoused anti-imperialist ideas and stated that all nations deserved "the right of self-determination".

[ 458 ] He supported wars of national liberation , accepting that such conflicts might be necessary for a minority group to break away from a socialist state , because socialist states are not "holy or insured against mistakes or weaknesses".

[ 459 ] Prior to taking power in 1917, he was concerned that ethnic and national minorities would make the Soviet state ungovernable with their calls for independence; according to the historian Simon Sebag Montefiore , Lenin thus encouraged Stalin to develop "a theory that offered the ideal of autonomy and the right of secession without necessarily having to grant either".

[ 460 ] On taking power, Lenin called for the dismantling of the bonds that had forced minority ethnic groups to remain in the Russian Empire and espoused their right to secede but also expected them to reunite immediately in the spirit of proletariat internationalism.

[ 461 ] He was willing to use military force to ensure this unity, resulting in armed incursions into the independent states that formed in Ukraine, Georgia, Poland, Finland, and the Baltic states.

[ 462 ] Only when its conflicts with Finland, the Baltic states, and Poland proved unsuccessful did Lenin's government officially recognise their independence.

[ 463 ] Personal life and characteristics Lenin saw himself as a man of destiny and firmly believed in the righteousness of his cause and his own ability as a revolutionary leader.

[ 464 ] Biographer Louis Fischer described him as "a lover of radical change and maximum upheaval", a man for whom "there was never a middle-ground. He was an either-or, black-or-red exaggerator".

[ 465 ] Highlighting Lenin's "extraordinary capacity for disciplined work" and "devotion to the revolutionary cause", Pipes noted that he exhibited much charisma.

[ 466 ] Similarly, Volkogonov believed that "by the very force of his personality, [Lenin] had an influence over people".

[ 467 ] Conversely, Lenin's friend Maxim Gorky commented that in his physical appearance as a "baldheaded, stocky, sturdy person", the communist revolutionary was "too ordinary" and did not give "the impression of being a leader".

[ 468 ] Historian and biographer Robert Service asserted that Lenin had been an intensely emotional young man, [ 469 ] who exhibited strong hatred for the Tsarist authorities.

[ 470 ] According to Service, Lenin developed an "emotional attachment" to his ideological heroes, such as Marx, Engels, and Chernyshevsky ; he owned portraits of them, [ 471 ] and privately described himself as being "in love" with Marx and Engels.

[ 472 ] According to Lenin biographer James D. White, Lenin treated their writings as "holy writ", a "religious dogma", which should "not be questioned but believed in".

[ 473 ] In Volkogonov's view, Lenin accepted Marxism as "absolute truth", and accordingly acted like "a religious fanatic".

[ 474 ] Similarly, Bertrand Russell felt that Lenin exhibited "unwavering faith—religious faith in the Marxian gospel".

[ 475 ] Biographer Christopher Read suggested that Lenin was "a secular equivalent of theocratic leaders who derive their legitimacy from the [perceived] truth of their doctrines, not popular mandates".

[ 476 ] Lenin was nevertheless an atheist and a critic of religion, believing that socialism was inherently atheistic; he thus considered Christian socialism a contradiction in terms.

[ 477 ] [Lenin's collected writings] reveal in detail a man with iron will, self-enslaving self-discipline, scorn for opponents and obstacles, the cold determination of a zealot, the drive of a fanatic, and the ability to convince or browbeat weaker persons by his singleness of purpose, imposing intensity, impersonal approach, personal sacrifice, political astuteness, and complete conviction of the possession of the absolute truth. His life became the history of the Bolshevik movement.

— Louis Fischer, 1964 [ 478 ] Service stated that Lenin could be "moody and volatile", [ 479 ] and Pipes deemed him to be "a thoroughgoing misanthrope", [ 480 ] a view rejected by Read, who highlighted many instances in which Lenin displayed kindness, particularly toward children.

[ 481 ] According to several biographers, Lenin was intolerant of opposition and often dismissed outright opinions that differed from his own.

[ 482 ] He could be "venomous in his critique of others", exhibiting a propensity for mockery, ridicule, and ad hominem attacks on those who disagreed with him.

[ 483 ] He ignored facts that did not suit his argument, [ 484 ] abhorred compromise, [ 485 ] and very rarely admitted his own errors.

[ 486 ] He refused to change his opinions, until he rejected them completely, after which he would treat the new view as if it was just as unchangeable.

[ 487 ] Lenin showed no sign of sadism or of personally desiring to commit violent acts, but he endorsed the violent actions of others and exhibited no remorse for those killed for the revolutionary cause.

[ 488 ] Adopting a utilitarian stance, in Lenin's view the end always justified the means; [ 489 ] according to Service, Lenin's "criterion of morality was simple: does a certain action advance or hinder the cause of the Revolution?" [ 490 ] Ethnically, Lenin identified as Russian.

[ 491 ] Service described Lenin as "a bit of a snob in national, social and cultural terms".

[ 492 ] The Bolshevik leader believed that other European countries, especially Germany, were culturally superior to Russia, [ 493 ] describing the latter as "one of the most benighted, medieval and shamefully backward of Asian countries".

[ 448 ] He was annoyed at what he perceived as a lack of conscientiousness and discipline among the Russian people, and from his youth had wanted Russia to become more culturally European and Western.

[ 494 ] The Lenin who seemed externally so gentle and good-natured, who enjoyed a laugh, who loved animals and was prone to sentimental reminiscences, was transformed when class or political questions arose. He at once became savagely sharp, uncompromising, remorseless and vengeful. Even in such a state he was capable of black humour .

— Dmitri Volkogonov, 1994 [ 495 ] Despite his revolutionary politics, Lenin disliked revolutionary experimentation in literature and the arts, expressing his dislike of expressionism , futurism , and cubism , and conversely favouring realism and Russian classic literature .

[ 496 ] Lenin also had a conservative attitude towards sex and marriage.

[ 497 ] Throughout his adult life, he was in a relationship with Krupskaya, a fellow Marxist whom he married. Lenin and Krupskaya both regretted that they never had children, [ 498 ] and they enjoyed entertaining their friends' offspring.

[ 499 ] Read noted that Lenin had "very close, warm, lifelong relationships" with his close family members; [ 500 ] he had no lifelong friends, and Armand has been cited as being his only close, intimate confidante.

[ 501 ] Aside from Russian, Lenin spoke and read French, German, and English.

[ 502 ] [ 503 ] Concerned with physical fitness, he exercised regularly, [ 504 ] enjoyed cycling, swimming, and hunting, [ 505 ] and also developed a passion for mountain walking in the Swiss peaks.

[ 506 ] He was also fond of pets, [ 507 ] in particular cats.

[ 508 ] Tending to eschew luxury, he lived a spartan lifestyle, [ 509 ] and Pipes noted that Lenin was "exceedingly modest in his personal wants", leading "an austere, almost ascetic, style of life".

[ 510 ] Lenin despised untidiness, always keeping his work desk tidy and his pencils sharpened, and insisted on total silence while he was working.

[ 511 ] According to Fischer, Lenin's "vanity was minimal", [ 512 ] and for this reason he disliked the cult of personality that the Soviet administration began to build around him; he nevertheless accepted that it might have some benefits in unifying the communist movement.

[ 513 ] Legacy See also: List of places named after Vladimir Lenin , List of statues of Vladimir Lenin , and Leniniana Lenin statue in Hanoi , Vietnam Volkogonov said, while renouncing Leninist ideology, that "there can scarcely have been another man in history who managed so profoundly to change so large a society on such a scale." [ 514 ] Lenin's administration laid the framework for the system of government that ruled Russia for seven decades and provided the model for later Communist-led states that came to cover a third of the inhabited world in the mid-20th century.

[ 515 ] As a result, Lenin's influence was global.

[ 516 ] A controversial figure, Lenin remains both reviled and revered, [ 446 ] a figure who has been both idolised and demonised.

[ 517 ] Even during his lifetime, Lenin "was loved and hated, admired and scorned" by the Russian people.

[ 518 ] This has extended into academic studies of Lenin and Leninism, which have often been polarised along political lines.

[ 519 ] The historian Albert Resis suggested that if the October Revolution is considered the most significant event of the 20th century, then Lenin "must for good or ill be considered the century's most significant political leader".

[ 520 ] White described Lenin as "one of the undeniably outstanding figures of modern history", [ 521 ] while Service noted that the Russian leader was widely understood to be one of the 20th century's "principal actors".

[ 522 ] Read considered him "one of the most widespread, universally recognizable icons of the twentieth century", [ 523 ] while Ryan called him "one of the most significant and influential figures of modern history".

[ 524 ] Time named Lenin one of the 100 most important people of the 20th century , [ 525 ] and one of their top 25 political icons of all time.

[ 526 ] In the Western world, biographers began writing about Lenin soon after his death; some such as Christopher Hill were sympathetic to him, and others such as Richard Pipes and Robert Gellately expressly hostile. Some later biographers such as Read and Lars Lih sought to avoid making either hostile or positive comments about him, thereby evading politicised stereotypes.

[ 527 ] Among sympathisers, he was portrayed as having made a genuine adjustment of Marxist theory that enabled it to suit Russia's particular socio-economic conditions.

[ 528 ] The Soviet view characterised him as a man who recognised the historically inevitable and accordingly helped to make the inevitable happen.

[ 529 ] Conversely, the majority of Western historians have perceived him as a person who manipulated events to attain and then retain political power, moreover, considering his ideas as attempts to ideologically justify his pragmatic policies.

[ 529 ] Later, revisionists in both Russia and the West highlighted the impact that pre-existing ideas and popular pressures exerted on Lenin and his policies.

[ 530 ] Statue of Lenin erected by the East German Marxist–Leninist government at Leninplatz in East Berlin (removed in 1992) Various historians and biographers have characterised Lenin's administration as a police state , [ 531 ] and many have described it as a one-party dictatorship, [ 532 ] and Lenin as a dictator.

[ 533 ] Fischer noted that while "Lenin was a dictator, [he was] not the kind of dictator Stalin later became." [ 534 ] Volkogonov believed that whereas Lenin established a "dictatorship of the Party", it would only be under Stalin that the Soviet Union became the "dictatorship of one man".

[ 535 ] Ryan stated that he was "not a dictator in the sense that all his recommendations were accepted and implemented", for many of his colleagues disagreed with him on various issues.

[ 536 ] Moshe Lewin wrote that "he was not a dictator in his party, but its leader".

[ 537 ] Some historians noted that his policies led to the establishment of a totalitarian system in the USSR, [ 538 ] [ 539 ] while others (including Volkogonov) directly characterized his government as a totalitarian regime.

[ 540 ] The latter claim has been a subject of debates since the 1980s between the traditionalist school of Soviet and communist studies , also known as " Cold War historians" or the "totalitarian school" for relying on interpretations rooted in the early years of the Cold War, and the "revisionists". The traditionalists believed that Stalinist totalitarianism was a mere continuation of Leninism and that Soviet Russia of 1917–1924 was as totalitarian as the Soviet Union under Stalin, while the revisionists opposed such definition and tended to see rupture between Lenin and Stalin and; contrary to the traditionalists, they stressed the genuinely popular nature of the revolution.

[ 541 ] [ 542 ] Moshe Lewin argued that "The Soviet regime underwent a long period of 'Stalinism', which in its basic features was diametrically opposed to the recommendations of [Lenin's] testament".

[ 543 ] The description of Stalinism as a continuation of Leninism, and thus of Leninism as a totalitarian system, was consenus in Western historiography until such revisionist historians as Lewin broke the consensus in the late 1960s.

[ 544 ] According to Evan Mawdsley , the revisionist position on this issue "had been dominant from the 1970s".

[ 541 ] Conversely, various Marxist observers, including Western historians Hill and John Rees , argued against the view that Lenin's government was a dictatorship, viewing it instead as an imperfect way of preserving elements of democracy without some of the processes found in liberal democratic states.

[ 545 ] Ryan contends that the leftist historian Paul Le Blanc "makes a quite valid point that the personal qualities that led Lenin to brutal policies were not necessarily any stronger than in some of the major Western leaders of the twentieth century".

[ 546 ] Ryan also posits that for Lenin revolutionary violence was merely a means to an end, namely the establishment of a socialist, ultimately communist world—a world without violence.

[ 547 ] Historian J. Arch Getty stated, "Lenin deserves a lot of credit for the notion that the meek can inherit the earth, that there can be a political movement based on social justice and equality." [ 548 ] Some left-wing intellectuals, among them Slavoj Žižek , Alain Badiou , Lars T. Lih, and Fredric Jameson , advocate reviving Lenin's uncompromising revolutionary spirit to address contemporary global problems.

[ 549 ] Within the Soviet Union Lenin's Mausoleum in front of the Kremlin, 2007 In the Soviet Union, a cult of personality devoted to Lenin began to develop during his lifetime, but was only fully established after his death.

[ 550 ] According to historian Nina Tumarkin, it represented the world's "most elaborate cult of a revolutionary leader" since that of George Washington in the United States, [ 551 ] and has been repeatedly described as "quasi-religious" in nature.

[ 552 ] Busts or statues of Lenin were erected in almost every village, [ 553 ] and his face adorned postage stamps, crockery, posters, and the front pages of Soviet newspapers Pravda and Izvestia .

[ 554 ] The places where he had lived or stayed were converted into museums devoted to him.

[ 553 ] Libraries, streets, farms, museums, towns, and whole regions were named after him, [ 553 ] with the city of Petrograd being renamed "Leningrad" in 1924, [ 555 ] and his birthplace of Simbirsk becoming Ulyanovsk.

[ 556 ] The Order of Lenin was established as one of the country's highest decorations.

[ 554 ] All of this was contrary to Lenin's own desires and was publicly criticised by his widow.

[ 417 ] Various biographers have stated that Lenin's writings were treated in a manner akin to religious scripture within the Soviet Union, [ 557 ] while Pipes added that "his every opinion was cited to justify one policy or another and treated as gospel".

[ 558 ] Stalin systematised Leninism through a series of lectures at the Sverdlov University , which were then published as Questions of Leninism .

[ 559 ] Stalin also had much of the deceased leader's writings collated and stored in a secret archive in the Marx–Engels–Lenin Institute .

[ 560 ] Material such as Lenin's collection of books in Kraków was also collected from abroad for storage in the institute, often at great expense.

[ 561 ] During the Soviet era, these writings were strictly controlled and very few had access.

[ 562 ] All of Lenin's writings that proved useful to Stalin were published, but the others remained hidden, [ 563 ] and knowledge of both Lenin's non-Russian ancestry and his noble status was suppressed.

[ 554 ] In particular, knowledge of his Jewish ancestry was suppressed until the 1980s, [ 564 ] perhaps out of Soviet antisemitism, [ 565 ] and so as not to undermine Stalin's Russification efforts, [ 566 ] and perhaps so as not to provide fuel for anti-Soviet sentiment among international antisemites.

[ 565 ] After the discovery of Lenin's Jewish ancestry, this aspect was repeatedly emphasised by the Russian far-right, who claimed that his inherited Jewish genetics explained his desire to uproot traditional Russian society.

[ 567 ] Under Stalin's regime, Lenin was portrayed as a close friend of Stalin's who had supported Stalin's bid to be the next Soviet leader.

[ 568 ] During the Soviet era, five separate editions of Lenin's published works were published in Russian, the first beginning in 1920 and the last from 1958 to 1965; the fifth edition was described as "complete", but in reality, had much omitted for political expediency.

[ 569 ] Commemorative one ruble coin minted in 1970 in honour of the centenary of Lenin's birth After Stalin's death, Nikita Khrushchev became leader of the Soviet Union and began a process of de-Stalinisation , citing Lenin's writings, including those on Stalin, to legitimise this process.

[ 570 ] When Mikhail Gorbachev took power in 1985 and introduced the policies of glasnost and perestroika , he too cited these actions as a return to Lenin's principles.

[ 571 ] In late 1991, amid the dissolution of the Soviet Union , Russian President Boris Yeltsin ordered the Lenin archive be removed from Communist Party control and placed under the control of a state organ, the Russian Centre for the Preservation and Study of Documents of Recent History , at which it was revealed that over 6,000 of Lenin's writings had gone unpublished. These were declassified and made available for scholarly study.

[ 572 ] Since 1991, there has been some discussion about moving Lenin's body from the mausoleum to the Kremlin Wall Necropolis . President Boris Yeltsin, with the support of the Russian Orthodox Church , intended to close the mausoleum and bury Lenin next to his mother, Maria Alexandrovna Ulyanova , at the Volkov Cemetery in Saint Petersburg. His successor, Vladimir Putin , opposed this, stating that a reburial of Lenin would imply that generations of citizens had observed false values during Soviet rule.

[ 573 ] [ 574 ] In Russia in 2012, a proposal from a deputy belonging to the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia , with the support of some members of the governing United Russia party, proposed the removal of Lenin monuments in Russia. The proposal was strongly opposed by the Communist Party of the Russian Federation and was never considered.

[ 575 ] Russia retained the vast majority of the 7,000 Lenin statues extant in 1991; as of 2022, there were approximately 6,000 monuments to Lenin in Russia.

[ 576 ] In Ukraine, during the 2013–2014 Euromaidan protests, Lenin statues were damaged or destroyed by protesters across the country, [ 577 ] and in April 2015 the Ukrainian government ordered that all others be dismantled to comply with decommunisation laws .

[ 578 ] During the Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, many Lenin statues which had been taken down by Ukrainian activists in the preceding years, were re-erected by Russian occupiers in Russian-occupied areas , symbolizing Russia's domination over Ukraine.

[ 579 ] [ 580 ] [ 581 ] [ 582 ] Beginning in 1998, the independent agency Levada has perennially conducted polls measuring the perception of Lenin's legacy among Russians: in 2017, 56% of respondents believed Lenin played a positive role in the country's history, while 22% believed he had played a negative role; [ 583 ] [ 584 ] in 2024, the former figure had increased to an all-time high of 67%.

[ 585 ] In the international communist movement Detail of Man, Controller of the Universe , a fresco by Diego Rivera in the Palacio de Bellas Artes in Mexico City , depicting Lenin After Lenin's death, Stalin's administration established an ideology known as Marxism–Leninism , a movement that came to be interpreted differently by contending factions in the communist movement.

[ 586 ] According to Lenin biographer David Shub , writing in 1965, it was Lenin's ideas and example that "constitutes the basis of the Communist movement today".

[ 587 ] Socialist states following Lenin's ideas appeared in various parts of the world during the 20th century, [ 524 ] forming into variants such as Stalinism , Maoism , Juche , Ho Chi Minh Thought , and Castroism .

[ 523 ] Writing in 1972, the historian Marcel Liebman stated that "there is hardly any insurrectionary movement today, from Latin America to Angola, that does not lay claim to the heritage of Leninism." [ 588 ] Conversely, many later Western communists expressed the view that Lenin and his ideas were irrelevant to their own objectives.

[ 589 ] See also Biography portal Communism portal Politics portal Soviet Union portal Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Foreign relations of the Soviet Union Lenin Peace Prize Lenin Prize Assassination attempts on Vladimir Lenin Lenin's Testament Marxist–Leninist atheism National delimitation in the Soviet Union Old Bolsheviks October Revolution Soviet Decree Brain of Vladimir Lenin Death and state funeral of Vladimir Lenin Tampere Lenin Museum Lenin's Mausoleum Vladimir Lenin bibliography Ten Days That Shook the World Notes ^ Founded as the RSDLP(b) in 1912; renamed the RCP(b) in 1918.

^ Russian : Владимир Ильич Ульянов [vlɐˈdʲimʲɪr ɨˈlʲjitɕ ʊˈlʲjanəf] .

^ In this name that follows East Slavic naming customs , the patronymic is Ilyich and the family name is Ulyanov .

^ English: / ˈ l ɛ n ɪ n / ; [ 1 ] Russian : Ленин [ˈlʲenʲɪn] .

References Footnotes ^ Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ Sebestyen 2017 , p. 33.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 6; Rice 1990 , p. 12; Service 2000 , p. 13.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 6; Rice 1990 , pp. 12, 14; Service 2000 , p. 25; White 2001 , pp. 19–20; Read 2005 , p. 4; Lih 2011 , pp. 21, 22.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 3, 8; Rice 1990 , pp. 14–15; Service 2000 , p. 29.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 1–2; Rice 1990 , pp. 12–13; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 7; Service 2000 , pp. 21–23; White 2001 , pp. 13–15; Read 2005 , p. 6.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 1–2; Rice 1990 , pp. 12–13; Service 2000 , pp. 21–23; White 2001 , pp. 13–15; Read 2005 , p. 6.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 5; Rice 1990 , p. 13; Service 2000 , p. 23.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 2–3; Rice 1990 , p. 12; Service 2000 , pp. 16–19, 23; White 2001 , pp. 15–18; Read 2005 , p. 5; Lih 2011 , p. 20.

^ Petrovsky-Shtern 2010 , pp. 66–67.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 6; Rice 1990 , pp. 13–14, 18; Service 2000 , pp. 25, 27; White 2001 , pp. 18–19; Read 2005 , pp. 4, 8; Lih 2011 , p. 21; Yakovlev 1988 , p. 112.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 8; Service 2000 , p. 27; White 2001 , p. 19.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 18; Service 2000 , p. 26; White 2001 , p. 20; Read 2005 , p. 7; Petrovsky-Shtern 2010 , p. 64.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 7; Rice 1990 , p. 16; Service 2000 , pp. 32–36.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 7; Rice 1990 , p. 17; Service 2000 , pp. 36–46; White 2001 , p. 20; Read 2005 , p. 9.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 6, 9; Rice 1990 , p. 19; Service 2000 , pp. 48–49; Read 2005 , p. 10.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 9; Service 2000 , pp. 50–51, 64; Read 2005 , p. 16; Petrovsky-Shtern 2010 , p. 69.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 10–17; Rice 1990 , pp. 20, 22–24; Service 2000 , pp. 52–58; White 2001 , pp. 21–28; Read 2005 , p. 10; Lih 2011 , pp. 23–25.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 18; Rice 1990 , p. 25; Service 2000 , p. 61; White 2001 , p. 29; Read 2005 , p. 16; Theen 2004 , p. 33.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 18; Rice 1990 , p. 26; Service 2000 , pp. 61–63.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 26–27; Service 2000 , pp. 64–68, 70; White 2001 , p. 29.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 18; Rice 1990 , p. 27; Service 2000 , pp. 68–69; White 2001 , p. 29; Read 2005 , p. 15; Lih 2011 , p. 32.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 18; Rice 1990 , p. 28; White 2001 , p. 30; Read 2005 , p. 12; Lih 2011 , pp. 32–33.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 18; Rice 1990 , p. 310; Service 2000 , p. 71.

^ Possony, Stefan T. (2017).

Lenin: The Compulsive Revolutionary . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-79391-9 .

^ Rice 1990 , p. 34; Service 2000 , p. 78; White 2001 , p. 31.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 33; Service 2000 , pp. 74–76; White 2001 , p. 31; Read 2005 , p. 17.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 34; Service 2000 , p. 77; Read 2005 , p. 18.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 34, 36–37; Service 2000 , pp. 55–55, 80, 88–89; White 2001 , p. 31; Read 2005 , pp. 37–38; Lih 2011 , pp. 34–35.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 23–25, 26; Service 2000 , p. 55; Read 2005 , pp. 11, 24.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 79, 98.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 34–36; Service 2000 , pp. 82–86; White 2001 , p. 31; Read 2005 , pp. 18, 19; Lih 2011 , p. 40.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 21; Rice 1990 , p. 36; Service 2000 , p. 86; White 2001 , p. 31; Read 2005 , p. 18; Lih 2011 , p. 40.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 21; Rice 1990 , pp. 36, 37.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 21; Rice 1990 , p. 38; Service 2000 , pp. 93–94.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 354; Rice 1990 , pp. 38–39; Service 2000 , pp. 90–92; White 2001 , p. 33; Lih 2011 , pp. 40, 52.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 354; Rice 1990 , pp. 39–40; Lih 2011 , p. 53.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 40, 43; Service 2000 , p. 96.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 355; Rice 1990 , pp. 41–42; Service 2000 , p. 105; Read 2005 , pp. 22–23.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 22; Rice 1990 , p. 41; Read 2005 , pp. 20–21.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 27; Rice 1990 , pp. 42–43; White 2001 , pp. 34, 36; Read 2005 , p. 25; Lih 2011 , pp. 45–46.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 30; Pipes 1990 , p. 354; Rice 1990 , pp. 44–46; Service 2000 , p. 103; White 2001 , p. 37; Read 2005 , p. 26; Lih 2011 , p. 55.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 46; Service 2000 , p. 103; White 2001 , p. 37; Read 2005 , p. 26.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 30; Rice 1990 , p. 46; Service 2000 , p. 103; White 2001 , p. 37; Read 2005 , p. 26.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 47–48; Read 2005 , p. 26.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 31; Pipes 1990 , p. 355; Rice 1990 , p. 48; White 2001 , p. 38; Read 2005 , p. 26.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 31; Rice 1990 , pp. 48–51; Service 2000 , pp. 107–108; Read 2005 , p. 31; Lih 2011 , p. 61.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 31; Rice 1990 , pp. 48–51; Service 2000 , pp. 107–108.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 31; Rice 1990 , pp. 52–55; Service 2000 , pp. 109–110; White 2001 , pp. 38, 45, 47; Read 2005 , p. 31.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 31–32; Rice 1990 , pp. 53, 55–56; Service 2000 , pp. 110–113; White 2001 , p. 40; Read 2005 , pp. 30, 31.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 33; Pipes 1990 , p. 356; Service 2000 , pp. 114, 140; White 2001 , p. 40; Read 2005 , p. 30; Lih 2011 , p. 63.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 33–34; Rice 1990 , pp. 53, 55–56; Service 2000 , p. 117; Read 2005 , p. 33.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 61–63; Service 2000 , p. 124; Rappaport 2010 , p. 31.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 57–58; Service 2000 , pp. 121–124, 137; White 2001 , pp. 40–45; Read 2005 , pp. 34, 39; Lih 2011 , pp. 62–63.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 34–35; Rice 1990 , p. 64; Service 2000 , pp. 124–125; White 2001 , p. 54; Read 2005 , p. 43; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 27–28.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 35; Pipes 1990 , p. 357; Rice 1990 , pp. 66–65; White 2001 , pp. 55–56; Read 2005 , p. 43; Rappaport 2010 , p. 28.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 35; Pipes 1990 , p. 357; Rice 1990 , pp. 64–69; Service 2000 , pp. 130–135; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 32–33.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 69–70; Read 2005 , p. 51; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 41–42, 53–55.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 69–70.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 4–5; Service 2000 , p. 137; Read 2005 , p. 44; Rappaport 2010 , p. 66.

^ Rappaport 2010 , p. 66; Lih 2011 , pp. 8–9.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 39; Pipes 1990 , p. 359; Rice 1990 , pp. 73–75; Service 2000 , pp. 137–142; White 2001 , pp. 56–62; Read 2005 , pp. 52–54; Rappaport 2010 , p. 62; Lih 2011 , pp. 69, 78–80.

^ "Reading Room" .

The British Museum . Retrieved 29 April 2020 .

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 37; Rice 1990 , p. 70; Service 2000 , p. 136; Read 2005 , p. 44; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 36–37.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 37; Rice 1990 , pp. 78–79; Service 2000 , pp. 143–144; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 81, 84.

^ Read 2005 , p. 60.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 38; Lih 2011 , p. 80.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 38–39; Rice 1990 , pp. 75–76; Service 2000 , p. 147.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 40, 50–51; Rice 1990 , p. 76; Service 2000 , pp. 148–150; Read 2005 , p. 48; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 82–84.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 77–78; Service 2000 , p. 150; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 85–87.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 360; Rice 1990 , pp. 79–80; Service 2000 , pp. 151–152; White 2001 , p. 62; Read 2005 , p. 60; Rappaport 2010 , p. 92; Lih 2011 , p. 81.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 81–82; Service 2000 , pp. 154–155; White 2001 , p. 63; Read 2005 , pp. 60–61.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 39; Rice 1990 , p. 82; Service 2000 , pp. 155–156; Read 2005 , p. 61; White 2001 , p. 64; Rappaport 2010 , p. 95.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 83; Rappaport 2010 , p. 107.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 83–84; Service 2000 , p. 157; White 2001 , p. 65; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 97–98.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 158–159, 163–164; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 97, 99, 108–109.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 85; Service 2000 , p. 163.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 41; Rice 1990 , p. 85; Service 2000 , p. 165; White 2001 , p. 70; Read 2005 , p. 64; Rappaport 2010 , p. 114.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 44; Rice 1990 , pp. 86–88; Service 2000 , p. 167; Read 2005 , p. 75; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 117–120; Lih 2011 , p. 87.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 44–45; Pipes 1990 , pp. 362–363; Rice 1990 , pp. 88–89.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 170–171.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 363–364; Rice 1990 , pp. 89–90; Service 2000 , pp. 168–170; Read 2005 , p. 78; Rappaport 2010 , p. 124.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 60; Pipes 1990 , p. 367; Rice 1990 , pp. 90–91; Service 2000 , p. 179; Read 2005 , p. 79; Rappaport 2010 , p. 131.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 88–89.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 51; Rice 1990 , p. 94; Service 2000 , pp. 175–176; Read 2005 , p. 81; Read 2005 , pp. 77, 81; Rappaport 2010 , pp. 132, 134–135.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 94–95; White 2001 , pp. 73–74; Read 2005 , pp. 81–82; Rappaport 2010 , p. 138.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 96–97; Service 2000 , pp. 176–178.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 70–71; Pipes 1990 , pp. 369–370; Rice 1990 , p. 104.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 95; Service 2000 , pp. 178–179.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 53; Pipes 1990 , p. 364; Rice 1990 , pp. 99–100; Service 2000 , pp. 179–180; White 2001 , p. 76.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 103–105; Service 2000 , pp. 180–182; White 2001 , pp. 77–79.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 105–106; Service 2000 , pp. 184–186; Rappaport 2010 , p. 144.

^ Brackman 2000 , pp. 59, 62.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 186–187.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 67–68; Rice 1990 , p. 111; Service 2000 , pp. 188–189.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 64; Rice 1990 , p. 109; Service 2000 , pp. 189–190; Read 2005 , pp. 89–90.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 63–64; Rice 1990 , p. 110; Service 2000 , pp. 190–191; White 2001 , pp. 83, 84.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 110–111; Service 2000 , pp. 191–192; Read 2005 , p. 91.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 64–67; Rice 1990 , p. 110; Service 2000 , pp. 192–193; White 2001 , pp. 84, 87–88; Read 2005 , p. 90.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 69; Rice 1990 , p. 111; Service 2000 , p. 195.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 81–82; Pipes 1990 , pp. 372–375; Rice 1990 , pp. 120–121; Service 2000 , p. 206; White 2001 , p. 102; Read 2005 , pp. 96–97.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 70; Rice 1990 , pp. 114–116.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 68–69; Rice 1990 , p. 112; Service 2000 , pp. 195–196.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 75–80; Rice 1990 , p. 112; Pipes 1990 , p. 384; Service 2000 , pp. 197–199; Read 2005 , p. 103.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 115; Service 2000 , p. 196; White 2001 , pp. 93–94.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 71–72; Rice 1990 , pp. 116–117; Service 2000 , pp. 204–206; White 2001 , pp. 96–97; Read 2005 , p. 95.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 72; Rice 1990 , pp. 118–119; Service 2000 , pp. 209–211; White 2001 , p. 100; Read 2005 , p. 104.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 93–94; Pipes 1990 , p. 376; Rice 1990 , p. 121; Service 2000 , pp. 214–215; White 2001 , pp. 98–99.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 122; White 2001 , p. 100.

^ Service 2000 , p. 216; White 2001 , p. 103; Read 2005 , p. 105.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 73–74; Rice 1990 , pp. 122–123; Service 2000 , pp. 217–218; Read 2005 , p. 105.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 85.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 127; Service 2000 , pp. 222–223.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 94; Pipes 1990 , pp. 377–378; Rice 1990 , pp. 127–128; Service 2000 , pp. 223–225; White 2001 , p. 104; Read 2005 , p. 105.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 94; Pipes 1990 , p. 378; Rice 1990 , p. 128; Service 2000 , p. 225; White 2001 , p. 104; Read 2005 , p. 127.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 107; Service 2000 , p. 236.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 85; Pipes 1990 , pp. 378–379; Rice 1990 , p. 127; Service 2000 , p. 225; White 2001 , pp. 103–104.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 94; Rice 1990 , pp. 130–131; Pipes 1990 , pp. 382–383; Service 2000 , p. 245; White 2001 , pp. 113–114, 122–113; Read 2005 , pp. 132–134.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 85; Rice 1990 , p. 129; Service 2000 , pp. 227–228; Read 2005 , p. 111.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 380; Service 2000 , pp. 230–231; Read 2005 , p. 130.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 135; Service 2000 , p. 235.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 95–100, 107; Rice 1990 , pp. 132–134; Service 2000 , pp. 245–246; White 2001 , pp. 118–121; Read 2005 , pp. 116–126.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 241–242.

^ Service 2000 , p. 243.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 238–239.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 136–138; Service 2000 , p. 253.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 254–255.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 109–110; Rice 1990 , p. 139; Pipes 1990 , pp. 386, 389–391; Service 2000 , pp. 255–256; White 2001 , pp. 127–128.

^ Ted Widmer (20 April 2017).

"Lenin and the Russian Spark" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 110–113; Rice 1990 , pp. 140–144; Pipes 1990 , pp. 391–392; Service 2000 , pp. 257–260.

^ Merridale 2017 , p. ix.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 113, 124; Rice 1990 , p. 144; Pipes 1990 , p. 392; Service 2000 , p. 261; White 2001 , pp. 131–132.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 393–394; Service 2000 , p. 266; White 2001 , pp. 132–135; Read 2005 , pp. 143, 146–147.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 266–268, 279; White 2001 , pp. 134–136; Read 2005 , pp. 147, 148.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 267, 271–272; Read 2005 , pp. 152, 154.

^ Service 2000 , p. 282; Read 2005 , p. 157.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 421; Rice 1990 , p. 147; Service 2000 , pp. 276, 283; White 2001 , p. 140; Read 2005 , p. 157.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 422–425; Rice 1990 , pp. 147–148; Service 2000 , pp. 283–284; Read 2005 , pp. 158–61; White 2001 , pp. 140–141; Read 2005 , pp. 157–159.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 431–434; Rice 1990 , p. 148; Service 2000 , pp. 284–285; White 2001 , p. 141; Read 2005 , p. 161.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 125; Rice 1990 , pp. 148–149; Service 2000 , p. 285.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 436, 467; Service 2000 , p. 287; White 2001 , p. 141; Read 2005 , p. 165.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 468–469; Rice 1990 , p. 149; Service 2000 , p. 289; White 2001 , pp. 142–143; Read 2005 , pp. 166–172.

^ Service 2000 , p. 288.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 468; Rice 1990 , p. 150; Service 2000 , pp. 289–292; Read 2005 , p. 165.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 439–465; Rice 1990 , pp. 150–151; Service 2000 , p. 299; White 2001 , pp. 143–144; Read 2005 , p. 173.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 465.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 465–467; White 2001 , p. 144; Lee 2003 , p. 17; Read 2005 , p. 174.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 471; Rice 1990 , pp. 151–152; Read 2005 , p. 180.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 473, 482; Rice 1990 , p. 152; Service 2000 , pp. 302–303; Read 2005 , p. 179.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 482–484; Rice 1990 , pp. 153–154; Service 2000 , pp. 303–304; White 2001 , pp. 146–147.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 471–472; Service 2000 , p. 304; White 2001 , p. 147.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 306–307.

^ Rigby 1979 , pp. 14–15; Leggett 1981 , pp. 1–3; Pipes 1990 , p. 466; Rice 1990 , p. 155.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 485–486, 491; Rice 1990 , pp. 157, 159; Service 2000 , p. 308.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 492–493, 496; Service 2000 , p. 311; Read 2005 , p. 182.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 491; Service 2000 , p. 309.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 499; Service 2000 , pp. 314–315.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 496–497; Rice 1990 , pp. 159–161; Service 2000 , pp. 314–315; Read 2005 , p. 183.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 504; Service 2000 , p. 315.

^ Service 2000 , p. 316.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 314; Service 2000 , p. 317.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 315; Pipes 1990 , pp. 540–541; Rice 1990 , p. 164; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 173; Service 2000 , p. 331; Read 2005 , p. 192.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 176; Service 2000 , pp. 331–332; White 2001 , p. 156; Read 2005 , p. 192.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 164.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 546–547.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 552–553; Rice 1990 , p. 165; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 176–177; Service 2000 , pp. 332, 336–337; Read 2005 , p. 192.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 158; Shub 1966 , pp. 301–302; Rigby 1979 , p. 26; Leggett 1981 , p. 5; Pipes 1990 , pp. 508, 519; Service 2000 , pp. 318–319; Read 2005 , pp. 189–190.

^ Rigby 1979 , pp. 166–167; Leggett 1981 , pp. 20–21; Pipes 1990 , pp. 533–534, 537; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 171; Service 2000 , pp. 322–323; White 2001 , p. 159; Read 2005 , p. 191.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 219, 256, 379; Shub 1966 , p. 374; Service 2000 , p. 355; White 2001 , p. 159; Read 2005 , p. 219.

^ Rigby 1979 , pp. 160–164; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 374–375; Service 2000 , p. 377.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 74; Rigby 1979 , pp. 168–169.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 432.

^ Leggett 1981 , p. 316; Lee 2003 , pp. 98–99.

^ Rigby 1979 , pp. 160–161; Leggett 1981 , p. 21; Lee 2003 , p. 99.

^ Service 2000 , p. 388; Lee 2003 , p. 98.

^ Service 2000 , p. 388.

^ Rigby 1979 , pp. 168, 170; Service 2000 , p. 388.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 325–326, 333; Read 2005 , pp. 211–212.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 361; Pipes 1990 , p. 548; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 229; Service 2000 , pp. 335–336; Read 2005 , p. 198.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 156; Shub 1966 , p. 350; Pipes 1990 , p. 594; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 185; Service 2000 , p. 344; Read 2005 , p. 212.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 566; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 232–233; Service 2000 , p. 337; Read 2005 , p. 198.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 280; Shub 1966 , pp. 361–362; Pipes 1990 , pp. 806–807; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 219–221; Service 2000 , pp. 367–368; White 2001 , p. 155.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 161.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 252–253; Pipes 1990 , p. 499; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 341; Service 2000 , pp. 316–317; White 2001 , p. 149; Read 2005 , pp. 194–195.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 310; Leggett 1981 , pp. 5–6, 8, 306; Pipes 1990 , pp. 521–522; Service 2000 , pp. 317–318; White 2001 , p. 153; Read 2005 , pp. 235–236.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 249; Pipes 1990 , p. 514; Service 2000 , p. 321.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 249; Pipes 1990 , p. 514; Read 2005 , p. 219.

^ White 2001 , pp. 159–160.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 249.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 84; Read 2005 , p. 211.

^ Leggett 1981 , pp. 172–173; Pipes 1990 , pp. 796–797; Read 2005 , p. 242.

^ Leggett 1981 , p. 172; Pipes 1990 , pp. 798–799; Ryan 2012 , p. 121.

^ Hazard 1965 , p. 270; Leggett 1981 , p. 172; Pipes 1990 , pp. 796–797.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 170.

^ a b Service 2000 , p. 321.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 260–261.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 174.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 554–555; Sandle 1999 , p. 83.

^ Sandle 1999 , pp. 122–123.

^ David 1974 , p. 417.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 552; Leggett 1981 , p. 308; Sandle 1999 , p. 126; Read 2005 , pp. 238–239; Ryan 2012 , pp. 176, 182.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 373; Leggett 1981 , p. 308; Ryan 2012 , p. 177.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 709; Service 2000 , p. 321.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 171.

^ Rigby 1979 , pp. 45–46; Pipes 1990 , pp. 682, 683; Service 2000 , p. 321; White 2001 , p. 153.

^ Rigby 1979 , p. 50; Pipes 1990 , p. 689; Sandle 1999 , p. 64; Service 2000 , p. 321; Read 2005 , p. 231.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 437–438; Pipes 1990 , p. 709; Sandle 1999 , pp. 64, 68.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 263–264; Pipes 1990 , p. 672.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 264.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 681, 692–693; Sandle 1999 , pp. 96–97.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 692–693; Sandle 1999 , p. 97.

^ a b Fischer 1964 , p. 236; Service 2000 , pp. 351–352.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 259, 444–445.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 120.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 354–355.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 307–308; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 178–179; White 2001 , p. 156; Read 2005 , pp. 252–253; Ryan 2012 , pp. 123–124.

^ Shub 1966 , pp. 329–330; Service 2000 , p. 385; White 2001 , p. 156; Read 2005 , pp. 253–254; Ryan 2012 , p. 125.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 383.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 193–194.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 331; Pipes 1990 , p. 567.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 151; Pipes 1990 , p. 567; Service 2000 , p. 338.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 190–191; Shub 1966 , p. 337; Pipes 1990 , p. 567; Rice 1990 , p. 166.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 151–152; Pipes 1990 , pp. 571–572.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 154; Pipes 1990 , p. 572; Rice 1990 , p. 166.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 161; Shub 1966 , p. 331; Pipes 1990 , p. 576.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 162–163; Pipes 1990 , p. 576.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 171–172, 200–202; Pipes 1990 , p. 578.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 166; Service 2000 , p. 338.

^ Service 2000 , p. 338.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 195; Shub 1966 , pp. 334, 337; Service 2000 , pp. 338–339, 340; Read 2005 , p. 199.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 206, 209; Shub 1966 , p. 337; Pipes 1990 , pp. 586–587; Service 2000 , pp. 340–341.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 587; Rice 1990 , pp. 166–167; Service 2000 , p. 341; Read 2005 , p. 199.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 338; Pipes 1990 , pp. 592–593; Service 2000 , p. 341.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 211–212; Shub 1966 , p. 339; Pipes 1990 , p. 595; Rice 1990 , p. 167; Service 2000 , p. 342; White 2001 , pp. 158–159.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 595; Service 2000 , p. 342.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 213–214; Pipes 1990 , pp. 596–597.

^ Service 2000 , p. 344.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 313–314; Shub 1966 , pp. 387–388; Pipes 1990 , pp. 667–668; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 193–194; Service 2000 , p. 384.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 303–304; Pipes 1990 , p. 668; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 194; Service 2000 , p. 384.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 182.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 236; Pipes 1990 , pp. 558, 723; Rice 1990 , p. 170; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 190.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 236–237; Shub 1966 , p. 353; Pipes 1990 , pp. 560, 722, 732–736; Rice 1990 , p. 170; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 181, 342–343; Service 2000 , pp. 349, 358–359; White 2001 , p. 164; Read 2005 , p. 218.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 254; Pipes 1990 , pp. 728, 734–736; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 197; Ryan 2012 , p. 105.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 277–278; Pipes 1990 , p. 737; Service 2000 , p. 365; White 2001 , pp. 155–156; Ryan 2012 , p. 106.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 450; Pipes 1990 , p. 726.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 700–702; Lee 2003 , p. 100.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 195; Pipes 1990 , p. 794; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 181; Read 2005 , p. 249.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 237.

^ Service 2000 , p. 385; White 2001 , p. 164; Read 2005 , p. 218.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 344; Pipes 1990 , pp. 790–791; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 181, 196; Read 2005 , pp. 247–248.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 312.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 435–436.

^ Shub 1966 , pp. 345–347; Rigby 1979 , pp. 20–21; Pipes 1990 , p. 800; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 233; Service 2000 , pp. 321–322; White 2001 , p. 153; Read 2005 , pp. 186, 208–209.

^ Leggett 1981 , p. 174; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 233–234; Sandle 1999 , p. 112; Ryan 2012 , p. 111.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 366; Sandle 1999 , p. 112.

^ Ryan 2012 , p. 116.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 821; Ryan 2012 , pp. 114–115.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 366; Sandle 1999 , p. 113; Read 2005 , p. 210; Ryan 2012 , pp. 114–115.

^ Leggett 1981 , pp. 173–174; Pipes 1990 , p. 801.

^ Leggett 1981 , pp. 199–200; Pipes 1990 , pp. 819–820; Ryan 2012 , p. 107.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 364; Ryan 2012 , p. 114.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 837.

^ Ryan 2012 , p. 114.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 834.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 202; Read 2005 , p. 247.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 796.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 202.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 825; Ryan 2012 , pp. 117, 120.

^ Leggett 1981 , pp. 174–175, 183; Pipes 1990 , pp. 828–829; Ryan 2012 , p. 121.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 829–830, 832.

^ Leggett 1981 , pp. 176–177; Pipes 1990 , pp. 832, 834.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 835; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 235.

^ Leggett 1981 , p. 178; Pipes 1990 , p. 836.

^ Leggett 1981 , p. 176; Pipes 1990 , pp. 832–833.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 358–360; Ryan 2012 , pp. 172–173, 175–176.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 376–377; Read 2005 , p. 239; Ryan 2012 , p. 179.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 381.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 610.

^ a b Service 2000 , p. 357.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 391–392.

^ a b Lee 2003 , pp. 84, 88.

^ Read 2005 , p. 205.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 355; Leggett 1981 , p. 204; Rice 1990 , pp. 173, 175; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 198; Service 2000 , pp. 357, 382; Read 2005 , p. 187.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 334, 343, 357; Leggett 1981 , p. 204; Service 2000 , pp. 382, 392; Read 2005 , pp. 205–206.

^ Leggett 1981 , p. 204; Read 2005 , p. 206.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 288–289; Pipes 1990 , pp. 624–630; Service 2000 , p. 360; White 2001 , pp. 161–162; Read 2005 , p. 205.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 262–263.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 291; Shub 1966 , p. 354.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 331, 333.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 610, 612; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 198.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 337; Pipes 1990 , pp. 609, 612, 629; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 198; Service 2000 , p. 383; Read 2005 , p. 217.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 248, 262.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 251; White 2001 , p. 163; Read 2005 , p. 220.

^ Leggett 1981 , p. 201; Pipes 1990 , p. 792; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 202–203; Read 2005 , p. 250.

^ Leggett 1981 , p. 201; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 203–204.

^ Oleg Budnitskii (2012).

Russian Jews Between the Reds and the Whites, 1917-1920 . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 3.

ISBN 9780812208146 .

^ Shub 1966 , pp. 357–358; Pipes 1990 , pp. 781–782; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 206–207; Service 2000 , pp. 364–365.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 763, 770–771; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 211.

^ Ryan 2012 , p. 109.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 208.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 635.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 244; Shub 1966 , p. 355; Pipes 1990 , pp. 636–640; Service 2000 , pp. 360–361; White 2001 , p. 159; Read 2005 , p. 199.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 242; Pipes 1990 , pp. 642–644; Read 2005 , p. 250.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 244; Pipes 1990 , p. 644; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 172.

^ Leggett 1981 , p. 184; Service 2000 , p. 402; Read 2005 , p. 206.

^ Hall 2015 , p. 83.

^ Goldstein 2013 , p. 50.

^ Hall 2015 , p. 84.

^ Davies 2003 , pp. 26–27.

^ Davies 2003 , pp. 27–30.

^ Davies 2003 , pp. 22, 27.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 389; Rice 1990 , p. 182; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 281; Service 2000 , p. 407; White 2001 , p. 161; Davies 2003 , pp. 29–30.

^ Davies 2003 , p. 22.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 389; Rice 1990 , p. 182; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 281; Service 2000 , p. 407; White 2001 , p. 161.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 391–395; Shub 1966 , p. 396; Rice 1990 , pp. 182–183; Service 2000 , pp. 408–409, 412; White 2001 , p. 161.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 183; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 388; Service 2000 , p. 412.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 387; Rice 1990 , p. 173.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 333; Shub 1966 , p. 388; Rice 1990 , p. 173; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 395.

^ a b Service 2000 , pp. 385–386.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 531, 536.

^ Service 2000 , p. 386.

^ Shub 1966 , pp. 389–390.

^ a b Shub 1966 , p. 390.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 525; Shub 1966 , p. 390; Rice 1990 , p. 174; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 390; Service 2000 , p. 386; White 2001 , p. 160; Read 2005 , p. 225.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 525; Shub 1966 , pp. 390–391; Rice 1990 , p. 174; Service 2000 , p. 386; White 2001 , p. 160.

^ Service 2000 , p. 387; White 2001 , p. 160.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 525; Shub 1966 , p. 398; Read 2005 , pp. 225–226.

^ Service 2000 , p. 387.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 395; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 391.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 397; Service 2000 , p. 409.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 409–410.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 415–420; White 2001 , pp. 161, 180–181.

^ Service 2000 , p. 410.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 397.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 341; Shub 1966 , p. 396; Rice 1990 , p. 174.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 437–438; Shub 1966 , p. 406; Rice 1990 , p. 183; Service 2000 , p. 419; White 2001 , pp. 167–168.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 406; Service 2000 , p. 419; White 2001 , p. 167.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 436, 442; Rice 1990 , pp. 183–184; Sandle 1999 , pp. 104–105; Service 2000 , pp. 422–423; White 2001 , p. 168; Read 2005 , p. 269.

^ White 2001 , p. 170.

^ Ryan 2012 , p. 164.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 343, 347.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 508; Shub 1966 , p. 414; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 345; White 2001 , p. 172.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 346.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 374–375.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 375–376; Read 2005 , p. 251; Ryan 2012 , pp. 176, 177.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 376; Ryan 2012 , p. 178.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 467; Shub 1966 , p. 406; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 343; Service 2000 , p. 425; White 2001 , p. 168; Read 2005 , p. 220; Ryan 2012 , p. 154.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 459; Leggett 1981 , pp. 330–333; Service 2000 , pp. 423–424; White 2001 , p. 168; Ryan 2012 , pp. 154–155.

^ Shub 1966 , pp. 406–407; Leggett 1981 , pp. 324–325; Rice 1990 , p. 184; Read 2005 , p. 220; Ryan 2012 , p. 170.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 469–470; Shub 1966 , p. 405; Leggett 1981 , pp. 325–326; Rice 1990 , p. 184; Service 2000 , p. 427; White 2001 , p. 169; Ryan 2012 , p. 170.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 470–471; Shub 1966 , pp. 408–409; Leggett 1981 , pp. 327–328; Rice 1990 , pp. 184–185; Service 2000 , pp. 427–428; Ryan 2012 , pp. 171–172.

^ Shub 1966 , pp. 412–413.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 411; Rice 1990 , p. 185; Service 2000 , pp. 421, 424–427, 429.

^ Gregory, Paul R. (2004).

The Political Economy of Stalinism: Evidence from the Soviet Secret Archives . Cambridge University Press. pp.

218– 20.

ISBN 978-0-521-53367-6 . Retrieved 20 June 2015 .

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 479–480; Sandle 1999 , p. 155; Service 2000 , p. 430; White 2001 , pp. 170, 171.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 411; Sandle 1999 , pp. 153, 158; Service 2000 , p. 430; White 2001 , p. 169; Read 2005 , pp. 264–265.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 412; Service 2000 , p. 430; Read 2005 , p. 266; Ryan 2012 , p. 159.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 479; Shub 1966 , p. 412; Sandle 1999 , p. 155; Ryan 2012 , p. 159.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 151; Service 2000 , p. 422; White 2001 , p. 171.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 421, 434.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 703–707; Sandle 1999 , p. 103; Ryan 2012 , p. 143.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 423, 582; Sandle 1999 , p. 107; White 2001 , p. 165; Read 2005 , p. 230.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 567–569.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 574, 576–577; Service 2000 , pp. 432, 441.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 424–427.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 414; Rice 1990 , pp. 177–178; Service 2000 , p. 405; Read 2005 , pp. 260–261.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 283.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 404–409; Rice 1990 , pp. 178–179; Service 2000 , p. 440.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 409–411.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 433–434; Shub 1966 , pp. 380–381; Rice 1990 , p. 181; Service 2000 , pp. 414–415; Read 2005 , p. 258.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 434; Shub 1966 , pp. 381–382; Rice 1990 , p. 181; Service 2000 , p. 415; Read 2005 , p. 258.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 181–182; Service 2000 , pp. 416–417; Read 2005 , p. 258.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 426; Lewin 1969 , p. 33; Rice 1990 , p. 187; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 409; Service 2000 , p. 435.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 426; Rice 1990 , p. 187; Service 2000 , p. 435.

^ Service 2000 , p. 436; Read 2005 , p. 281; Rice 1990 , p. 187.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 420, 425–426; Service 2000 , p. 439; Read 2005 , pp. 280, 282.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 443; Service 2000 , p. 437.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 598–599; Shub 1966 , p. 426; Service 2000 , p. 443; White 2001 , p. 172; Read 2005 , p. 258.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 600; Shub 1966 , pp. 426–427; Lewin 1969 , p. 33; Service 2000 , p. 443; White 2001 , p. 173; Read 2005 , p. 258.

^ Shub 1966 , pp. 427–428; Service 2000 , p. 446.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 634; Shub 1966 , pp. 431–432; Lewin 1969 , pp. 33–34; White 2001 , p. 173.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 600–602; Shub 1966 , pp. 428–430; Leggett 1981 , p. 318; Sandle 1999 , p. 164; Service 2000 , pp. 442–443; Read 2005 , p. 269; Ryan 2012 , pp. 174–175.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 310; Leggett 1981 , pp. 320–322; Aves 1996 , pp. 175–178; Sandle 1999 , p. 164; Lee 2003 , pp. 103–104; Ryan 2012 , p. 172.

^ Lewin 1969 , pp. 8–9; White 2001 , p. 176; Read 2005 , pp. 270–272.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 578; Rice 1990 , p. 189.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 192–193.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 578.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 638–639; Shub 1966 , p. 433; Lewin 1969 , pp. 73–75; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 417; Service 2000 , p. 464; White 2001 , pp. 173–174.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 647; Shub 1966 , pp. 434–435; Rice 1990 , p. 192; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 273; Service 2000 , p. 469; White 2001 , pp. 174–175; Read 2005 , pp. 278–279.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 640; Shub 1966 , pp. 434–435; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 249, 418; Service 2000 , p. 465; White 2001 , p. 174.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 666–667, 669; Lewin 1969 , pp. 120–121; Service 2000 , p. 468; Read 2005 , p. 273.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 650–654; Service 2000 , p. 470.

^ Service 2000 , p. 369.

^ Shub 1966 , pp. 426, 434; Lewin 1969 , pp. 34–35.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 263–264.

^ Lewin 1969 , p. 70; Rice 1990 , p. 191; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 273, 416.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 635; Lewin 1969 , pp. 35–40; Service 2000 , pp. 451–452; White 2001 , p. 173.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 637–638, 669; Shub 1966 , pp. 435–436; Lewin 1969 , pp. 71, 85, 101; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 273–274, 422–423; Service 2000 , pp. 463, 472–473; White 2001 , pp. 173, 176; Read 2005 , p. 279.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 607–608; Lewin 1969 , pp. 43–49; Rice 1990 , pp. 190–191; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 421; Service 2000 , pp. 452, 453–455; White 2001 , pp. 175–176.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 608; Lewin 1969 , p. 50; Leggett 1981 , p. 354; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 421; Service 2000 , p. 455; White 2001 , p. 175.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 455, 456.

^ Lewin 1969 , pp. 40, 99–100; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 421; Service 2000 , pp. 460–461, 468.

^ Rigby 1979 , p. 221.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 671; Shub 1966 , p. 436; Lewin 1969 , p. 103; Leggett 1981 , p. 355; Rice 1990 , p. 193; White 2001 , p. 176; Read 2005 , p. 281.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 671; Shub 1966 , p. 436; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 425; Service 2000 , p. 474; Lerner, Finkelstein & Witztum 2004 , p. 372.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 672; Rigby 1979 , p. 192; Rice 1990 , pp. 193–194; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 429–430.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 672; Shub 1966 , p. 437; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 431; Service 2000 , p. 476; Read 2005 , p. 281.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 194; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 299; Service 2000 , pp. 477–478.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 673–674; Shub 1966 , p. 438; Rice 1990 , p. 194; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 435; Service 2000 , pp. 478–479; White 2001 , p. 176; Read 2005 , p. 269.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 435; Lerner, Finkelstein & Witztum 2004 , p. 372.

^ Rice 1990 , p. 7.

^ Rice 1990 , pp. 7–8.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 674; Shub 1966 , p. 439; Rice 1990 , pp. 7–8; Service 2000 , p. 479.

^ a b Rice 1990 , p. 9.

^ History , April 2009 .

^ Shub 1966 , p. 439; Rice 1990 , p. 9; Service 2000 , pp. 479–480.

^ a b Volkogonov 1994 , p. 440.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 674; Shub 1966 , p. 438; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 437–438; Service 2000 , p. 481.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 625–626; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 446.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 444, 445.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 445.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 444.

^ Moscow.info .

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 150.

^ a b c d Ryan 2012 , p. 18.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 409.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 35; Service 2000 , p. 237.

^ a b c Sandle 1999 , p. 41.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 206.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 35.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 432.

^ Sandle 1999 , pp. 42–43.

^ Keynes, John Maynard (1920).

The economic consequences of the peace . Wellesley College Library. New York, Harcourt, Brace and Howe. p. 235.

^ "Unveiled! Lenin's Brilliant Plot to Destroy Capitalism" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on 26 September 2013 . Retrieved 21 July 2025 .

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 38.

^ Sandle 1999 , pp. 43–44, 63.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 36.

^ Service 2000 , p. 203.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 29; White 2001 , p. 1.

^ Service 2000 , p. 173.

^ Ryan 2012 , p. 13.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 57; White 2001 , p. 151.

^ Sandle 1999 , p. 34.

^ White 2001 , pp. 150–151.

^ a b c Ryan 2012 , p. 19.

^ a b Ryan 2012 , p. 3.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 213.

^ a b Rice 1990 , p. 121.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 471.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 443.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 310; Shub 1966 , p. 442.

^ Sandle 1999 , pp. 36–37.

^ Lewin 2005 , p. 41.

^ Suny, Ronald Grigor (25 August 2020).

Red Flag Wounded: Stalinism and the Fate of the Soviet Experiment . Verso Books. p. 141.

ISBN 9781788730747 .

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 54; Shub 1966 , p. 423; Pipes 1990 , p. 352.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 88–89.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 87; Montefiore 2007 , p. 266.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 87.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 91, 93.

^ Montefiore 2007 , p. 266.

^ Page 1948 , p. 17; Page 1950 , p. 354.

^ Page 1950 , p. 355.

^ Page 1950 , p. 342.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 159, 202; Read 2005 , p. 207.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 47, 148.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 348, 351.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 246.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 57.

^ Service 2000 , p. 73.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 44; Service 2000 , p. 81.

^ Service 2000 , p. 118.

^ Service 2000 , p. 232; Lih 2011 , p. 13.

^ White 2001 , p. 88.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 362.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 409.

^ Read 2005 , p. 262.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 40–41; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 373; Service 2000 , p. 149.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 21–22.

^ Service 2000 , p. 116.

^ Pipes 1996 , p. 11; Read 2005 , p. 287.

^ Read 2005 , p. 259.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 67; Pipes 1990 , p. 353; Read 2005 , pp. 207, 212.

^ Petrovsky-Shtern 2010 , p. 93.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 353.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 69.

^ Service 2000 , p. 244; Read 2005 , p. 153.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 59.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 45; Pipes 1990 , p. 350; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 182; Service 2000 , p. 177; Read 2005 , p. 208; Ryan 2012 , p. 6.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 415; Shub 1966 , p. 422; Read 2005 , p. 247.

^ Service 2000 , p. 293.

^ Petrovsky-Shtern 2010 , p. 67.

^ Service 2000 , p. 453.

^ Service 2000 , p. 389.

^ Pipes 1996 , p. 11; Service 2000 , pp. 389–400.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 200.

^ Fischer 1964 , pp. 489, 491; Shub 1966 , pp. 420–421; Sandle 1999 , p. 125; Read 2005 , p. 237.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 79; Read 2005 , p. 237.

^ Service 2000 , p. 199.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 424; Service 2000 , p. 213; Rappaport 2010 , p. 38.

^ Read 2005 , p. 19.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 515; Volkogonov 1994 , p. 246.

^ Service 2000 , p. 242.

^ Goode, William Thomas (4 December 1919).

"An interview with Lenin" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 56; Rice 1990 , p. 106; Service 2000 , p. 160.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 56; Service 2000 , p. 188.

^ Read 2005 , pp. 20, 64, 132–37.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 423.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 367.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 368.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 812.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 99–100, 160.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 245.

^ Pipes 1990 , pp. 349–350; Read 2005 , pp. 284, 259–260.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 326.

^ Service 2000 , p. 391.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 259.

^ Read 2005 , p. 284.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 414.

^ Liebman 1975 , pp. 19–20.

^ Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ White 2001 , p. iix.

^ Service 2000 , p. 488.

^ a b Read 2005 , p. 283.

^ a b Ryan 2012 , p. 5.

^ Time , 13 April 1998 .

^ Time , 4 February 2011 .

^ Lee 2003 , p. 14; Ryan 2012 , p. 3.

^ Lee 2003 , p. 14.

^ a b Lee 2003 , p. 123.

^ Lee 2003 , p. 124.

^ Leggett 1981 , p. 364.

^ Lewin 1969 , p. 12; Rigby 1979 , pp. x, 161; Sandle 1999 , p. 164; Service 2000 , p. 506; Lee 2003 , p. 97; Read 2005 , p. 190; Ryan 2012 , p. 9.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 417; Shub 1966 , p. 416; Pipes 1990 , p. 511; Pipes 1996 , p. 3; Read 2005 , p. 247.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 524.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 313.

^ Ryan 2012 , p. 1.

^ Lewin 2005 , p. 42.

^ Vladimir Lenin at the Encyclopædia Britannica ^ Shub 1966 , p. 415; Leggett 1981 , p. 364.

^ Fischer 1964 , p. 516; Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 307, 312.

^ a b Mawdsley, Evan (2011).

The Russian Civil War . Birlinn.

ISBN 9780857901231 .

^ Ronald Suny .

Red Flag Unfurled: History, Historians and the Russian Revolution ( Verso Books , 2017).

^ Lewin 2005 , p. 136.

^ Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation . Transaction. pp.

10– 11.

ISBN 978-1-4128-3502-2 .

^ Lee 2003 , p. 120.

^ Ryan 2012 , p. 191.

^ Ryan 2012 , p. 184.

^ Biography .

^ Ryan 2012 , p. 3; Budgen, Kouvelakis & Žižek 2007 , pp. 1–4.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 327; Tumarkin 1997 , p. 2; White 2001 , p. 185; Read 2005 , p. 260.

^ Tumarkin 1997 , p. 2.

^ Pipes 1990 , p. 814; Service 2000 , p. 485; White 2001 , p. 185; Petrovsky-Shtern 2010 , p. 114; Read 2005 , p. 284.

^ a b c Volkogonov 1994 , p. 328.

^ a b c Service 2000 , p. 486.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 437; Service 2000 , p. 482.

^ Lih 2011 , p. 22.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 439; Pipes 1996 , p. 1; Service 2000 , p. 482.

^ Pipes 1996 , p. 1.

^ Service 2000 , p. 484; White 2001 , p. 185; Read 2005 , pp. 260, 284.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 274–275.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 262.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 261.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , p. 263.

^ Petrovsky-Shtern 2010 , p. 99; Lih 2011 , p. 20.

^ a b Read 2005 , p. 6.

^ Petrovsky-Shtern 2010 , p. 108.

^ Petrovsky-Shtern 2010 , pp. 134, 159–161.

^ Service 2000 , p. 485.

^ Pipes 1996 , pp. 1–2; White 2001 , p. 183.

^ Volkogonov 1994 , pp. 452–453; Service 2000 , pp. 491–492; Lee 2003 , p. 131.

^ Service 2000 , pp. 491–492.

^ Pipes 1996 , pp. 2–3.

^ See, e.g., a statement by President Putin in Sankt-Peterburgsky Vedomosty , 19 July 2001.

^ Путин против захоронения тела Ленина (in Russian). Женьминь Жибао. 24 July 2001.

Archived from the original on 14 March 2018 . Retrieved 23 March 2018 .

^ The Moscow Times , 24 October 2013 .

^ "Relics of the Soviet era remain in Russia" . 23 January 2012.

^ BBC, 22 February 2014 .

^ BBC, 14 April 2015 .

^ Harding, Luke (23 April 2022).

"Back in the Soviet Union: Lenin statues and Soviet flags reappear in Russian-controlled cities" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 May 2022 . Retrieved 4 May 2022 .

^ Fink, Andrew (20 April 2022).

"Lenin Returns to Ukraine" .

The Dispatch .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2022 . Retrieved 4 May 2022 .

^ Bowman, Verity (27 April 2022).

"Kyiv pulls down Soviet-era monument symbolising Russian-Ukrainian friendship" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2022 . Retrieved 4 May 2022 .

^ Trofimov, Yaroslav (1 May 2022).

"Russia's Occupation of Southern Ukraine Hardens, With Rubles, Russian Schools and Lenin Statues" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2022 . Retrieved 4 May 2022 .

^ "100 Years After Revolution, Most Russians Say Lenin Played Positive Role: Poll" .

Radio Free Europe . 5 November 2017.

^ "Levada Center: Vladimir Lenin" (in Russian). 19 April 2017.

^ " "Ideas about the personality of Vladimir Lenin and his role in the history of the country" " .

Levada . 16 April 2024. Archived from the original on 2 May 2024.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 9; Service 2000 , p. 482.

^ Shub 1966 , p. 10.

^ Liebman 1975 , p. 22.

^ Lee 2003 , pp. 132–133.

Bibliography Aves, Jonathan (1996).

Workers Against Lenin: Labour Protest and the Bolshevik Dictatorship . London: I. B. Tauris.

ISBN 978-1-86064-067-4 .

Brackman, Roman (2000).

The Secret File of Joseph Stalin: A Hidden Life . Portland, OR: Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-7146-5050-0 .

Budgen, Sebastian; Kouvelakis, Stathis; Žižek, Slavoj (2007).

Lenin Reloaded: Toward a Politics of Truth . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8223-3941-0 .

David, H. P. (1974). "Abortion and Family Planning in the Soviet Union: Public Policies and Private Behaviour".

Journal of Biosocial Science .

6 (4): 417– 426.

doi : 10.1017/S0021932000009846 .

ISSN 0021-9320 .

PMID 4473125 .

S2CID 11271400 .

Davies, Norman (2003) [1972].

White Eagle, Red Star: The Polish-Soviet War 1919–20 and 'the Miracle on the Vistula' . London: Pimlico.

ISBN 978-0-7126-0694-3 .

Fischer, Louis (1964).

The Life of Lenin . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Figes, Orlando (26 January 2017).

A People's Tragedy: The Russian Revolution – centenary edition with new introduction . Random House. pp.

796– 797.

ISBN 978-1-4481-1264-7 .

Hazard, John N.

(1965).

"Unity and Diversity in Socialist Law" .

Law and Contemporary Problems .

30 (2): 270– 290.

doi : 10.2307/1190515 .

JSTOR 1190515 .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 8 August 2016 .

Lee, Stephen J. (2003).

Lenin and Revolutionary Russia . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-28718-0 .

Leggett, George (1981).

The Cheka: Lenin's Political Police . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-822552-2 .

Lerner, Vladimir; Finkelstein, Y.; Witztum, E. (2004). "The Enigma of Lenin's (1870–1924) Malady".

European Journal of Neurology .

11 (6): 371– 376.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2004.00839.x .

PMID 15171732 .

S2CID 14966309 .

Goldstein, Erik (2013).

The First World War Peace Settlements, 1919–1925 . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-31-7883-678 .

Hall, Richard C. (2015).

Consumed by War: European Conflict in the 20th Century . Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 978-0-81-3159-959 .

Liebman, Marcel (1975) [1973].

Leninism Under Lenin . Translated by Brian Pearce. London: Jonathan Cape.

ISBN 978-0-224-01072-6 .

Merridale, Catherine (2017).

Lenin on the Train . London: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-241-01132-4 .

Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2007).

Young Stalin . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 978-0-297-85068-7 .

Lewin, Moshe (1969).

Lenin's Last Struggle . Translated by Sheridan Smith, A. M.

London: Faber & Faber.

Lewin, Moshe (4 May 2005).

Lenin's Last Struggle . University of Michigan Press. p. 67.

ISBN 978-0-472-03052-1 .

Lih, Lars T. (2011).

Lenin . Critical Lives. London: Reaktion.

ISBN 978-1-86189-793-0 .

Page, Stanley W. (1948). "Lenin, the National Question and the Baltic States, 1917–19".

The American Slavic and East European Review .

7 (1): 15– 31.

doi : 10.2307/2492116 .

JSTOR 2492116 .

Page, Stanley W. (1950). "Lenin and Self-Determination".

The Slavonic and East European Review .

28 (71): 342– 358.

JSTOR 4204138 .

Petrovsky-Shtern, Yohanan (2010).

Lenin's Jewish Question . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-15210-4 .

JSTOR j.ctt1npd80 .

Pipes, Richard (1990).

The Russian Revolution: 1899–1919 . London: Collins Harvill.

ISBN 978-0-679-73660-8 .

Pipes, Richard (1996).

The Unknown Lenin: From the Secret Archive . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-06919-8 .

Rappaport, Helen (2010).

Conspirator: Lenin in Exile . New York: Basic.

ISBN 978-0-465-01395-1 .

Read, Christopher (2005).

Lenin: A Revolutionary Life . Routledge Historical Biographies. London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-20649-5 .

Remnick, David (13 April 1998).

"TIME 100: Vladimir Lenin" . Archived from the original on 25 April 2011.

Resis, Albert.

"Vladimir Ilich Lenin" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 19 June 2015 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .

Rice, Christopher (1990).

Lenin: Portrait of a Professional Revolutionary . London: Cassell.

ISBN 978-0-304-31814-8 .

Rigby, T. H. (1979).

Lenin's Government: Sovnarkom 1917–1922 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-22281-5 .

Ryan, James (2012).

Lenin's Terror: The Ideological Origins of Early Soviet State Violence . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-81568-1 .

Sandle, Mark (1999).

A Short History of Soviet Socialism . London: UCL Press.

doi : 10.4324/9780203500279 .

ISBN 978-1-85728-355-6 .

Sebestyen, Victor (2017).

Lenin the Dictator: An Intimate Portrait . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 978-1-47460-044-6 .

Service, Robert (2000).

Lenin: A Biography . London: Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-333-72625-9 .

Shevchenko, Vitaly (14 April 2015).

"Goodbye, Lenin: Ukraine moves to ban communist symbols" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2016.

Shub, David (1966).

Lenin: A Biography (Rev. ed.). London: Pelican.

Sun, Feifei (4 February 2011).

"Top 25 Political Icons: Lenin" .

Time . Archived from the original on 14 January 2015 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .

Thatcher, Ian D. (April 2009). "Trotskii and Lenin's Funeral, 27 January 1924: A Brief Note".

History .

94 (2): 194– 202.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-229X.2009.00451.x .

JSTOR 24428587 .

Theen, Rolf (2004).

Lenin: Genesis and Development of a Revolutionary . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-64358-8 .

Tumarkin, Nina (1997).

Lenin Lives! The Lenin Cult in Soviet Russia (enlarged ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-52431-6 .

Volkogonov, Dmitri (1994).

Lenin: Life and Legacy . Translated by Shukman, Harold . London: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-00-255123-6 .

White, James D. (2001).

Lenin: The Practice and Theory of Revolution . European History in Perspective. Basingstoke: Palgrave.

ISBN 978-0-333-72157-5 .

Yakovlev, Yegor (1988).

The Beginning: The Story about the Ulyanov Family, Lenin's Childhood and Youth . Moscow: Progress.

ISBN 978-5010005009 .

"Lenin" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 8 January 2021 .

"Lenin Mausoleum on Red Square in Moscow" .

www.moscow.info . Archived from the original on 10 January 2019 . Retrieved 7 May 2017 .

"Lenin Statue Beheaded in Orenburg" .

The Moscow Times . 24 October 2013.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2020 . Retrieved 17 July 2020 .

"Mongolia capital Ulan-Bator removes Lenin statue" .

BBC News . 14 October 2012.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2020 . Retrieved 17 July 2020 .

"Ukraine crisis: Lenin statues toppled in protest" .

BBC News . 22 February 2014.

Archived from the original on 5 January 2016.

"Vladimir Lenin Biography" .

Biography .  42:10 minutes in. A&E.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 20 May 2016 .

Further reading See also: Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Ali, Tariq (2017).

The Dilemmas of Lenin: Terrorism, War, Empire, Love, Revolution . New York/London: Verso.

ISBN 978-1-78663-110-7 .

Cliff, Tony (1986).

Building the Party: Lenin, 1893–1914 . Chicago: Haymarket.

ISBN 978-1-931859-01-1 .

Felshtinsky, Yuri (2010).

Lenin and His Comrades: The Bolsheviks Take Over Russia 1917–1924 . New York: Enigma Books.

ISBN 978-1-929631-95-7 .

Gellately, Robert (2007).

Lenin, Stalin, and Hitler: The Age of Social Catastrophe . New York: Knopf.

ISBN 978-1-4000-3213-6 .

Gooding, John (2001).

Socialism in Russia: Lenin and His Legacy, 1890–1991 . Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan.

doi : 10.1057/9781403913876 .

ISBN 978-0-333-97235-9 .

Hill, Christopher (1993).

Lenin and the Russian Revolution . London: Pelican.

Lukács, Georg (1970) [1924].

Lenin: A Study on the Unity of his Thought . Translated by Jacobs, Nicholas.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2016 . Retrieved 7 August 2016 .

Nimtz, August H. (2014).

Lenin's Electoral Strategy from 1907 to the October Revolution of 1917: The Ballot, the Streets—or Both . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-137-39377-7 .

Ryan, James (2007). "Lenin's The State and Revolution and Soviet State Violence: A Textual Analysis".

Revolutionary Russia .

20 (2): 151– 172.

doi : 10.1080/09546540701633452 .

S2CID 144309851 .

Service, Robert (1985).

Lenin: A Political Life – Volume One: The Strengths of Contradiction . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0-253-33324-7 .

Service, Robert (1991).

Lenin: A Political Life – Volume Two: Worlds in Collision . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0-253-33325-4 .

Service, Robert (1995).

Lenin: A Political Life – Volume Three: The Iron Ring . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0-253-35181-4 .

Wade, Rex A. (2016). "The Revolution at One Hundred: Issues and Trends in the English Language Historiography of the Russian Revolution of 1917".

Journal of Modern Russian History and Historiography .

9 (1). Brill: 9– 38.

doi : 10.1163/22102388-00900003 .

ISSN 1947-9956 .

External links Vladimir Lenin at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Library resources about Vladimir Lenin Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Marx2Mao.org – Lenin Internet Library Lenin Internet Archive Biography includes interviews with Lenin and essays on the leader Works by Vladimir Lenin at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Vladimir Lenin at the Internet Archive (narrowed results) Works by or about Vladimir Lenin at the Internet Archive (broad results) Works by Vladimir Lenin at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Marxists.org Lenin Internet Archive – Extensive compendium of writings, a biography, and many photographs Newspaper clippings about Vladimir Lenin in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Political offices Position established Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic 1917–1924 Succeeded by Alexei Rykov Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1922–1924 Military offices Position established Chairman of the Council of Labour and Defence 1918–1920 Succeeded by Himself as Chair of the Sovnarkom Articles related to Vladimir Lenin v t e Communist Party of the Soviet Union Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union Bibliography of the Post Stalinist Soviet Union Central Committee Leaders Vladimir Lenin (1912–24) Joseph Stalin (1924–53) Nikita Khrushchev (1953–64) Leonid Brezhnev (1964–82) Yuri Andropov (1982–84) Konstantin Chernenko (1984–85) Mikhail Gorbachev (1985–91) General Secretaries Elena Stasova (1917–18) Yakov Sverdlov (1918–19) Elena Stasova (Mar.–Dec. 1919) Nikolay Krestinsky (1919–21) Vyacheslav Molotov (1921–22) Joseph Stalin (1922–52) Nikita Khrushchev (1953–64) Leonid Brezhnev (1964–82) Yuri Andropov (1982–84) Konstantin Chernenko (1984–85) Mikhail Gorbachev (1985–91) Vladimir Ivashko ( acting , Aug. 1991) Decision-making bodies Politburo / Presidium Secretariat Orgburo Control Commission Departments Administrative Organs Agriculture Chemical Industry Construction Culture Defence Industry Foreign Cadres General Heavy Industry Information International Light- and Food Industry Machine Industry Organisational-party Work Planning and Financial Organs Political Administration of the Armed Forces Propaganda Science and Education Trade and Consumers' Services Transportation-Communications Women Publications Pravda Bolshevik / Kommunist National meetings Congress 1st (1898) 2nd (1903) 3rd (1905) 4th (1906) 5th (1907) 6th (1917) 7th (1918) 8th (1919) 9th (1920) 10th (1921) 11th (1922) 12th (1923) 13th (1924) 14th (1925) 15th (1927) 16th (1930) 17th (1934) 18th (1939) 19th (1952) 20th (1956) 21st (1959) 22nd (1961) 23rd (1966) 24th (1971) 25th (1976) 26th (1981) 27th (1986) 28th (1990) Conference 1st (1905) 2nd (1906) 3rd (Aug. 1907) 4th (Nov. 1907) 5th (1908) 6th (1912) 7th (1917) 8th (1919) 9th (1920) 10th (May 1921) 11th (Dec. 1921) 12th (1922) 13th (1924) 14th (1925) 15th (1926) 16th (1929) 17th (1932) 18th (1941) 19th (1988) Leadership sittings Elected by the Central Committee Politburo Aug.–Oct. 1917 Oct.–Dec. 1917 6th (1917–18) 7th (1918–19) 8th (1919–20) 9th (1920–21) 10th (1921–22) 11th (1922–23) 12th (1923–24) 13th (1924–25) 14th (1925–27) 15th (1927–30) 16th (1930–34) 17th (1934–39) 18th (1939–52) 19th (1952–56) 20th (1956–61) 22nd (1961–66) 23rd (1966–71) 24th (1971–76) 25th (1976–81) 26th (1981–86) 27th (1986–90) 28th (1990–91) Secretariat 6th (1917–18) 7th (1918–19) 8th (1919–20) 9th (1920–21) 10th (1921–22) 11th (1922–23) 12th (1923–24) 13th (1924–25) 14th (1925–27) 15th (1927–30) 16th (1930–34) 17th (1934–39) 18th (1939–52) 19th (1952–56) 20th (1956–61) 22nd (1961–66) 23rd (1966–71) 24th (1971–76) 25th (1976–81) 26th (1981–86) 27th (1986–90) 28th (1990–91) Orgburo 7th (Jan.–Mar. 1919) 8th (1919–20) 9th (1920–21) 10th (1921–22) 11th (1922–23) 12th (1923–24) 13th (1924–25) 14th (1925–27) 15th (1927–30) 16th (1930–34) 17th (1934–39) 18th (1939–52) Control Committee 17th (1934–39) 18th (1939–52) 19th (1952–56) 20th (1956–61) 22nd (1961–66) 23rd (1966–71) 24th (1971–76) 25th (1976–81) 26th (1981–86) 27th (1986–90) Elected by the Central Control Commission Presidium 12th (1923–24) 13th (1924–25) 14th (1925–27) 15th (1927–30) 16th (1930–34) 28th (1990–91) Secretariat 12th (1923–24) 13th (1924–25) 14th (1925–27) Collegium 12th (1923–24) 13th (1924–25) 14th (1925–27) 15th (1927–30) 16th (1930–34) Elected by Congress Central Committee 1st (1898–1903) 2nd (1903–05) 3rd (Apr.–Dec. 1905) CC of the 1st Conf. (1905–06) 4th (1906–07) 5th (1907–12) CC of the 6th Conf. (1912–17) CC of the 7th Conf. (Apr.–Aug. 1917) 6th (1917–18) 7th (1918–19) 8th (1919–20) 9th (1920–21) 10th (1921–22) 11th (1922–23) 12th (1923–24) 13th (1924–25) 14th (1925–27) 15th (1927–30) 16th (1930–34) 17th (1934–39) 18th (1939–52) 19th (1952–56) 20th (1956–61) 22nd (1961–66) 23rd (1966–71) 24th (1971–76) 25th (1976–81) 26th (1981–86) 27th (1986–90) 28th (1990–91) Auditing Commission 8th (1919–21) 10th (1921–24) 13th (1924–25) 14th (1925–27) 15th (1927–30) 16th (1930–34) 17th (1934–39) 18th (1939–52) 19th (1952–56) 20th (1956–61) 22nd (1961–66) 23rd (1966–71) 24th (1971–76) 25th (1976–81) 26th (1981–86) 27th (1986–90) Control Commission 9th (1920–21) 10th (1921–22) 11th (1922–23) 12th (1923–24) 13th (1924–25) 14th (1925–27) 15th (1927–30) 16th (1930–34) 28th (1990–91) Wider organisation Republican-level Armenian Azerbaijani Byelorussian Bukharan Estonian Georgian Karelo-Finnish Kazakh Khorezmi Kirghiz Latvian Lithuanian Moldavian Russian SFSR Tajik Transcaucasian Turkestani Turkmen Ukrainian Uzbek Local-level Obkom Okrugkom Gorkom Raikom Partkom Other organs Statute All-Union Leninist Young Communist League (Komsomol) Vladimir Lenin All-Union Pioneer Organization Higher Party School Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Army and Soviet Navy Groupings Ban on factions Group of Democratic Centralism (1919–21) Workers' Opposition (1920–21) Workers' Truth (1921–23) Left Opposition (1923–27) Workers' Group (1923–30) Right Opposition (1924–33) United Opposition (1926–27) Left-Right Bloc (1930) Union of Marxist-Leninists (1932) Bloc of Soviet Oppositions (1932–33) Anti-Party Group (1957) Soyuz (1990–91) State Committee on the State of Emergency (1991) See also Bloc of Communists and Non-Partisans General Jewish Labour Bund in Lithuania, Poland and Russia League of Russian Revolutionary Social Democracy Abroad League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class Purges Siberian Social-Democratic Union Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania Union of Russian Social Democrats Abroad v t e Premiers of the Soviet Union Premiers Lenin (1923–1924) Rykov (1924–1930) Molotov (1930–1941) Stalin (1941–1953) Malenkov (1953–1955) Bulganin (1955–1958) Khrushchev (1958–1964) Kosygin (1964–1980) Tikhonov (1980–1985) Ryzhkov (1985–1991) Pavlov (Jan.–Aug. 1991) Doguzhiyev (Aug. 1991) Silayev (Aug.–Dec. 1991) First Deputies Kuybyshev (1934–1935) Voznesensky (1941–1946) Molotov (1942–1957) Bulganin (1950–1955) Beria (Mar.–June 1953) Kaganovich (1953–1957) Mikoyan (1955–1964) Pervukhin (1955–1957) Saburov (1955–1957) Kuzmin (1957–1958) Kozlov (1958–1960) Kosygin (1960–1964) Ustinov (1963–1965) Mazurov (1965–1978) Polyansky (1965–1973) Tikhonov (1976–1980) Arkhipov (1980–1986) Aliyev (1982–1987) Gromyko (1983–1985) Talyzin (1985–1988) Murakhovsky (1985–1989) Maslyukov (1988–1990) Voronin (1989–1990) Vladilen Niktin (1989–1990) Velichko (Jan.–Nov. 1991) Doguzhiyev (Jan.–Nov. 1991) Shcherbakov [ ru ] (May–Nov. 1991) First Deputy Premiers Deputy Premiers Prime Ministers of Russia v t e Heads of government of Russia Note: Acting heads of government shown in italics . Questionable heads of government are written in small type .

Russian Empire Committee of Ministers Vorontsov Rumyantsev Vyazmitinov Saltykov Lopukhin Kochubey Novosiltsev Chernyshyov Orlov Bludov Gagarin Ignatyev Valuyev von Reutern Bunge Durnovo Witte Council of Ministers Witte Goremykin Stolypin Kokovtsov Goremykin Stürmer Trepov Golitsyn Provisional Government Lvov Kerensky Russian SFSR Council of People's Commissars Lenin Rykov Syrtsov Sulimov Bulganin Vakhrushev Khokhlov Pamfilov Kosygin Council of Ministers Rodionov Chernousov Puzanov Yasnov Kozlov Polyansky Voronov Solomentsev Vorotnikov Vlasov Silayev Lobov Russian Federation Yeltsin Gaidar Chernomyrdin Kiriyenko Chernomyrdin Primakov Stepashin Putin Kasyanov Khristenko Fradkov Zubkov Putin Zubkov Medvedev Mishustin Belousov Russian Government Cabinets Premiers of the USSR v t e Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Events Revolution February Revolution July Days Kornilov affair October Revolution Kerensky–Krasnov uprising Junker mutiny Civil War Russian Civil War Red Terror (Outline) Ukrainian War of Independence Ukrainian–Soviet War Kiev Bolshevik Uprising Polish–Ukrainian War Finnish Civil War Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic Heimosodat Polish–Soviet War Estonian War of Independence Latvian War of Independence Lithuanian Wars of Independence Red Army invasion of Georgia Armenian–Azerbaijani war (1918–1920) Left SR uprising Tambov Rebellion Workers' Opposition Kronstadt rebellion Interventions Allied Central Powers Siberian Groups Provisional Committee of the State Duma Russian Provisional Government White movement Pro-independence movements Mossoviet Petrograd Soviet All-Russian Central Executive Committee First All-Russian Congress Second All-Russian Congress Third All-Russian Congress Council of the People's Commissars Red Army Military Revolutionary Committee Petrograd MRC Moscow MRC Russian Constituent Assembly elections Black Guards Revolutionary Insurgent Army of Ukraine Green armies Red Guards Group of forces in battle with the counterrevolution in the South of Russia Tsentralna Rada Ukrainian People's Republic Parties Kadets Nabat Russian Social Democratic Labour Party Bolsheviks Mensheviks Socialist Revolutionary Party Left SRs Union of October 17 General Jewish Labour Bund Figures Monarchists Nicholas II of Russia Nikolai Golitsyn Provisional Government Georgy Lvov Alexander Kerensky Pavel Milyukov Alexander Guchkov White movement Pyotr Wrangel Alexander Kolchak Anton Denikin Pyotr Krasnov Nikolai Yudenich Lavr Kornilov Bolsheviks Vladimir Lenin Lev Kamenev Grigory Zinoviev Leon Trotsky Mikhail Frunze Joseph Stalin Semyon Budyonny Yakov Sverdlov Nikolai Bukharin Felix Dzerzhinsky Alexei Rykov Right SRs Viktor Chernov Alexander Kerensky Boris Savinkov Boris Sokoloff Left SRs Yakov Blumkin Boris Kamkov Mark Natanson Maria Spiridonova Alexander Antonov Anarchists Nestor Makhno Maria Nikiforova Stepan Petrichenko Lev Chernyi Semen Karetnyk Fedir Shchus Viktor Bilash Fanya Baron Peter Kropotkin International Revolutions of 1917–1923 German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic Hungarian Soviet Republic Hungarian–Romanian War Workers' Councils in Poland Polish–Ukrainian War Polish–Soviet War Slovak Soviet Republic Belarusian-Soviet conflict v t e Murder of the Romanov family Victims Romanovs Emperor Nicholas II of Russia Empress Alexandra Feodorovna Grand Duchess Olga Nikolaevna of Russia Grand Duchess Tatiana Nikolaevna of Russia Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna of Russia Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia Alexei Nikolaevich, Tsarevich of Russia Entourage Eugene Botkin Anna Demidova Alexei Trupp Ivan Kharitonov Pets Ortino Jimmy Joy Perpetrators Organizers Vladimir Lenin Yakov Sverdlov Felix Dzerzhinsky Filipp Goloshchyokin Alexander Beloborodov Boris Didkovsky Georgy Safarov Nikolay Tolmachyov Pyotr Voykov Fyodor Lukoyanov Gavril Myasnikov Yevgeni Preobrazhensky Executioners Yakov Yurovsky Grigory Nikulin Peter Ermakov Mikhail Medvedev-Kudrin Pavel Medvedev Stepan Vaganov Alexey Kabanov Background Regicide Russian Empire Russian Revolution ( October Revolution ) Russian Civil War ( Reds and Whites ) Anti-religious campaign during the Russian Civil War Cheka Red Terror Ural Soviet Yekaterinburg Ipatiev House Ganina Yama Legacy Canonization New Martyr List of Russian saints Saints Peter and Paul Cathedral, Saint Petersburg Church of All Saints, Yekaterinburg White émigré Romanov Family Association Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia Provender House Romanov impostors Category v t e Leaders of the ruling Communist parties of the Eastern Bloc Party of Labour of Albania Enver Hoxha Ramiz Alia Bulgarian Communist Party Georgi Dimitrov Valko Chervenkov Todor Zhivkov Petar Mladenov Communist Party of Czechoslovakia Klement Gottwald Antonín Novotný Alexander Dubček Gustáv Husák Miloš Jakeš Karel Urbánek Socialist Unity Party of Germany Wilhelm Pieck Otto Grotewohl Walter Ulbricht Erich Honecker Egon Krenz Gregor Gysi Hungarian Working People's Party Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party Mátyás Rákosi Ernő Gerő Imre Nagy János Kádár Károly Grósz Rezső Nyers Polish Workers' Party Polish United Workers' Party Bolesław Bierut Edward Ochab Władysław Gomułka Edward Gierek Stanisław Kania Wojciech Jaruzelski Romanian Communist Party Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Gheorghe Apostol Nicolae Ceaușescu Communist Party of the Soviet Union Vladimir Lenin Joseph Stalin Georgy Malenkov Nikita Khrushchev Leonid Brezhnev Yuri Andropov Konstantin Chernenko Mikhail Gorbachev League of Communists of Yugoslavia Josip Broz Tito Stevan Doronjski Lazar Mojsov Dušan Dragosavac Mitja Ribičič Dragoslav Marković Ali Šukrija Vidoje Žarković Milanko Renovica Boško Krunić Stipe Šuvar Milan Pančevski v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Vladimir Lenin Vladimir Lenin bibliography List of speeches Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is To Be Done?

(1902) One Step Forward, Two Steps Back (1904) Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution (1905) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Philosophical Notebooks (1913) The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism (1913) The Right of Nations to Self-Determination (1914) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1916) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Testament (1922–1923) v t e 12th Politburo of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) (1923–1924) Full members Grigory Zinoviev Lev Kamenev Vladimir Lenin Alexei Rykov Joseph Stalin Mikhail Tomsky Leon Trotsky Candidate members Nikolai Bukharin Mikhail Kalinin Vyacheslav Molotov Jānis Rudzutaks v t e 11th Politburo of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) (1922–1923) Full members Grigory Zinoviev Lev Kamenev Vladimir Lenin Alexei Rykov Joseph Stalin Mikhail Tomsky Leon Trotsky Candidate members Nikolai Bukharin Mikhail Kalinin Vyacheslav Molotov v t e 10th Politburo of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) (1921–1922) Full members Grigory Zinoviev Lev Kamenev Vladimir Lenin Joseph Stalin Leon Trotsky Candidate members Nikolai Bukharin Mikhail Kalinin Vyacheslav Molotov v t e 9th Politburo of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) (1920–1921) Full members Lev Kamenev Nikolay Krestinsky Vladimir Lenin Joseph Stalin Leon Trotsky Candidate members Nikolai Bukharin Grigory Zinoviev Mikhail Kalinin v t e 8th Politburo of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) (1919–1920) Full members Lev Kamenev Nikolay Krestinsky Vladimir Lenin Joseph Stalin Leon Trotsky Candidate members Nikolai Bukharin Grigory Zinoviev Mikhail Kalinin Elena Stasova Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Taiwan Latvia Croatia Chile Greece 2 Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz KulturNav FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA SNAC Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐79fd654b9f‐4qw85
Cached time: 20250818134018
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 4.221 seconds
Real time usage: 4.550 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 50834/1000000
Revision size: 199385/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1047808/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 275143/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 793787/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.380/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26842972/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3620.175      1 -total
 21.70%  785.519    351 Template:Sfnm
 17.58%  636.578    240 Template:Sfn
 10.82%  391.850     51 Template:Cite_book
  9.27%  335.760      2 Template:Reflist
  9.24%  334.493      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
  6.28%  227.343      3 Template:Efn
  6.19%  224.196      1 Template:Navboxes
  5.18%  187.699     30 Template:Navbox
  3.63%  131.247      2 Template:Langx Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11015252:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818134018 and revision id 1304716198. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vladimir_Lenin&oldid=1304716198 " Categories : Vladimir Lenin 1870 births 1924 deaths 19th-century atheists 19th-century philosophers from the Russian Empire 19th-century pseudonymous writers 20th-century atheists 20th-century pseudonymous writers 20th-century Russian philosophers Activist journalists Anti-monarchists Anti-nationalists Atheist philosophers Burials at the Kremlin Wall Necropolis Candidates of the Central Committee of the 5th Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party Comintern people Communists from the Russian Empire Critics of religions Emigrants from the Russian Empire to Germany Emigrants from the Russian Empire to Switzerland Emigrants from the Russian Empire to the United Kingdom Heads of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Heads of government of the Soviet Union Imperialism studies Leaders who took power by coup Leninism Marxism–Leninism Marxist theorists Members of the Bureau of the 7th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Politburo of the 8th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Politburo of the 9th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Politburo of the 10th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Politburo of the 11th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Politburo of the 12th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Central Committee of the 2nd Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party Members of the Central Committee of the 3rd Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party Members of the Central Committee of the 6th Conference of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Central Committee of the 7th Conference of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Central Committee of the 6th Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Central Committee of the 7th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Central Committee of the 8th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Central Committee of the 9th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Central Committee of the 10th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Central Committee of the 11th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Members of the Central Committee of the 12th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Nobility from the Russian Empire Old Bolsheviks People from Simbirsky Uyezd People from the Russian Empire of German descent People from the Russian Empire of Swedish descent People from Ulyanovsk People of Kalmyk descent People of the Russian Civil War Perpetrators of the Red Terror (Russia) Soviet people of Jewish descent Russian Social Democratic Labour Party members Russian Constituent Assembly members Revolutionaries of the Russian Revolution Revolutionaries of the Russian Revolution of 1905 Activists from the Russian Empire Political party founders Russian political philosophers Prisoners and detainees from the Russian Empire Prisoners and detainees of Russia Revolution theorists Russian anti-imperialists Russian atheism activists Russian atheists Russian communists Russian economists Russian lawyers Russian male journalists Russian Marxists Russian people with disabilities Russian revolutionaries Saint Petersburg State University alumni Socialist feminists Hidden categories: Articles containing Russian-language text Pages with Russian IPA Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Featured articles Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from July 2025 Use British English from January 2014 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 18:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vladimir Lenin 208 languages Add topic

