Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structural divisions 2 History 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 4.1 General 4.2 Specialized 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Plant anatomy 46 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Bosanski Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית Jawa Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of the internal structure of plants Plant anatomy or phytotomy is the general term for the study of the internal structure of plants . Originally, it included plant morphology , the description of the physical form and external structure of plants, but since the mid-20th century, plant anatomy has been considered a separate field referring only to internal plant structure.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Plant anatomy is now frequently investigated at the cellular level , and often involves the sectioning of tissues and microscopy .

[ 3 ] Structural divisions [ edit ] Diagram of the anatomy of a plant with labels of structural parts of the plants and the roots. 1. Shoot system. 2. Root system. 3. Hypocotyl. 4. Terminal bud. 5. Leaf blade. 6. Internode. 7. Axillary bud. 8. Petiole. 9. Stem. 10. Node. 11. Tap root. 12. Root hairs. 13. Root tip. 14. Root cap Some studies of plant anatomy use a systems approach, organized on the basis of the plant's activities, such as nutrient transport, flowering, pollination, embryogenesis or seed development.

[ 4 ] Others are more classically [ 5 ] divided into the following structural categories: Flower anatomy, including study of the calyx , corolla , androecium , and gynoecium Leaf anatomy , including study of the epidermis , stomata and palisade cells Stem anatomy, including stem structure and vascular tissues , buds and shoot apex Fruit/Seed anatomy, including structure of the ovule , seed , pericarp and accessory fruit Wood anatomy, including structure of the bark , cork , xylem , phloem , vascular cambium , heartwood and sapwood and branch collar Root anatomy, including structure of the root , root tip , endodermis History [ edit ] Main article: History of botany Vascular tissue of a gooseberry (left) and a vine branch (right) from Grew 's Anatomy of Plants About 300 BC, Theophrastus wrote a number of plant treatises, only two of which survive, Enquiry into Plants ( Περὶ φυτῶν ἱστορία ), and On the Causes of Plants ( Περὶ φυτῶν αἰτιῶν ). He developed concepts of plant morphology and classification, which did not withstand the scientific scrutiny of the Renaissance .

A Swiss physician and botanist, Gaspard Bauhin , introduced binomial nomenclature into plant taxonomy . He published Pinax theatri botanici in 1596, which was the first to use this convention for naming of species. His criteria for classification included natural relationships, or 'affinities', which in many cases were structural.

It was in the late 1600s that plant anatomy became refined into a modern science. Italian doctor and microscopist, Marcello Malpighi , was one of the two founders of plant anatomy. In 1671, he published his Anatomia Plantarum , the first major advance in plant physiogamy since Aristotle . The other founder was the British doctor Nehemiah Grew . He published An Idea of a Philosophical History of Plants in 1672 and The Anatomy of Plants in 1682. Grew is credited with the recognition of plant cells, although he called them 'vesicles' and 'bladders'. He correctly identified and described the sexual organs of plants (flowers) and their parts.

[ 6 ] In the eighteenth century, Carl Linnaeus established taxonomy based on structure, and his early work was with plant anatomy. While the exact structural level which is to be considered to be scientifically valid for comparison and differentiation has changed with the growth of knowledge, the basic principles were established by Linnaeus. He published his master work, Species Plantarum in 1753.

Root tip In 1802, French botanist Charles-François Brisseau de Mirbel , published Traité d'anatomie et de physiologie végétale ( Treatise on Plant Anatomy and Physiology ) establishing the beginnings of the science of plant cytology .

In 1812, Johann Jacob Paul Moldenhawer published Beyträge zur Anatomie der Pflanzen , describing microscopic studies of plant tissues.

In 1813, a Swiss botanist, Augustin Pyrame de Candolle , published Théorie élémentaire de la botanique , in which he argued that plant anatomy, not physiology, ought to be the sole basis for plant classification. Using a scientific basis, he established structural criteria for defining and separating plant genera.

In 1830, Franz Meyen published Phytotomie , the first comprehensive review of plant anatomy.

Chloroplasts in leaf cells of the moss Mnium stellare In 1838, German botanist Matthias Jakob Schleiden , published Contributions to Phytogenesis , stating, "the lower plants all consist of one cell, while the higher plants are composed of (many) individual cells" thus confirming and continuing Mirbel's work.

A German-Polish botanist, Eduard Strasburger , described the mitotic process in plant cells and further demonstrated that new cell nuclei can only arise from the division of other pre-existing nuclei. His Studien über Protoplasma was published in 1876.

Gottlieb Haberlandt , a German botanist, studied plant physiology and classified plant tissue based upon function. On this basis, in 1884, he published Physiologische Pflanzenanatomie ( Physiological Plant Anatomy ), in which he described twelve types of tissue systems (absorptive, mechanical, photosynthetic, etc.).

Nehemiah Grew , Father of Plant Anatomy British paleobotanists Dunkinfield Henry Scott and William Crawford Williamson described the structures of fossilized plants at the end of the nineteenth century. Scott's Studies in Fossil Botany was published in 1900.

Following Charles Darwin 's Origin of Species a Canadian botanist, Edward Charles Jeffrey , who was studying the comparative anatomy and phylogeny of different vascular plant groups, applied the theory to plants using the form and structure of plants to establish a number of evolutionary lines. He published his The Anatomy of Woody Plants in 1917.

The growth of comparative plant anatomy was spearheaded by British botanist Agnes Arber . She published Water Plants: A Study of Aquatic Angiosperms in 1920, Monocotyledons: A Morphological Study in 1925, and The Gramineae: A Study of Cereal, Bamboo and Grass in 1934.

[ 7 ] Following World War II, Katherine Esau published, Plant Anatomy (1953), which became the definitive textbook on plant structure in North American universities and elsewhere, it was still in print as of 2006.

[ 8 ] She followed up with her Anatomy of seed plants in 1960.

References [ edit ] ^ Raven, P. H.; Evert, R. F. and Eichhorn, S. E. (2005) Biology of Plants (7th edition) W. H. Freeman, New York, page 9, ISBN 0-7167-1007-2 ^ Hagemann, Wolfgang (1992). "The Relationship of Anatomy to Morphology in Plants: A New Theoretical Perspective".

International Journal of Plant Sciences .

153 (3(2)): S38 – S48 .

Bibcode : 1992IJPlS.153S..38H .

doi : 10.1086/297062 .

JSTOR 2995526 .

S2CID 84816710 .

^ Evert, Ray Franklin and Esau, Katherine (2006) Esau's Plant anatomy: meristems, cells, and tissues of the plant body - their structure, function and development Wiley, Hoboken, New Jersey, page xv Archived 2013-12-31 at the Wayback Machine , ISBN 0-471-73843-3 ^ Howell, Stephen Herbert (1998).

Molecular Genetics of Plant Development . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. p. xiii.

ISBN 978-0-521-58784-6 .

^ See e.g.

Craig, Richard & Vassilyev, Andrey.

"Plant Anatomy" . McGraw-Hill.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2010.

^ Bolam, J. (1973). "The botanical works of Nehemiah Grew, FRS (1641-1712)".

Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London .

27 (2): 219– 231.

doi : 10.1098/rsnr.1973.0017 .

JSTOR 530999 .

S2CID 143696615 .

^ Thomas, Hanshaw H. (1960). "Agnes Arber, 1879–1960".

Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society .

6 : 1– 11.

doi : 10.1098/rsbm.1960.0021 .

JSTOR 769330 .

^ Chaffey, N. (2006).

"(Book Review) Esau's Plant Anatomy, Meristems, Cells, and Tissues of the Plant Body: their Structure, Function, and Development. 3rd edn" .

Annals of Botany .

99 (4): 785– 786.

doi : 10.1093/aob/mcm015 .

PMC 2802946 .

Further reading [ edit ] General [ edit ] Crang, R.C.; Lyons-Sobaski, S.; Wise, R.R. (2018) Plant Anatomy: A Concept-Based Approach to the Study of Seed Plants . Springer, New York, 725 pp.

Eames, Arthur Johnson; MacDaniels, Laurence H. (1947).

An Introduction to Plant Anatomy 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, link (1st ed., 1925, link ).

Esau, Katherine (1965).

Plant Anatomy 2nd ed. Wiley, New York.

Meicenheimer, R.

History of Plant Anatomy . Miami University, link .

Specialized [ edit ] Cutler, D. F.; Gregory, M.; Rudall, P. (eds.) (1960-2014).

Anatomy of the Monocotyledons . 10 vols. Oxford University Press.

Goffinet, B.; Buck, W. R.; Shaw, J. (2008). Morphology, anatomy, and classification of the Bryophyta. In: Goffinet, B.; Shaw, J. (eds.).

Bryophyte Biology , 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press, pp. 55–138 (1st ed., 2000, link ).

Jeffrey, E. C. (1917).

The anatomy of woody plants . Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, link .

Metcalfe, C.R.; Chalk, L. (1957).

Anatomy of the Dicotyledons: Leaves, stem and wood in relation to taxonomy, with notes on economic uses . 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1500 pp., link (2nd ed., 1979-1998, 4 vols.).

Schoute, J. C. (1938). Anatomy. In: Verdoorn, F. (ed.).

Manual of Pteridology . Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague. pp. 65–104.

link .

Schweingruber, F. H.; Börner, A.; Schulze, E. (2011-2013).

Atlas of Stem Anatomy in Herbs, Shrubs and Trees . Vol. 1, 2011, link . Vol. 2, 2013, link . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg.

External links [ edit ] Farabee, M.J. (2001) "Plants and their structure" Estrella Mountain Community College, Phoenix, Arizona Botanical Visual Glossary Plant anatomy glossary - University of Rhode Island v t e Anatomy and morphology Fields Gross anatomy Superficial anatomy Neuroanatomy brain morphometry Comparative anatomy Microscopic anatomy histology molecular Morphometrics Bacteria and fungi Bacterial cell structure cellular morphologies morphological plasticity Colonial morphology Lichen morphology Protists Structures Plants Plant anatomy fruit Plant habit Plant life-form Plant morphology reproductive Soil morphology Invertebrates Decapod anatomy Gastropod anatomy Insect morphology Diptera Odonata Spider anatomy Arthropod cuticle Mammals Human anatomy Neanderthal anatomy Cat anatomy Dog anatomy Horse anatomy Elephant anatomy Giraffe anatomy Other vertebrates Amphibian anatomy Bird anatomy Fish anatomy Shark anatomy Glossaries Anatomical terminology Anatomical terms of location Glossary of dinosaur anatomy Glossary of plant morphology leaf morphology Related topics Allometry Anatomical variation Anatomical plane Body plan Form classification Gracility Hertwig rule History of anatomy 19th century Physiognomy Standard anatomical position Transcendental anatomy Category Portal Index of anatomy articles v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plant_anatomy&oldid=1306356138 " Categories : Plant anatomy Branches of botany Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 09:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plant anatomy 46 languages Add topic

