Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Criminal law 2 Commercial law 3 Administrative law 4 References Toggle the table of contents Principle of typicality 3 languages 한국어 Italiano Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia General legal principle The principle of typicality (from the Greek term typikos which means model) is a general legal principle that takes on different meanings in contexts.

[ 1 ] Criminal law [ edit ] In criminal law , the principle of typicality, also defined as the prohibition of analogy , indicates that the criminal law applies only to real events that actually relate to the abstract case, without having recourse to the principle of analogy.

[ 2 ] The principle of typicality provides that for each crime the essential elements must be defined, which will make up the abstract case; and consequently the negative value necessary to identify, through the principle of proportionality , the appropriate penalty.

[ 3 ] Commercial law [ edit ] In commercial law , the principle of typicality indicates that real rights are predetermined by the law in a certain number of figures, for this reason called typical, which cannot be further increased on the basis of the will of private individuals.

[ 4 ] Administrative law [ edit ] In administrative law , the principle of typicality indicates that administrative acts are to be considered a numerus clausus (closed number) and precisely for this reason they are identified only with those provided for by law by the Italian administrative system.

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Tipicità | La Legge per tutti" (in Italian).

Archived from the original on 2017-05-24 . Retrieved 2021-02-07 .

^ Themelize.me.

"Guida a Open Graph" .

www.tesionline.it (in Italian).

Archived from the original on 2021-02-07 . Retrieved 2021-02-07 .

^ Grimaldi, Ilaria (2020-05-06).

"Il principio di proporzionalità della pena nel disegno della Corte Costituzionale" .

Giurisprudenza penale (in Italian).

Archived from the original on 2021-02-07 . Retrieved 2021-02-07 .

^ Themelize.me.

"Guida a Open Graph" .

www.tesionline.it (in Italian).

Archived from the original on 2021-02-07 . Retrieved 2021-02-07 .

^ "Provvedimento, tipicità" .

www.exeo.it (in Italian).

Archived from the original on 2020-09-26 . Retrieved 2021-02-07 .

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Principle_of_typicality&oldid=1218811135 " Categories : History of law enforcement Legal doctrines and principles Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 April 2024, at 00:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Principle of typicality 3 languages Add topic

