Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In folklore 2 In fiction Toggle In fiction subsection 2.1 Fantasy 2.1.1 Video games 2.2 Science fiction 3 Conspiracy theory 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Reptilian humanoid 4 languages Azərbaycanca IsiZulu 日本語 Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Beings in mythology, folklore and fiction "Lizardman" redirects here. For other uses, see Lizardman (disambiguation) .

"Reptiloid" redirects here. For the film, see Reptiloid (film) .

The Dinosauroid , a hypothetical anthropomorphic reptile.

Reptilian humanoids , also known as reptiloids , are anthropomorphic reptile‑like beings that appear in mythology , folklore , science fiction and modern conspiracy theories. In ancient traditions such as the Nāga of South and Southeast Asian belief systems, they are depicted as half‑human, half‑serpent divine or semi‑divine figures. In fiction, early portrayals include Robert E. Howard ’s serpent men in the 1929 story The Shadow Kingdom and a range of later works featuring lizard‑like races in fantasy and science‑fiction literature and media. In conspiracy circles, most prominently popularized by David Icke in the 1990s, reptilian humanoids are alleged to be shape‑shifting aliens from systems such as Draco or Orion who inhabit world leadership and manipulate global events. These claims lack credible scientific evidence and are widely dismissed as pseudoscientific and unfounded.

[ 1 ] In folklore A Nāga couple, featured as a Hoysala relief.

In South Asian and Southeast Asian mythology, the Nāga are semi-divine creatures which are half-human and half- snakes .

[ 2 ] Claims of sightings of reptilian creatures occur in Southern United States , where swamps are common. In the late 1980s, there were hundreds of supposed sightings of a " Lizard Man " in Bishopville, South Carolina .

[ 3 ] In fiction Anthropomorphic reptilian races or beings commonly appear in fantasy and science fiction . They can be based on various reptiles, like lizards , crocodiles , alligators , snakes , dinosaurs , and the fictional dragons . They are often depicted as powerful warriors, though their relative intelligence to humans varies – as with other anthropomorphic races, a greater resemblance to humans often denotes more "civilized" behavior. Some anthropomorphic reptilians such as lizards and snakes are often associated with jungles, swamps, and other tropical biomes, and as such are seen with cultural elements of similar regions, including Mesoamerican cultures.

Fantasy The Serpent Men , reptilian humanoids who can project illusions of human form, appeared as villains throughout Robert E. Howard 's King Kull stories starting in 1929 as well as in the linked Cthulhu Mythos .

Edgar Rice Burroughs ' Pellucidar series featured primitive dinosaur-descended humanoids living in the Hollow Earth called the Horibs or snake-men in his 1929–1930 crossover Tarzan at the Earth's Core . These almost simultaneous inventions originated the modern reptilian humanoid trope.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] In the 1980s, the animated television series Dino-Riders feature a race called the Rulons , of which some individuals were reptilian humanoids, that served as the main antagonist to the protagonist Valorians upon which the series is based. Merchandise based on the series included several series of toys, among which they included replicas of the reptilian Rulons.

[ 8 ] Video games A drawing of kobolds , reptilian humanoid beings that appear in Dungeons & Dragons .

Examples of reptilian races in fantasy games are the Lizardmen from Warhammer as well as Lizardfolk, Dragonborn and Kobolds of the Dungeons & Dragons tabletop role-playing game .

The Dragonborn in particular – based on the Draconians of Dragonlance , which in that game were uniformly evil – were originally introduced in the Dungeons & Dragons 3.5 supplement book Races of the Dragon , published by Wizards of the Coast in 2006.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] In 4th Edition, dragonborn are available as one of the core player character races in the Player's Handbook .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The dragonborn were introduced to the core rules in an attempt to reflect contemporary trends in fantasy fiction and appeal to newer players.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In addition, it reflected a perception among the game's designers that it should be possible to play dragon-like creatures in a game with "Dragons" in the title.

[ 14 ] [ 16 ] Richard Baker , who helped design 4th Edition, noted that the introduction of dragonborn to the core rules allowed them to "grow the D&D world by allowing the mix of characters to evolve in the new edition." [ 16 ] Jonathan Bolding of The Escapist noted that the inclusion of the dragonborn in the 5th edition Player's Handbook does "push the 'traditional D&D' mold a bit, but this is a greatest hits of D&D player races and powers from the last fifteen years of the game." [ 17 ] Anthropomorphic reptilians are also shown in video games, especially in fantasy games. The lizardlike Argonian race takes a prominent role in the fantasy video game franchise The Elder Scrolls . Other examples of reptilian humanoids in fantasy games include the Man-Serpents from the game Elden Ring and the Naga from World of Warcraft .

Science fiction In works of science fiction , aliens are often depicted as closely resembling animals , with reptilian aliens being no exception. An early appearance was in the story " The Lizard-Men of Buh-Lo " (1930) by Francis Flagg .

[ 18 ] Other examples include the Gorn from Star Trek and the Dracs from the film Enemy Mine (1985).

[ 18 ] The television franchise V features the Visitors , a lizardlike alien race who disguise themselves as humans.

[ 18 ] The Cardassian race featured in multiple Star Trek series, is another example of reptilian humanoids in that particular science fiction universe.

[ 19 ] The "Tosk" people, featured on Star Trek: Deep Space Nine , is another.

[ 20 ] The " Distant Origin " episode of Star Trek: Voyager then features the Voth, a race descended from the dinosaurs that had escaped extinction by leaving Earth and relocating to the Delta Quadrant .

[ 21 ] On the television series Doctor Who , there are also races of reptilian humanoids, such as the Silurians [ 22 ] and Ice Warriors .

Conspiracy theory The reptilian conspiracy theory alleges that shape-shifting reptilian aliens control Earth.

[ 23 ] Belief in reptilian humanoids can sometimes be traced to anti-Semitic texts. In one recent example, the perpetrator of the 2020 Nashville bombing subscribed to reptilian conspiracy theories that were influenced by the writings of David Icke , who was in turn influenced by the 1903 anti-Semitic fabricated text The Protocols of the Elders of Zion .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] See also List of reptilian humanoids References ^ "Reptilian Elite Conspiracy Debunked: The Truth About Lizard People Myths" .

Factual America Podcast . Retrieved 2025-07-26 .

^ "Naga | Hindu mythology" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2019-09-11 .

^ Milligan, Stephen (1988-08-07) "Sightings of a monster lizard from the swamp has struck terror into a small community in South Carolina", The Sunday Times.

^ Trompf, Garry W.; Bernauer, Lauren (2012).

"Producing Lost Civilisations: Theosophical Concepts in Literature, Visual Media and Popular Culture" . In Cusack, Carole; Norman, Alex (eds.).

Handbook of New Religions and Cultural Production . Leiden: Brill. pp.

113– 114.

ISBN 978-9004221871 .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2019 . Retrieved 3 September 2014 .

^ Debus, Allen A. (7 June 2016).

Dinosaurs ever evolving: the changing face of prehistoric animals in popular culture .

ISBN 9780786499519 .

^ "Top Ten Favorite Edgar Rice Burroughs Monsters" . Dark Worlds Quarterly. 3 October 2020.

^ Barkun, Michael (2003).

A Culture of Conspiracy: Apocalyptic Visions in Contemporary America . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press . p.

121 .

ISBN 0520238052 .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2019 . Retrieved 3 September 2014 .

In August 1929, he published a story in Weird Tales magazine called 'The Shadow Kingdom' ...

^ "Activate the Nostalgia Center: Remembering DinoRiders" . Wired magazine. January 29, 2009.

^ "Races of the Dragon Excerpt" . Archived from the original on February 7, 2006.

^ Kestrel, Gwendolyn F.M.; Wilkes, Jennifer Clarke; Liquette, Kolja Raven (2006).

Races of the Dragon .

Wizards of the Coast .

^ Witwer, Michael; Newman, Kyle; Peterson, Jonathan; Witwer, Sam; Manganiello, Joe (October 2018).

Dungeons & Dragons Art & Arcana: a visual history .

Ten Speed Press . p. 359.

ISBN 9780399580949 .

OCLC 1033548473 .

^ "20 Things About Dungeons & Dragons That Make No Sense" .

ScreenRant . June 2, 2018.

^ Heinsoo, Rob ; Collins, Andy ; Wyatt, James (2008).

Player's Handbook .

Wizards of the Coast .

^ a b Tresca, Michael J. (2010).

The Evolution of Fantasy Role-Playing Games . McFarland. p. 81.

^ "D&D Player's Handbook: Then and Now" .

Wired . wired.com. 2008-07-30 . Retrieved 2015-07-16 .

^ a b "Player's Handbook Races: Dragonborn (4e)" . rpgnow.com. 2015-03-31 . Retrieved 2015-07-21 .

^ Bolding, Jonathan (2014-08-13).

"5th Edition D&D; Player's Handbook Review - A Greatest Hits Collection" .

Escapistmagazine.com . Archived from the original on 2014-11-12.

^ a b c The Greenwood encyclopedia of science fiction and fantasy : themes, works, and wonders . Westfahl, Gary. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press. 2005. pp. 15, 78, 319.

ISBN 0313329508 .

OCLC 60401685 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ NICHOLAS CONLEY (July 15, 2016).

"Star Trek: 15 Alien Races You Need To Know About - Not all of them have bumpy foreheads. From the Ferengi to the Gorn, find out which Star Trek aliens stand out from the crowd" . Screen Rant.

^ Keith R.A. DeCandido (May 10, 2013).

"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Rewatch: "Captive Pursuit" " . TOR.com.

^ Keith R.A. DeCandido (September 10, 2020).

"Star Trek: Voyager Rewatch: "Distant Origin" " . TOR.com.

^ Sean O'Grady (January 4, 2021).

"Having vanquished the idiots who mocked her arrival, it would be a shame if Jodie Whittaker left Doctor Who" .

The Independent .

^ "Conspiracy Theories" .

Time . 2008-11-20.

ISSN 0040-781X . Retrieved 2019-09-11 .

^ Dickey, Colin (2023-07-20).

"Hunting for the Lizard People: On the Dangerous Conspiracy Theories That Led to the Nashville Bombing" .

Literary Hub . Retrieved 2024-04-09 .

^ "Former Labour MP, anti-Israel activist Walker gets support from David Icke" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com . 2019-04-15 . Retrieved 2024-04-09 .

^ Karp, Paul (2019-02-20).

"Conspiracy theorist David Icke hits back after Australia revokes visa" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2024-04-09 .

^ Alter, Alexandra (2018-12-21).

"Alice Walker, Answering Backlash, Praises Anti-Semitic Author as 'Brave' " .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2024-04-09 .

v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Adventurers League Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker David Cook Monte Cook Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Rob Heinsoo Tracy Hickman Harold Johnson Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Tom Moldvay Chris Perkins Jon Pickens Jonathan Tweet Jim Ward Margaret Weis Skip Williams Steve Winter Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Magic: The Gathering planes Ravnica Strixhaven Theros Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Rokugan Spelljammer Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races and lineages Dragonborn Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Human Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Rogue Sorcerer Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Catti-brie Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Centaur Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of Dungeons & Dragons monsters (1974–76) List of Dungeons & Dragons monsters (1977–99) List of 2nd edition monsters List of 3rd edition monsters List of 4th edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Unearthed Arcana High-level rules Wrath of the Immortals Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Epic Level Handbook Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Insider D&D Beyond v t e Reptiles in culture Dinosaurs Crystal Palace Dinosaurs Jurassic Park Stegosaurus in popular culture Tyrannosaurus in popular culture Snakes Basilisk Caduceus Serpents in the Bible Rod of Asclepius Snakebite Snake charming Serpent (symbolism) Snake worship Other Cultural depictions of turtles Bixi (mythology) Turtle Island World Turtle Crocodile farm Crocodile tears Dragon Reptilian humanoid Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reptilian_humanoid&oldid=1302632445 " Categories : Anthropomorphic reptiles Fantasy creatures Fictional humanoids Fictional reptilians Legendary reptiles Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 16:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reptilian humanoid 4 languages Add topic

