Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Boundaries 2 Components 3 Modern movements 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents African plate 56 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پنجابی Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from African Plate ) Tectonic plate underlying Africa African plate Type Major Approximate area 61,300,000 km 2 (23,700,000 sq mi) [ 1 ] Features Africa , Atlantic Ocean , Mediterranean Sea , Red Sea The African plate , also known as the Nubian plate , is a major tectonic plate that includes most of the continent of Africa (except for its easternmost part ) and the adjacent oceanic crust to the west and south. It also includes a narrow strip of Western Asia along the Mediterranean Sea , including much of Israel and Lebanon .  It is bounded by the North American plate and South American plate to the west (separated by the Mid-Atlantic Ridge ); the Arabian plate and Somali plate to the east; the Eurasian plate , Aegean Sea plate and Anatolian plate to the north; and the Antarctic plate to the south.

Between 60 million years ago and 10 million years ago , the Somali plate began rifting from the African plate along the East African Rift .

[ 2 ] Since the continent of Africa consists of crust from both the African and the Somali plates, some literature refers to the African plate as the Nubian plate to distinguish it from the continent as a whole.

[ 3 ] Boundaries [ edit ] The western edge of the African plate is a divergent boundary with the North American plate to the north and the South American plate to the south which forms the central and southern part of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge . The African plate is bounded on the northeast by the Arabian plate , the southeast by the Somali plate , the north by the Eurasian plate , the Aegean Sea plate , and the Anatolian plate , and on the south by the Antarctic plate at the Southwest Indian Ridge . All of these are divergent or spreading boundaries with the exception of the northern boundary and a short segment near the Azores known as the Terceira Rift .

Components [ edit ] Tectonic dynamics in the Adriatic basin - The western limit of the Adriatic basin currently shifts by about 40 mm per year towards the east, under the thrust of the Eurasian plate, resulting in a gradual narrowing of the Adriatic Sea. The Po Valley is part of the African plate. (Text in Italian) The African plate includes several cratons , stable blocks of old crust with deep roots in the subcontinental lithospheric mantle , and less stable terranes , which came together to form the African continent during the assembly of the supercontinent Pangea around 250 million years ago. The cratons are from south to north, the Kalahari Craton , Congo Craton , Tanzania Craton and West African Craton . The cratons were widely separated in the past, but came together during the Pan-African orogeny and stayed together when Gondwana split up. The cratons are connected by orogenic belts , regions of highly deformed rock where the tectonic plates have engaged.

The Saharan Metacraton has been tentatively identified as the remains of a craton that has become detached from the subcontinental lithospheric mantle, but alternatively may consist of a collection of unrelated crustal fragments swept together during the Pan-African orogeny .

In some areas, the cratons are covered by sedimentary basins , such as the Tindouf Basin , Taoudeni Basin and Congo Basin , where the underlying archaic crust is overlaid by more recent Neoproterozoic sediments. The plate includes shear zones such as the Central African Shear Zone (CASZ) where, in the past, two sections of the crust were moving in opposite directions, and rifts such as the Anza Trough where the crust was pulled apart, and the resulting depression filled with more modern sediment.

Modern movements [ edit ] Today, the African plate is moving over Earth's surface at a speed of 32.51 km per million years relative to the Earth's "average" crust velocities (see NNR-MORVEL56 ) Map of East Africa showing some of the historically active volcanoes (red triangles) and the Afar Triangle (shaded, center) – a triple junction where three plates are pulling away from one another: the Arabian plate, the African plate, and the Somali plate (USGS) The African plate is rifting in the eastern interior of the African continent along the East African Rift . This rift zone separates the African plate to the west from the Somali plate to the east. One hypothesis proposes a mantle plume rising beneath the Afar region pushing the crust outward, whereas an opposing hypothesis explains the rifting by dynamics in the crust, as a break in the African plate along a line of maximum weakness as plates to its east move rapidly northward.

The African plate's speed is estimated at 2.15 cm (0.85 in) per year.

[ 4 ] It has been moving over the past 100 million years or so in a general northeast direction. It is pushing closer to the Eurasian plate , causing subduction where oceanic crust is converging with continental crust (e.g. portions of the central and eastern Mediterranean ). In the western Mediterranean, the relative motions of the Eurasian and African plates produce a combination of lateral and compressive forces, concentrated in a zone known as the Azores–Gibraltar Fault Zone . Along its northeast margin, the African plate is bounded by the Red Sea Rift where the Arabian plate is moving away from the African plate.

The New England hotspot in the Atlantic Ocean has probably created a short line of mid- to late- Tertiary age seamounts on the African plate but appears to be currently inactive.

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Sizes of Tectonic or Lithospheric Plates" . About.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2016 . Retrieved 30 June 2015 .

^ "Somali Plate" . Ashten Sawitsky . Retrieved 30 June 2015 .

^ Chu, D.; Gordon, R.G. (1999). "Evidence for motion between Nubia and Somalia along the Southwest Indian ridge".

Nature .

398 (6722): 64– 67.

Bibcode : 1999Natur.398...64C .

doi : 10.1038/18014 .

S2CID 4403043 .

^ Huang, Zhen Shao (1997).

"Speed of the Continental Plates" .

The Physics Factbook . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ Duncan, R.A. (1984). "Age progressive volcanism in the New England Seamounts and the opening of the central Atlantic Ocean".

Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth .

89 (B12): 9980– 90.

Bibcode : 1984JGR....89.9980D .

doi : 10.1029/jb089ib12p09980 .

External links [ edit ] USGS – Understanding plate motions Meijer, P. Th.; Wortel, M. J. R. (1999).

"Cenozoic dynamics of the African plate with emphasis on the Africa-Eurasia collision" .

Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth .

104 (B4): 7405– 7418.

Bibcode : 1999JGR...104.7405M .

doi : 10.1029/1999JB900009 .

v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons v t e Major African geological formations Plates Major plates: African plate Minor plates: Somali plate Microplates: Lwandle plate Madagascar plate Rovuma plate Seychelles plate Victoria Microplate Cratons and shields Arabian-Nubian Shield Congo Craton Kaapvaal Craton Kalahari Craton Saharan Metacraton Tanzania Craton Tuareg Shield West African Craton Zimbabwe Craton Shear zones Aswa Dislocation Broodkop Shear Zone Central African Shear Zone Chuan Shear Zones Foumban Shear Zone Kandi Fault Zone Mwembeshi Shear Zone Todi Shear Zone Western Meseta Shear Zone Orogens Alpine Orogen Cape Fold Belt Damara Orogen East African Orogen Eburnean Orogen Gondwanide Orogen Kibaran Orogen Kuunga Orogen Mauritanide Belt Pan-African orogens Terra Australis Orogen Rifts Afar Triangle Anza trough Bahr el Arab rift Benue Trough Blue Nile rift East African Rift Gulf of Suez Rift Lamu Embayment Melut Basin Muglad Basin Red Sea Rift Sangha Aulacogen Atbara rift Urema Valley West and Central African Rift System White Nile rift Sedimentary basins Angola Basin Aoukar Blue Nile Basin Chad Basin Congo Basin Douala Basin El Djouf Karoo Basin Gabon Basin Iullemmeden Basin Kufra Basin Murzuq Basin Niger Delta Basin Ogaden Basin Orange River Basin Ouled Abdoun Basin Owambo Basin Reggane Basin Rio del Rey Basin Sirte Basin Somali Coastal Basin Taoudeni Basin Tanzania Coastal Basin Tindouf Basin Turkana Basin Mountain ranges Aïr Mountains Atlas Mountains Aurès Mountains Bambouk Mountains Blue Mountains Cameroon line Central Pangean Mountains Chaillu Mountains Drakensberg Eastern Arc Mountains Eastern Rift mountains Ethiopian Highlands Great Escarpment Great Karas Mountains Guinea Highlands Hoggar Mountains Imatong Mountains Jebel Uweinat Loma Mountains Mandara Mountains Marrah Mountains Mitumba Mountains Nuba Mountains Rif Mountains Rwenzori Mountains Sankwala Mountains Serra da Leba Serra da Chela Teffedest Mountains Tibesti Mountains Inselbergs (aka koppie) Anti-Atlas Mount Gorongosa Jugurtha Tableland Mount Mabu Mulanje Massif Mont Niénokoué Wase Rock Zuma Rock List of inselbergs Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=African_plate&oldid=1304112280 " Categories : Tectonic plates Geology of Africa Geology of the Atlantic Ocean Geology of the Indian Ocean Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 02:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents African plate 56 languages Add topic

