Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Editor of the Merkur 3 Life as an independent writer 4 Death 5 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 5.1 Works in English translation 6 Influences 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Joseph Görres 20 languages تۆرکجه Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Latina Lëtzebuergesch مصرى Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German writer and philosopher (1776–1848) Joseph Görres Portrait of Görres, by Joseph Anton Settegast Born Johann Joseph von Görres ( 1776-01-25 ) 25 January 1776 Koblenz , Electorate of Trier Died 29 January 1848 (1848-01-29) (aged 72) Munich , Kingdom of Bavaria Occupation Publicist, writer, journalist, politician Nationality German Spouse Catherine de Lasaulx Children Guido Görres, Maria Görres Johann Joseph Görres , since 1839 von Görres (25 January 1776 – 29 January 1848), was a German writer, philosopher, theologian, historian and journalist.

Early life [ edit ] Görres was born in Koblenz . His father was moderately well off, and sent his son to a Latin college under the direction of the Jesuits. The young Görres' sympathies were initially with the French Revolution , and the French exiles in the Rhineland confirmed his beliefs, which would then evolve over time. He began a republican journal called Das rote Blatt , and afterwards Rübezahl , in which he strongly condemned the administration of the Rhenish provinces by France .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] After the Treaty of Campo Formio (1797) there was hope that the Rhenish provinces would be constituted into an independent republic. He was one of several delegates sent by the Rhine and Moselle provinces to Paris in the fall of the year 1799, to protest against the conduct of the French general Leval in the Rhine country. The embassy reached Paris on 20 November 1799; two days before this Napoleon had assumed power. After much delay he received the embassy; but the only answer they obtained was "that they might rely on perfect justice, and that the French government would never lose sight of their wants". His stay in Paris cured him of his enthusiasm for the French Revolution, Görres on his return published a tract called Resultate meiner Sendung nach Paris , in which he gave his impressions.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Lithograph of the young man by August Strixner, after a painting by Peter von Cornelius During the thirteen years of Napoleon's dominion Görres lived a quiet life, devoting himself chiefly to art or science. In 1801 he married Catherine de Lasaulx, and for some years taught at a secondary school in Koblenz; in 1806 he moved to Heidelberg , where he lectured at the university .

[ 1 ] British lawyer and diarist Henry Crabb Robinson met Görres during this time. A quote from his diary: Görres has the wildest physiognomy – looks like an overgrown old student. A faun-like nose and lips, fierce eyes, and locks as wild as Caliban’s. Strong sense, with a sort of sulky indifference toward others, are the characteristics of his manner.

[ 3 ] Clemens Brentano compared his appearance to that [...] of an old lion shaking and pulling his mane caught in the bars of his cage.

[ 4 ] As a leading member of the Heidelberg Romantic group, he edited together with Brentano and Ludwig Achim von Arnim the Zeitung für Einsiedler (subsequently renamed Trost-Einsamkeit ), and in 1807 he published Die deutschen Volksbücher (literally, The Books of the German People ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He returned to Koblenz in 1808, and again found occupation as a teacher in a secondary school, supported by civic funds. He now studied Persian , and in two years published a Mythengeschichte der asiatischen Welt ( History of the Myths of the Asiatic World ), which was followed ten years later by Das Heldenbuch von Iran ( The Book of Heroes of Iran ), a translation of part of the Shahnama , the epic of Firdousi .

[ 1 ] Editor of the Merkur [ edit ] In 1813 he again took up the cause of national independence, and in the following year founded Der rheinische Merkur . The outspokenness of its hostility to Napoleon made it influential, and Napoleon himself called it "a fifth power".

[ 5 ] It campaigned for a united Germany, with a representative government, but under an emperor, Görres having abandoned his earlier advocacy of republicanism . When Napoleon was at Elba , Görres wrote an ironic imaginary proclamation issued by him to the people. He criticised the second peace of Paris (1815), declaring that Alsace and Lorraine should have been demanded back from France.

[ 1 ] Stein used the Merkur at the time of the meeting of the congress of Vienna to give expression to his hopes. But Hardenberg , in May 1815, warned Görres to remember that he was not to arouse hostility against France, but only against Napoleon. There was also in the Merkur a demand for a constitution for Prussia , [ 6 ] expression of the desire that an Austrian prince should assume the imperial title, and also a tendency to liberalism —all distasteful to Hardenberg, and to his master Friedrich Wilhelm III . Görres disregarded warnings sent to him by the censorship, so that the Merkur was suppressed early in 1816, at the instance of the Prussian government; and soon after Görres was dismissed from his teaching post.

[ 1 ] Life as an independent writer [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Germany Ideologies Agrarian Christian democracy Liberal Ordo Ritter School Monarchism Nationalist Neue Rechte Völkisch Paternalistic Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Romanticism Right-Hegelianism Historical School Value Principles Authority Christian values Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Federalism Gemeinschaft Geopolitik Germanisation Heimat Imperialism In Treue fest Kultur Medievalism Monarchism Organicism Patriotism Political theology Prussian virtues Sittlichkeit Social market economy Sonderweg Subsidiarity Volk Volksgeist History Holy Roman Empire The Junkers German Confederation Carlsbad Decrees Anti-Socialist Laws German Reich German Empire State Socialism Völkisch movement George-Kreis Leipzig school Freikorps Monarchism in Bavaria after 1918 Perceived Weimar decadence Conservative Revolution Oster conspiracy 20 July plot Historikerstreit Heidelberg Manifesto German reunification Erklärung 2018 Intellectuals Fichte Freyer Gadamer von Galen George Gehlen Gogarten Görres Hamann Hartmann Heidegger Hegel Herder Hielscher von Hildebrand Hoppe Jünger (Ernst) Jünger (Friedrich) Kantorowicz Klages Kommerell Koselleck Langbehn von Lilienfeld Lorenz Löwith Lübbe Mann (early) Maschke Moeller van den Bruck Müller Nolte Novalis Otto Pieper Plessner von Ranke Reck-Malleczewen Ritter (Gerhard) Ritter (Joachim) Röpke Rüstow von Salomon Scheler Schelsky Schlegel Schmitt Sieferle Sloterdijk Sombart Spaemann Spengler Steinbuch von Treitschke Voegelin Weber Literature Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) The National System (1837) Degeneration (1892) Ressentiment (1912) Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Ideology and Utopia (1929) Man and Technics (1931) The Concept of the Political (1932) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Man (1940) Diary of a Man in Despair (1947) Man in the Age of Technology (1949) The Questionnaire (1951) Fascism in Its Epoch (1963) Envy (1966) Moral und Hypermoral (1969) Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Finis Germania (2017) Commentators Anrich Aust Bolz Broder Deschner Thomas Fasbender Herman Höhler Hoven Joffe Krause Landt Kuby Hermann Löns Löwenthal Mann (Golo) Maurer Nagel Nebel Noelle-Neumann Otte Pirinçci Röhl Safranski Sarrazin von Schrenck-Notzing Schwilk Stein Strauss (Botho) Stürmer Tichy Weißmann Zehrer Zitelmann Politicians Adenauer Ancillon Barschel von Bismarck von Bose Brüning Fehrenbach Filbinger von Gerlach Goerdeler Held von Hindenburg Hugenberg Jongen Jung Kapp Kohl Krah Lengsfeld Maaßen von Merkatz Merz Michaelis von Papen Petry von Radowitz Rauschning Ritter von Kahr von Roon Schäffer Schäffler von Schleicher Stresemann vom Stein Stoecker von Storch Strauss Wagener Weidel von Westarp Wilhelm II Winnig Jurists Böckenförde von Gierke Möser Quabbe von Savigny Schmitt Stahl Wackenroder Wagener Activists Kohlmann Kubitschek Seibt Billy Six von Stauffenberg Stürzenberger von Thurn und Taxis (Elisabeth) von Thurn und Taxis (Gloria) Parties Active Alternative for Germany (AfD) Bavaria Party (BP) Bündnis Deutschland (BD) Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) Centre Party Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Family Party of Germany The Republicans (REP) Values Union (WU) We Citizens (WB) Defunct Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Conservative Party Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) German Freedom Party German National People's Party (DNVP) German Party (DP) German People's Party (DVP) Organizations Aufbau Vereinigung Bibliothek des Konservatismus Desiderius-Erasmus-Stiftung Die Deutschen Konservativen Forum of German Catholics Gerhard Löwenthal Prize German Burschenschaft German Taxpayers Federation Citizens' Movement Pax Europa Hanns Seidel Foundation Hans Filbinger Foundation Identitäre Aktion Institut für Staatspolitik Konrad Adenauer Foundation PEGIDA Studienzentrum Weikersheim Tradition und Leben Defunct Der Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten Germany Foundation Queen Louise League Media Die Achse des Guten Antaios (Defunct) Bild Cato Cicero COMPACT Deutsche Rundschau Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Junge Freiheit Kreuzzeitung (Defunct) Politically Incorrect Preußische Allgemeine Zeitung Süddeutsche Monatshefte Der Türmer Verlag Antaios Die Welt Welt am Sonntag Related topics Alternative Mitte Bavarian nationalism Böckenförde dilemma European New Right Conservatism in Austria Conservatism in Switzerland Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural pessimism Freischwebende Intelligenz Immigration to Germany Criminality Remigration Metapolitics Politics of Germany Liberalism Stahlhelm-Fraktion Conservatism portal Germany portal v t e He went back to Heidelberg, but in 1817 returned to Coblenz and founded a relief-society for the alleviation of distress in the Rhenish province. At the same time he continued his work as a political pamphleteer, as shown chiefly in his "Adresse der Stadt und Landschaft Koblenz und ihre Uebergabe beim Fürsten Hardenberg" (1818) and his brochure "Teutschland und die Revolution" (1819). In this work he reviewed the circumstances which had led to the murder of August von Kotzebue , and, while expressing horror at the deed itself, he urged that it was impossible and undesirable to repress the free utterance of public opinion. The success of the work was marked, despite a ponderous style. It was suppressed by the Prussian government, which confiscated his papers and ordered his arrest.

[ 1 ] He escaped, however, to Frankfort, whence he made his way to Strasbourg .

[ 7 ] Two more political tracts were Europa und die Revolution ("Europe and the Revolution", 1821) and In Sachen der Rheinprovinzen und in eigener Angelegenheit ("In the matter of the Rhine Province and in a matter of my own", 1822).

[ 1 ] In the former book – read with avidity throughout Germany.

[ 8 ] – Görres describes the moral, intellectual and political corruption of France in the course of the eighteenth century as the major cause which led to the revolution: "The public morals, corrupted as they were from the high to the lower classes of society, abjured the aid of the clergy: in the dissolution of all the principles of justice and morality, nought remained unconsumed, save the consuming power itself — wit, which now not as a creative, but as a destroying spirit, brooded over the abyss. The literati, who had formerly gone to court, now, after having there finished their schooling, turned to the people and preached to them another doctrine — of the God who resided in matter, of the Heaven to be found in the senses, of morality that consisted in cunning, and of the felicity that voluptuous indulgence afforded; and that all beside was the vain deception and jugglery of priests, whether at court or in the Church. That warm genial view of the Middle Age, which, in the same way as antiquity gave life to mountains, springs, and trees, looked on the state in all its members and parts as a thing endued with vitality, and procured for them, as so many essential personalities, love and attachment; that warm ennobling view had long since passed away. In room of this, the doctrine of political materialism had descended from the high to the lower regions of society, and for warm life had substituted cold abstractions, cyphers, and rigid geometrical forms, which cut sharply into private life; and for such dead abstractions it was impossible to feel affection. The portion of the nobility that sank into degeneracy at court, incurred the contempt of the people. The better part, who residing on their estates, still cultivated many ancient virtues, were, as holding extensive landed possessions in the face of grinding poverty, objects of hatred; and their consideration was undermined by the arrogance and ever increasing wealth of the monied class. Thus all bonds were relaxed, in proportion as the inward expansion of all relations increased. Authority sometimes, with a good-natured imprudence, assisted in the destruction; sometimes terrified, struggled against it in impotent opposition, by means of her police and bastilles, and then again sent her armies over the Atlantic, in order to visit in America the school of freedom. Thus all was prepared for the stroke; and when the same want of money, which through the indulgencies had led to the Reformation, necessitated the convocation of the three estates, the Revolution broke out." — Joseph Görres, "Europe and the Revolution", 1821 [ 9 ] Joseph Görres in 1838, drawing by F. Diez In his pamphlet Die heilige Allianz und die Völker auf dem Congresse von Verona ("The Holy Alliance and the peoples represented at the congress of Verona", 1822) Görres asserted that the princes had met together to crush the liberties of the people, and that the people must look elsewhere for help. The "elsewhere" was to Rome; and from this time Görres became an Ultramontane writer. In 1826, he was summoned to Munich by King Ludwig of Bavaria as professor of history in the university, [ 10 ] and there his writing enjoyed popularity.

[ 1 ] There he was visited by Brentano, Lacordaire , Lamennais, and Montalembert.

Since his sojourn in Strasbourg, Görres had studied the mystic testimonies of various epochs. He went into the mystical writers of the Middle Ages such as María de Ágreda as well as observing, partly in person, the ecstatic young women of his time (Maria von Mörl, and others), and strove to comprehend more thoroughly the nature of Christian mysticism. His Christliche Mystik ("On christian mysticism", 4 vols., 1836–1842; 2nd ed., 5 vols., 1879) gave a series of biographies of the saints, together with an exposition of Roman Catholic mysticism. But his most celebrated ultramontane work was a polemical one. Its occasion was the deposition and imprisonment by the Prussian government of the archbishop Clement Wenceslaus reportedly due to his refusal to sanction in certain instances the marriages of Protestants and Roman Catholics.

[ 1 ] In his Athanasius (1837), Görres upheld the power of the church.

[ 11 ] Athanasius went through several editions, and initiated a long and bitter controversy. In the Historisch-politische Blätter ("Historical-political pages"), a Munich journal, Görres and his son Guido (1805–1852) continued to uphold the claims of the church.

[ 1 ] On New Year's Day of 1839, Görres received the "Civil Order of Merit" from the king for his services.

[ 12 ] Death [ edit ] He died 29 January 1848, the year of the fall of Metternich , and was buried in the Alter Südfriedhof in Munich.

Publications [ edit ] Joseph-Görres-Memorial in Koblenz Der allgemeine Frieden, ein Ideal (1798).

Aphorismen über Kunst (1802).

Glauben und Wissen (1805).

Die teutschen Volksbücher. Nähere Würdigung der schönen Historien-, Wetter- und Arzneybüchlein […] (1807).

Schriftproben von Peter Hammer (1808).

Über den Fall Teutschlands und die Bedingungen seiner Wiedergeburt (1810).

Mythengeschichte der asiatischen Welt (1810).

Lohengrin, ein altteutsches Gedicht (1813).

Rheinischer Merkur (1814–1816).

Teutschland und die Revolution (1819).

Beantwortung der in den jetzigen Zeiten für jeden Teutschen besonders wichtigen Frage: Was haben wir zu erwarten?

(1814).

Europa und die Revolution (1821).

Firdusi (1822).

Die heilige Allianz und die Völker auf dem Congresse von Verona (1822).

Introduction to Melchior von Diepenbrock 's Heinrich Susos, genannt Amandus, Leben und Schriften (1829).

Über die Grundlage, Gliederung und Zeitenfolge der Weltgeschichte (1830).

Nachruf auf Achim von Arnim (1831).

Vier Sendschreiben an Herrn Culmann, Sekretär der Ständeversammlung (1831).

Ministerium, Staatszeitung, Rechte und Unrechte Mitte (1831).

Athanasius (1837).

Die Triarier H. Leo, Dr. P. Marheinecke, D. K. Bruno (1838).

Die christliche Mystik (1836–1842).

Kirche und Staat nach Ablauf der Cölner Irrung (1842).

Der Dom von Köln und das Münster von Strasburg (1842).

Introduction to Das Leben Christi , by Johann Nepomuk Sepp (1843).

Die Japhetiden und ihre gemeinsame Heimat Armenien. Akademische Festrede (1844).

Die drei Grundwurzeln des celtischen Stammes und ihre Einwanderung (1845).

Die Wallfahrt nach Trier (1845).

Die Aspecten an der Zeitenwende. Zum neuen Jahre 1848 (last and unfinished article, 1848).

Works in English translation [ edit ] Germany and the Revolution.

London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, 1820.

Influences [ edit ] Richard Wagner was an avid reader of Görres' Lohengrin introduction, since the 1840s, as well as (less enthusiastically) of the Christliche Mystik (read in 1875).

[ 13 ] Carl Jung mentions reading Görres as a young man in his autobiography, Memories, Dreams, Reflections (Pantheon Books, 1963, p. 99) ISBN 0-679-72395-1 .

The Görres Society was founded on 25 January 1876 in honour of Görres to advance Roman Catholic studies.

See also [ edit ] Guido Görres References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Chisholm 1911 , p. 260.

^ a b c Kirsch 1913 ^ Robinson, Henry Crabb (1869).

Diary, Reminiscences and Correspondence, Vol. III. London: Macmillan & Co., p. 46.

^ Henry, J. B. (1867).

"Joseph Görres – A Life-Portrait of the Author of Die Mystik," The Catholic World 6 , p. 508.

^ "In 1814 he began to publish the famous Rhenish Mercury , called by a contemporary Englishman 'the best journal ever edited in Germany.' This is the journal, as we have seen, that Napoleon labeled 'a fifth power,' and which caused Marshall Blücher to remark: 'We [Prussia] have four allies: England, Russia, Austria, and Görres'." — Neill, Thomas P. (1951).

"Joseph Görres." In: They Lived the Faith; Great Lay Leaders of Modern Times.

Milwaukee: The Bruce Publishing Company, p. 230.

^ Sperber, Jonathan.

Central European History , vol. 36, no. 3, 2003, pp. 454–56. JSTOR ^ "Life and Writings of Görres," The Rambler, Vol. I, 1848, p. 229.

^ Robertson, James Burton (1839).

"The Life and Writings of Görres," The Dublin Review 6 , p. 37.

^ Cit. Robertson (1839), p. 42.

^ Henry, J. B. (1867), p. 502.

^ "Athanasius, by Joseph Görres" The Dublin Review, Vol. IX, 1840.

^ Gonzaga, Sister Mary (1920).

The Mysticism of Johann Joseph von Görres as a Reaction Against Rationalism, A Dissertation Submitted to the Faculty of Philosophy of the Catholic University of America in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy, Catholic University of America Press, p. 136.

^ Richard Wagner: Mein Leben. Zweiter Teil: 1842–1850 . Paul List, Munich 1994, p. 315.

Cosima Wagner: Die Tagebücher . Vol. 1:  1869–1877. Piper, Munich 1982, pp. 573, 920.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Kirsch, Johann Peter (1913). " Johann Joseph Görres ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Görres, Johann Joseph von ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

260– 261.

Further reading [ edit ] Berger, Martin (1921).

Görres als politischer Publizist . Bonn und Leipzig: K. Schroeder.

Coker, F. W. (1910).

"The Organismic Analogies of Görres." In: Organismic Theories of the State.

Columbia University Press, pp. 44–47.

Dickerhof, Harald (1999).

Görres-Studien . Paderborn: Schöningh.

Heuvel, Jon Vanden (2001).

A German Life in the Age of Revolution: Joseph Görres, 1776–1848, Catholic University of America Press.

Menzel, Wolfgang (1840).

German Literature , Vol. 2 , Vol. 3 . Boston: Hilliard, Gray and Company.

Münster, Hans A. (1926).

Die öffentliche Meinung in Johann Josef Görres' Politischer Publizistik . Berlin: Staatspolitischer Verlag.

Raab, Heribert (1978).

Joseph Görres, ein Leben für Freiheit und Recht . Paderborn: Schöningh.

External links [ edit ] Biography of Joseph Görres, German and English Encyclopædia Britannica : Joseph von Görres Works by or about Joseph Görres at the Internet Archive Joseph Görres: "Something to Sell," 1798 Newspaper clippings about Joseph Görres in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN FID People BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Joseph_Görres&oldid=1241428111 " Categories : 1776 births 1848 deaths Politicians from Heidelberg 19th-century German Catholic theologians Writers from Heidelberg Writers from Koblenz Immigrants to the Kingdom of Bavaria Roman Catholic activists German Roman Catholics Burials at the Alter Südfriedhof German political party founders Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 21 August 2024, at 03:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Joseph Görres 20 languages Add topic

