Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and artistic profile Toggle History and artistic profile subsection 1.1 Origins 1.2 15th century 1.3 16th century 1.4 17th century 2 Pope Martin V Administrative Hall 3 The Cloister of Bones 4 Departments and hospital services 5 Famous interns 6 Further reading 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova 8 languages العربية Català Español Français Italiano Magyar Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°46′24.27″N 11°15′35.62″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.7734083°N 11.2598944°E ﻿ / 43.7734083; 11.2598944 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hospital in Florence, Italy Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova Ospedale di Santa Maria Nuova The portico of Buontalenti Geography Location Florence , Italy Coordinates 43°46′24.27″N 11°15′35.62″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.7734083°N 11.2598944°E ﻿ / 43.7734083; 11.2598944 Organisation Type General Religious affiliation Roman Catholic History Opened 1288 Links Lists Hospitals in Italy The Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova (i.e.

Ospedale di Santa Maria Nuova in Italian ) is the oldest hospital still active in Florence , Italy.

History and artistic profile [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] The monument to the legendary Monna Tessa The hospital was founded in 1288 by Folco Portinari , [ 1 ] the father of Beatrice beloved by Dante . Folco was convinced to build the hospital by Monna Tessa , matriarch of the family, whose remains are buried under the tombstone is still visible in the Cloister of the Bones of the Hospital.

[ 1 ] This is one of the oldest and most important Florentine welfare institutions which became over the centuries very rich and powerful, thanks to the many legacies and donations. Besides the historical perspective, the hospital has a rich artistic legacy due to the profusion of decorations by some of the best Florentine artists over the centuries. Hospital needs have in many instances come into conflict with the need for conservation of artistic works. As such, there are many masterpieces in museums located nearby, such as Spedale degli Innocenti and San Marco Museum . The hospital was divided into two areas, female (woman's ward) and male (men's ward), and can accommodate about two hundred patients.

15th century [ edit ] The lunette of Giovanni della Robbia in the Cloister In the fifteenth century, the hospital enjoyed remarkable economic prosperity and in 1419 received a visit from Pope Martin V . In 1420 the addition of the cloister of the medical center by Bicci di Lorenzo marked a major transformation and expansion of the original building. The addition still has a terracotta lunette depicting the Pietà by Giovanni della Robbia and clay sculpture with the Madonna with Child and two angels, attributed to Michelozzo . In the early decades of the fifteenth century the aisles were decorated by Niccolò di Pietro Gerini with frescoes that are now partially preserved in the original locations and some were detached and placed in the living room of Pope Martin V where they now have the office of the hospital president. In the Cloister of the Bones was a detached fresco representing Last Judgment by Fra Bartolomeo , now at San Marco Museum .

16th century [ edit ] Further works were done in the late sixteenth century by important artists: Giambologna made stuccos in a lane of the men's ward Alessandro Allori painted frescoes in the men's ward chapel Bernardo Buontalenti painted frescoes in the walls and ceiling of the women's ward These works have been moved to the Pinacoteca of the Spedale degli Innocenti .

Bernardo Buontalenti designed the large porch that is the main entrance to the hospital and regrettably did not live long enough to see its implementation. Construction of the porch was begun in 1611 by Giulio Parigi and finally brought to completion in 1960.

17th century [ edit ] In 1660 the old lanes of the women's ward were replaced by Giovanni Battista Pieratti with a new more spacious environment.

Old facade of the hospital before the completion of the porch (painting by Fabio Borbottoni , 1820-1902) Pope Martin V Administrative Hall [ edit ] In the administrative hall (room and lounge of the hospital president), which are accessed by a staircase in the Cloister of Bones, there are frescos and other works from the facade of the Church of Sant'Egidio and from other monasteries. The works in this hall are/have been: "The Crucifixion with Saints Romuald and John the Baptist" by Andrea del Castagno (1440-1444), now in the cloister of Church of Santa Maria degli Angeli .

"The Coronation of the Virgin", a terracotta sculpture attributed to Dello Delli , now in the portal of the Church of Sant'Egidio (which has been replaced by a cast).

"Consecration of the new church of Sant'Egidio by Pope Martin V", a sinopia by Lorenzo di Bicci removed from the facade of the Church of Sant'Egidio.

"Pope Martin V confirming the privileges of the hospital", a detached fresco originally performed circa 1473 by Gherardo di Giovanni and said to have been repainted in 1560 by Francesco Brina , from the facade of the Church of Sant'Egidio.

The Cloister of Bones [ edit ] Cloister of Bones The Cloister of Bones, a temple and formerly a burial site, was built in the nineteenth century by Costoli in pietra serena . The temple has columns and pillars and on the center is the statue of the Marquis Angiolo Galli Tassi. The statue has the inscription in the back: "From the benefactor to the beneficiaries - Year 1863". On the front the statue has the following inscription: "Count Angiolo Galli - that emulating the love of the ancients - the ancestral heritage linked - to hospitals in Tuscany". There is also an inscription with the sculpture of Monna Tessa, the inspiration of the legendary Folco Portinari , from the church of Santa Margherita de' Cerchi .

Departments and hospital services [ edit ] Emergency department Clinical Observation General Surgery Dermatology Medicine Psychiatry Intensive Care U.T.I.C.

Day hospital doctor Day hospital oncology Radiology Laboratory analysis Neurology Endoscopy Dermatological Allergy Sexually Transmitted Diseases Famous interns [ edit ] Leonardo da Vinci , Circa 1507-1508 [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Paolo Mascagni , 1801 [ 4 ] François Carlo Antommarchi , 1809 [ 5 ] Sarah Parker Remond , 1866-1868 [ 6 ] Further reading [ edit ] For an extensive listing of art works at the complex of Santa Maria Nuova, and works that were transferred to other locations like the Uffizi and the Galleria dell' Accademia see it.wiki References [ edit ] ^ a b Gozzoli, Antonella; Frost, Catherine (2008).

"Ospedale di Santa Maria Nuova (Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova)" .

Institute and Museum of the History of Science .

^ Alvey, R. Kevin, "The Anatomical Drawings of Leonardo da Vinci", 24 January 2003 ^ Gozzoli, Antonella, Frost, Catherine, "Medicine in Tuscany", Institute and Museum of the History of Science, 2008 [1] ^ Choulant, Ludwig, Mortimer, Frank, Fielding, Hudson G., Streeter, Edward C., "History and bibliography of anatomic illustration in its relation to anatomic science and the graphic arts", 1852 [2] ^ Antommarchi, Francesco, "The last days of the Emperor Napoleon: By Doctor F. Antommarchi, His Physician. In Two Volumes", 1825 [3] ^ http://www.florin.ms/SantaMariaNuovaeng.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Santa Maria Nuova (Florence) .

Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States France BnF data Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hospital_of_Santa_Maria_Nuova&oldid=1193495380 " Categories : Hospitals in Florence 1288 establishments in Europe 13th-century establishments in the Republic of Florence Hospitals established in the 13th century Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from September 2022 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 4 January 2024, at 03:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova 8 languages Add topic

