Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins of the "Lost Cause" movement 2.2 20th century 2.3 Contemporary evaluations 3 Tenets and core beliefs Toggle Tenets and core beliefs subsection 3.1 Historical revisionism 3.2 Political beliefs 3.3 Cultural and religious 3.4 Economic policies 4 Neo-Confederates and libertarianism 5 Neo-Confederate views and the Republican Party 6 Criticism 7 Neo-Confederate groups 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Neo-Confederates 8 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Italiano Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Modern American political grouping Maryland Sons of Confederate Veterans marching in Arlington National Cemetery in 2014 Neo-Confederates are groups and individuals who portray the Confederate States of America and its actions during the American Civil War in a positive light. The League of the South (formed in 1994), the Sons of Confederate Veterans (formed 1896), and other neo-Confederate organizations continue to defend the secession of the 11 Confederate States .

Etymology [ edit ] A rectangular variant of the Confederate battle flag , also known colloquially as the Southern Cross The first national flag of the Confederate States with 13 stars, used from November 28, 1861, to May 1, 1863, and colloquially known as the Stars and Bars The second national flag of the Confederate states, used from May 1, 1863, to March 4, 1865, and colloquially known as the Stainless Banner The third national flag adopted on March 4, 1865, shortly before the end of the American Civil War and also known colloquially as the Bloodstained Banner Four flags commonly seen at neo-Confederate events [ citation needed ] Historian James M. McPherson used the term "neo-Confederate historical committees" in his description of the efforts which were undertaken from 1890 to 1930 to have history textbooks present a version of the American Civil War in which secession was not rebellion, the Confederacy did not fight for slavery , and the Confederate soldier was defeated by overwhelming numbers and resources.

[ 1 ] Historian Nancy MacLean used the term "neo-Confederacy" in reference to groups, such as the Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission , that formed in the 1950s to oppose the Supreme Court of the United States rulings demanding racial integration, in particular Brown v. Board of Education (1954).

[ 2 ] Former Southern Partisan editor and co-owner Richard Quinn used the term when he referred to Richard T. Hines , former Southern Partisan contributor and Ronald Reagan administration staffer, as being "among the first neo-Confederates to resist efforts by the infidels to take down the Confederate flag." [ 3 ] An early use of the term came in 1954. In a book review, Leonard W. Levy (later a winner of the Pulitzer Prize for History in 1968) wrote: "Similar blindness to the moral issue of slavery, plus a resentment against the rise of the Negro and modern industrialism, resulted in the neo-Confederate interpretation of Phillips , Ramsdell and Owsley ." [ 4 ] Historian Gary W. Gallagher stated in an interview that neo-Confederates do not want to hear him when he talks "about how important maintaining racial control, white supremacy , was to the white South." [ 5 ] He warns, however, that the term neo-Confederate can be overused, writing, "Any historian who argues that the Confederate people demonstrated robust devotion to their slave-based republic, possessed feelings of national community, and sacrificed more than any other segment of white society in United States history runs the risk of being labeled a neo-Confederate." [ 6 ] History [ edit ] Origins of the "Lost Cause" movement [ edit ] The " Lost Cause " is the name which is commonly given to a movement that seeks to reconcile the existence of the traditional society of the Southern United States with the defeat of the Confederate States of America at the end of the American Civil War of 1861–1865.

[ 7 ] Those who contribute to the movement tend to portray the Confederacy's cause as noble and they also tend to portray most of the Confederacy's leaders as exemplars of old-fashioned chivalry who were defeated by the Union 's armies because the Union's armies used overwhelming force rather than superior military skills. They believe that the history of the Civil War which is commonly portrayed is a "false history". They also tend to condemn Reconstruction , the era when African Americans were first allowed to vote.

On its main website, the Sons of Confederate Veterans (SCV) speaks of "ensuring that a true history of the 1861-1865 period is preserved", claiming that "[t]he preservation of liberty and freedom was the motivating factor in the South's decision to fight the Second American Revolution." [ 8 ] James M. McPherson has written the following about the origins in 1894 of the United Daughters of the Confederacy (UDC): "A principal motive of the UDC's founding was to counter this 'false history' which taught Southern children 'that their fathers were not only rebels but guilty of almost every crime enumerated in the Decalogue .

' " [ 9 ] Much of what the UDC called "false history" centered on the relationship between slavery and secession and the war. The chaplain of the United Confederate Veterans (UCV), forerunner of the Sons of Confederate Veterans, wrote in 1898 that history books as written could lead Southern children to "think that we fought for slavery" and would "fasten upon the South the stigma of slavery and that we fought for it ... The Southern soldier will go down in history dishonored".

[ 10 ] Referring to a 1932 call by the Sons of Confederate Veterans to restore "the purity of our history", McPherson notes that the "quest for purity remains vital today, as any historian working in the field can testify." [ 11 ] 20th century [ edit ] In the 1910s, Mildred Rutherford , the historian general of the UDC, spearheaded the attack on schoolbooks that did not present the Lost Cause version of history. Rutherford assembled a "massive collection" which included "essay contests on the glory of the Ku Klux Klan and personal tributes to faithful slaves".

[ 12 ] Historian David Blight concluded: "All UDC members and leaders were not as virulently racist as Rutherford, but all, in the name of a reconciled nation, participated in an enterprise that deeply influenced the white supremacist vision of Civil war memory." [ 13 ] In the 1930s, Seward Collins , a self-described "fascist publisher", provided an avenue for white supremacists and neo-Confederates to advance their ideology in The American Review , a literary journal openly sympathetic to European fascism .

[ 14 ] The connections and overlap between white supremacist, fascist, far-right, and neo-Confederate ideologies persisted, and remain in place in the present day.

[ 15 ] Historian Alan T. Nolan refers to the Lost Cause as "a rationalization, a cover-up". After describing the devastation that was the consequence of the war for the South, Nolan states: Leaders of such a catastrophe must account for themselves. Justification is necessary. Those who followed their leaders into the catastrophe required similar rationalization. Clement A. Evans, a Georgia veteran who at one time commanded the United Confederate Veterans organization, said this: "If we cannot justify the South in the act of Secession, we will go down in History solely as a brave, impulsive but rash people who attempted in an illegal manner to overthrow the Union of our Country." [ 16 ] Nolan further states his opinion of the racial basis of Lost Cause mythology: The Lost Cause version of the war is a caricature, possible, among other reasons, because of the false treatment of slavery and the black people. This false treatment struck at the core of the truth of the war, unhinging cause and effect, depriving the United States of any high purpose, and removing African Americans from their true role as the issue of the war and participants in the war, and characterizing them as historically irrelevant.

[ 16 ] In the 1930s and 1940s, supporters of Nazi Germany sought cross appeal with American neo-confederates. Despite a shared commitment to white supremacy and antipathy towards American Liberalism, the Nazis found few sympathizers amongst white southerners, even the KKK itself.

[ 17 ] Starting in the 1970s, neo-confederate ideals and organizations became increasingly associated with the emerging neo-Nazi movement.

[ 17 ] Critics often associate Neo-Confederates with fascism in the United States.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Contemporary evaluations [ edit ] Historian David Goldfield observes: If history has defined the South, it has also trapped white southerners into sometimes defending the indefensible, holding onto views generally discredited in the rest of the civilized world and holding on the fiercer because of that. The extreme sensitivity of some Southerners toward criticism of their past (or present) reflects not only their deep attachment to their perception of history but also to their misgivings, a feeling that maybe they've fouled up somewhere and maybe the critics have something.

[ 21 ] When asked about purported "neo-Confederate revisionism" and the people behind it, Arizona State University professor and Civil War historian Brooks D. Simpson said: This is an active attempt to reshape historical memory, an effort by white Southerners to find historical justifications for present-day actions. The neo-Confederate movement's ideologues have grasped that if they control how people remember the past, they'll control how people approach the present and the future. Ultimately, this is a very conscious war for memory and heritage. It's a quest for legitimacy, the eternal quest for justification.

[ 22 ] Tenets and core beliefs [ edit ] Historical revisionism [ edit ] Neo-Confederates often hold iconoclastic views about the American Civil War and the Confederate States of America. Neo-Confederates are openly critical of the presidency of Abraham Lincoln to varying degrees and they are also critical of the history of Reconstruction . Various authors have written critiques of Lincoln and the Union.

Major General William Tecumseh Sherman 's March to the Sea is singled out for purported atrocities like the burning of Atlanta which neo-Confederates believe were committed against Southern civilians, in contrast to the mainstream historical perspective which argues that Sherman targeted Southern infrastructure and curtailed killing rather than expand it.

Slavery is rarely mentioned—when it is, it is usually not defended and is denied as a primary cause of the Confederacy's starting of the American Civil War. Critics often accuse neo-Confederates of engaging in " historical revisionism " and acting as " apologists ".

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Neo-Confederates have been accused of downplaying the role of slavery in triggering the Civil War and misrepresenting African-American support for the Confederacy.

[ 25 ] The book The Confederate and Neo-Confederate Reader says that toward the end of the 20th century—in order to support the idea that the Civil War was not about slavery—neo-Confederates began to claim that "thousands of African Americans had served in the Confederate army". A neo-Confederate publication, Confederate Veteran , published by the Sons of Confederate Veterans and the Military Order of the Stars and Bars , said in 1992 that "the overwhelming majority of blacks during the War Between the States supported and defended, with armed resistance, the Cause of Southern Independence".

[ 26 ] Historian Bruce Levine says that "their [neo-Confederates'] insistent celebration these days of ' Black Confederates ' ... seeks to legitimize the claim" that the war "had never [italics in original] been fought on behalf of slavery; loyalty to the South, Southern self-government, Southern culture, or states' rights — rather than slavery and white supremacy — fueled the Southern war effort".

[ 27 ] The honor of the Confederacy and its veterans is another controversial feature of neo-Confederate dogma. The neo-Confederate movement is concerned about giving honor to the Confederacy itself, to the veterans of the Confederacy and Confederate veterans' cemeteries, to the various flags of the Confederacy and Southern cultural identity.

[ 28 ] Political beliefs [ edit ] Political values held by neo-Confederates vary, but they often revolve around a belief in limited government , states' rights , the right of states to secede , and Southern nationalism—that is, the belief that the people of the Southern United States are part of a distinct and unique civilization.

Neo-Confederates typically support a decentralized national government and are strong advocates of states' rights.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Neo-Confederates are strongly in favor of the right of secession , claiming it is legal and thus openly advocate the secession of the Southern states and territories which comprised the old Confederate States of America . The League of the South , for example, promotes the "independence of the Southern people" from the "American empire".

[ 31 ] Most neo-Confederate groups do not seek violent revolution, but rather an orderly separation, such as was done in the dissolution of Czechoslovakia . Many neo-Confederate groups have prepared for what they view as a possible collapse of the federal United States into its 50 separate states, similarly to the dissolution of the Soviet Union , and believe the Confederacy can be resurrected at that time.

[ 32 ] From the 1950s onward, the growth of neo-Confederate ideology was part of a larger reactionary movement against desegregation and the civil rights movement .

[ 33 ] Historian Nancy MacLean states that neo-Confederates used the history of the Confederacy to justify their opposition to the civil rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s.

[ 34 ] Historian David Blight writes that current neo-Confederates are "driven largely by the desire of current white supremacists to re-legitimize the Confederacy, while they tacitly reject the victories of the modern civil rights movement".

[ 35 ] Cultural and religious [ edit ] Neo-Confederates promote foundational Christian culture .

[ clarification needed ] They support public displays of Christianity , such as Ten Commandments monuments and displays of the Christian cross .

[ 36 ] Some neo-Confederates view the Civil War struggles as being between Christian orthodoxy and anti-Christian forces.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Certain neo-Confederates believe in an " Anglo - Celtic " identity theory for residents of the South.

[ 39 ] Economic policies [ edit ] Neo-Confederates usually advocate a free market economy which engages in significantly less taxation than currently found in the United States and which does not revolve around fiat currencies such as the United States dollar .

[ 31 ] Some of them desire an extreme type of laissez-faire economic system involving a minimal role for the state .

[ 30 ] Other Neo-Confederates believe in distributionism as well as a display of populist tendencies [ vague ] since the Civil War. Figures such as Absolom West , Leonidas L. Polk , and William M. Lowe went on to join the Populist movements of their respective times. There is a minority of neo-Confederates who believe the Confederacy to have been Socialist citing the writings of George Fitzhugh ; this was also displayed in Louise Biles Hill's book, State Socialism in the Confederate States . Many who believe this also point to Albert Parsons as another example.

Neo-Confederates and libertarianism [ edit ] Historian Daniel Feller asserts that libertarian authors Thomas DiLorenzo , Charles Adams and Jeffrey Rogers Hummel have produced a "marriage of neo-Confederates and libertarianism". Feller writes: What unites the two, aside from their hostility to the liberal academic establishment, is their mutual loathing of big government. Adams, DiLorenzo, and Hummel view the Civil War through the prism of market economics. In their view its main consequence, and even its purpose, was to create a leviathan state that used its powers to suppress the most basic personal freedom, the right to choose. The Civil War thus marks a historic retreat for liberty, not an advance. Adams and DiLorenzo dismiss the slavery issue as a mere pretext for aggrandizing central power. All three authors see federal tyranny as the war's greatest legacy. And they all hate Abraham Lincoln.

[ 40 ] In a review of libertarian Thomas E. Woods Jr.

's The Politically Incorrect Guide to American History , in turn Hummel refers to the works by DiLorenzo and Adams as "amateurish neo-Confederate books". Of Woods, Hummel states that the two main neo-Confederate aspects of Woods' work are his emphasis on a legal right of secession while ignoring the moral right to secession and his failure to acknowledge the importance of slavery in the Civil War. Hummel writes: Woods writes 'that the slavery debate masked the real issue: the struggle over power and domination' (p. 48). Talk about a distinction without a difference. It is akin to stating that the demands of sugar lobbyists for protective quotas mask their real worry: political influence. Yes, slaveholders constituted a special interest that sought political power. Why? To protect slavery.

[ 41 ] Hummel also criticizes Woods' "neo-Confederate sympathies" in his chapter on Reconstruction. Most egregious was his "apologia for the Black Codes adopted by the southern states immediately after the Civil War". Part of the problem was Woods' reliance on an earlier neo-Confederate work, Robert Selph Henry 's 1938 book The Story of Reconstruction .

[ 41 ] Historian Gerald J. Prokopowicz mentioned apprehension toward recognizing Lincoln's role in freeing slaves as well as libertarian attitudes towards the Confederacy in an interview regarding his book Did Lincoln Own Slaves? And Other Frequently Asked Questions about Abraham Lincoln : Some critics look at his careful and politically practical approach to ending slavery and mistake it for reluctance to help African-Americans. Others overlook slavery altogether and romanticize the Confederacy as a libertarian paradise crushed by the tyrant Lincoln.
But since even Lincoln's most extreme opponents can't deny that the end of slavery was a good thing, they have to try to disassociate Lincoln from emancipation, and that leads to the absurdity of implying that Lincoln must have been a slave owner.

[ 42 ] Some intellectuals who have helped shape the modern neo-Confederate movement have been associated with libertarian organizations such as the Mises Institute . These individuals often insist on the South's right to secede and typically hold views in stark contrast to mainstream academia in regards to the causes and consequences of the American Civil War.

[ 43 ] [ 30 ] Zack Beauchamp of ThinkProgress argues that because of its small size, the libertarian movement has become partially beholden to a neo-Confederate demographic.

[ 44 ] In contemporary politics, some libertarians have tried to distance themselves from neo-Confederate ideology while also critiquing President Lincoln's wartime policies, such as the suspension of habeas corpus , from a libertarian perspective.

[ 45 ] Neo-Confederate views and the Republican Party [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e See also: Southern Democrats , Solid South , and Southern strategy Historian Nancy MacLean writes that "since the 1960s the party of Lincoln has become the haven of neo-Confederacy. Having long prided itself on saving the Union, the Republican Party has become home to those who lionize the slaveholding South and romanticize the Jim Crow South". According to MacClean, this embrace of neo-Confederate views is not exclusively about race, but it is related to a pragmatic political realization that the "retrospective romanticization of the Old South" and secession presented many possible themes that could be used as conservatives attempted to reverse the national changes initiated by the New Deal .

[ 46 ] According to MacLean, after the defeat of Barry Goldwater in the 1964 presidential election and the successes of the civil rights movement , conservative leaders nationally distanced themselves from racial issues, but they continued to support a "color-blind" version of neo-Confederatism. She writes that "even into the twenty-first century mainstream conservative Republican politicians continued to associate themselves with issues, symbols, and organizations inspired by the neo-Confederate Right".

[ 47 ] Two prominent neo-Confederates—Walter Donald Kennedy and Al Benson—published the book Red Republicans and Lincoln's Marxists: Marxism in the Civil War , in which they argue that Lincoln and the Republican Party were influenced by Marxism .

[ 48 ] Criticism [ edit ] George Ewert, director of the Museum of Mobile, wrote a review of the film Gods and Generals in which he pointed out that the film was "part of a growing movement that seeks to rewrite the history of the American South, downplaying slavery and the economic system that it sustained". His review enraged local neo-Confederate activists.

[ 49 ] Neo-Confederate groups [ edit ] See also: List of Ku Klux Klan organizations Abbeville Institute Council of Conservative Citizens Dixiecrats (States' Rights Democratic Party) (defunct) Flaggers (movement) Ku Klux Klan League of the South Southern Party (division of the League of the South) Sons of Confederate Veterans Southern Historical Society (defunct) United Daughters of the Confederacy Military Order of the Stars and Bars See also [ edit ] American Civil War portal Culture of the Southern United States Far-right politics#United States Far-right subcultures History of the Southern United States List of organizations designated by the Southern Poverty Law Center as hate groups List of white nationalist organizations Politics of the Southern United States Racism against African Americans References [ edit ] Notes ^ McPherson, James M. "Long-Legged Yankee Lies: The Southern Textbook Crusade," from The Memory of the Civil War in American Culture, editors, Alice Fahs and Joan Waugh. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press , 2004)64-78. Reference to neo-Confederate on page 76. McPherson's discussion on page 68.

^ MacLean, Nancy, "Neo-Confederacy against the New Deal: The Regional Romance of the Modern American Right," paper presented at conference entitled "The End of Southern History? Reintegrating the Modern South and the Nation." (Atlanta: Emory University , 2006).

^ Quinn, Richard, "Partisan View," Southern Partisan , 8.1 (1988);5.

^ Levy, Leonard W. Review of Americans Interpret Their Civil War by Thomas J. Pressly. The Western Political Quarterly, Vol. 7, No. 3. (Sep. 1954), pp. 523–524 ^ Butler, Clayton,"An Interview with Historian Gary Gallagher" https://www.battlefields.org/learn/articles/interview-historian-gary-gallagher ^ Introduction The Confederate War Gary W. Gallagher ( Harvard University Press 1997) ^ Gallagher, Gary W. and Nolan, Alan T.

editors.

The Myth of the Lost Cause and Civil War History . (2000) p. 1. Gallagher wrote: "The architects of the Lost Cause acted from various motives. They collectively sought to justify their own actions and allow themselves and other former Confederates to find something positive in all-encompassing failure. They also wanted to provide their children and future generations of white Southerners with a 'correct' narrative of the war." ^ "Home" .

scv.org . Retrieved August 28, 2017 .

^ McPherson pg. 98 ^ McPherson pg. 97 ^ McPherson pg. 106 ^ Blight, David W. Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory. (2001) pg 289 ^ Blight, David W.

Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory . (2001) pg. 290 ^ Hague, Euan; Beirich, Heidi; Sebesta, Edward H. (September 15, 2009).

Neo-Confederacy: A Critical Introduction . University of Texas Press. p. 29.

ISBN 978-0-292-77921-1 . Retrieved May 4, 2023 .

^ Omi, Michael; Winant, Howard (June 20, 2014).

Racial Formation in the United States . Routledge. p. 260.

ISBN 978-1-135-12751-0 . Retrieved May 4, 2023 .

^ a b Gallagher and Nolan pg. 13-14 ^ a b White, Steven (August 17, 2017).

"Confederate flags and Nazi swastikas together? That's new. Here's what it means" .

Washington Post . Retrieved April 8, 2023 .

^ Fausset, Richard (November 25, 2017).

"I Interviewed a White Nationalist and Fascist. What Was I Left With?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 29, 2023 .

^ "Deconstructing the symbols and slogans spotted in Charlottesville" .

Washington Post . August 18, 2017 . Retrieved March 29, 2023 .

^ Munro, Niall (June 2020).

"Neo-Confederates Take Their Stand: Southern Agrarians and the Civil War" (PDF) .

European Journal of American Culture .

39 (2): 141– 162.

doi : 10.1386/ejac_00020_1 .

S2CID 225842730 . Retrieved March 29, 2023 .

^ Goldfield, David. Still Fighting the Civil War: The American South and Southern History. (2002) pg. 318 ^ Southern Poverty Law Center (2000).

"Arizona State Professor Brooks D. Simpson Discusses Neo-Confederate Movement" .

White Lies . Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved October 7, 2015 .

^ http://www.splcenter.org/intel/intelreport/article.jsp?pid=110 Archived July 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Lincoln Reconstructed ^ W. Loewen, James (July 1, 2015).

"Why do people believe myths about the Confederacy? Because our textbooks and monuments are wrong" .

Washington Post . Retrieved April 13, 2017 .

^ Smith, Sam (February 10, 2015).

"Black Confederates" .

www.civilwar.org . Archived from the original on April 14, 2017 . Retrieved April 13, 2017 .

^ Loewen, James W. and Sebesta, Edward H., The Confederate and Neo-Confederate Reader , pp.17-19.

^ Levine (2006) p.13 ^ http://vastpublicindifference.blogspot.com/2008/05/confederate-monumental-landscape_26.html Confederate Monumental Landscape: Literate Sources ^ Black, William (December 16, 2016).

"Confessions of a former neo-Confederate" .

Vox . Retrieved April 13, 2017 .

^ a b c Tabachnick, Rachel (November 22, 2013).

"Nullification, Neo-Confederates, and the Revenge of the Old Right | Political Research Associates" .

Political Research Associates . Retrieved April 13, 2017 .

^ a b http://www.dixienet.org/New%20Site/corebeliefs.shtml Archived July 15, 2009, at the Wayback Machine League of the South Core Beliefs Statement ^ Mrak, Mojmir (1999).

Succession of States . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 90-411-1145-X .

^ Agostinone-Wilson, Faith (January 1, 2012).

Neo-Confederate Ideology & History Textbooks – 1860 to 2010 . Brill. p. 293.

ISBN 978-94-6091-912-1 . Retrieved April 19, 2023 .

^ MacLean (2010) p. 309 ^ "David Blight Reviews Bruce Levine's" . March 5, 2006.

^ http://www.religioustolerance.org/chr_10cc.htm The Ten Commandments ^ Neo-Confederacy: A Critical Introduction, p. 53, Euan Hague, Heidi Beirich, Edward H. Sebesta, University of Texas ^ http://gis.depaul.edu/ehague/Articles/PUBLISHED%20CRAS%20ARTICLE.pdf Archived May 30, 2009, at the Wayback Machine "The US Civil War As A Theological War: Confederate Christian Nationalism and the League of the South," in Canadian Review of American Studies , Vol. 32 No. 3, pp. 253-284.

^ http://dixienet.org/New%20Site/faq.shtml Archived July 17, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Frequently Asked Questions about the League of the South ^ Feller (2004) p. 186. Feller differentiates between Hummel and the other two. He writes (p.190), "After this soapbox tirade [referring to DiLorenzo's "The Real Lincoln: A New Look at Abraham Lincoln, His Agenda, and an Unnecessary War" and Adams' "When in the Course of Human Events: Arguing the Case for Southern Secession"], Jeffrey Hummel's "Emancipating Slaves, Enslaving Free Men" is a breath of fresh air. Hummel is a real historian." ^ a b "Thomas Woods and His Critics by Jeffrey Rogers Hummel" .

www.la-articles.org.uk .

^ Change of Subject: Lincoln didn't own slaves, but people keep asking anyway. Find out why http://blogs.chicagotribune.com/news_columnists_ezorn/2008/02/lincoln.html ^ "The Ideologues" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . December 21, 2004. Archived from the original on April 11, 2017 . Retrieved April 11, 2017 .

^ Beauchamp, Zack (July 11, 2013).

"Why Libertarians Will Never Shake Their Neo-Confederate Ties" .

ThinkProgress . Retrieved April 11, 2017 .

^ "Libertarians and the Confederacy" .

Libertarianism.org . August 14, 2013 . Retrieved April 11, 2017 .

^ MacLean (2010) pp. 308-309 ^ MacLean (2010) pp. 320-321 ^ Swanson, Kevin (August 8, 2014).

"Red Tyrant Abraham Lincoln Introduced Communism To America | Right Wing Watch" .

Right Wing Watch . Retrieved April 13, 2017 .

^ "Flap Over Alabama Historian's Essay Roils City" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . December 31, 2003 . Retrieved November 29, 2022 .

Bibliography Blight, David W.

Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory . (2001) ISBN 0-674-00332-2 .

Feller, Daniel. "Libertarians in the Attic, or a Tale of Two Narratives".

Reviews in American History 32.2 (2004) 184–195.

Gallagher, Gary W. and Nolan, Alan T. editors.

The Myth of the Lost Cause and Civil War History . (2000) ISBN 0-253-33822-0 .

Goldfield, David.

Still Fighting the Civil War: The American South and Southern History . (2002) ISBN 0-8071-2758-2 .

Hague, Euan; Beirich, Heidi; Sebesta, Edward H., eds. (2008).

Neo-Confederacy: A Critical Introduction .

University of Texas Press . pp.

284– 285.

ISBN 978-0-2927-7921-1 .

Kennedy, Walter Donald, and Benson Jr., Al, Red Republicans and Lincoln's Marxists: Marxism in the Civil War (2009) ISBN 0-595-89021-0 .

Levine, Bruce.

Confederate Emancipation: Southern Plans to Free and Arm Slaves During the Civil War.

(2006) ISBN 978-0-19-514762-9 .

Levy, Leonard W.

Review of Americans Interpret Their Civil War by Thomas J. Pressly.

The Western Political Quarterly, Vol. 7, No. 3. (Sep. 1954), pp. 523–524.

MacLean, Nancy. "Neo-Confederacy versus the New Deal: The Regional Utopia of the Modern American Right" in The Myth of Southern Exceptionalism . (2010) edited by Lassiter, Matthew W. and Crespino, Joseph.

McPherson, James M.

This Mighty Scourge: Perspectives on the Civil War . (2007) ISBN 978-0-19-531366-6 .

Further reading Cox, Karen L.

Dixie's Daughters: the United Daughters of the Confederacy and the Preservation of Confederate Culture (Gainesville: University Press of Florida , 2003. Reissue with new intro 2019).

Denson, John V.

A Century of War: Lincoln, Wilson, and Roosevelt .

Fredrickson, Kari.

The Dixiecrat Revolt and the End of the Solid South, 1932-1968 . (Chapel Hill, Univ. of North Carolina Press, 2001). Forerunners of the modern neo-Confederate movement.

Gallagher, Gary W.

The Confederate War . (Harvard University Press, 1999).

McMillen, Neil R.

The Citizens' Councils: Organized Resistance to the Second Reconstruction, 1954-64 . (Urbana: University of Illinois Press , 1971). Forerunners of the Council of Conservative Citizens.

Murphy, Paul V.

The Rebuke of History: The Southern Agrarians and American Conservative Thought . (Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 2001). This is an important book to understand the forerunners of the modern neo-Confederate movement.

New York Times : Member's Racist Ties Split Confederate Legacy Group .

Southern Exposure: Bush's "Close Ties" To Neo-Confederate Groups Questioned .

SPLC Intelligence Report: The Neo-Confederates September 2000.

Hague, Euan. SPLC Hatewatch Report: The Neo-Confederate Movement January 2010.

Wikiquote has quotations related to American Civil War .

v t e Neo-Confederates Themes Display of the Confederate battle flag Flaggers Lost Cause of the Confederacy Secession Key people E. Merton Coulter Thomas Dixon Jr.

Thomas Fleming Michael Hill Jack Kershaw Frank Lawrence Owsley Donald Livingston Michael Peroutka Edith D. Pope Laura Martin Rose Mildred Lewis Rutherford Ellison D. Smith Robert Wilkie Clyde N. Wilson Active organizations League of the South Military Order of the Stars and Bars Sons of Confederate Veterans Southern Legal Resource Center United Daughters of the Confederacy Defunct organizations Ku Klux Klan Southern Historical Society Southern Party United Confederate Veterans White League Media Confederate Veteran Southern Partisan Related Confederate Memorial Day List of Confederate monuments and memorials v t e Secession in the United States Active movements Alaska Black California Cascadia Confederate States Hawaii Lakotah Sequoyah Puerto Rico Texas White Northwest Territorial Imperative History Election of 1860 and the Secession Crisis South Carolina Mississippi Louisiana Virginia Arkansas Missouri Miscellaneous 2012 U.S. state secession petitions List of state partition proposals v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism v t e Alt-right Ideas Core American Nationalism Antifeminism Fourteen Words Ghost skin White ethnostate White nationalism White supremacy Conspiracy theories Cultural Marxism Eurabia George Soros Great Replacement Homosexual agenda Kalergi Plan Murder of Seth Rich New World Order Pizzagate White genocide Zionist Occupation Government Related Alt-lite Alt-right pipeline Boogaloo movement Christian Identity DezNat Identitarian movement Incel Kinism Manosphere Men Going Their Own Way Neo-Confederates Neo-fascism Neo-nationalism Neo-Nazism Nouvelle Droite Paleoconservatism Paleolibertarianism QAnon Radical right Reactionary Dark Enlightenment Third Position Ultraconservatism Online culture Alt-tech 4chan /pol/ 8chan BitChute Epik Gab Gettr Minds Parler Rumble Terrorgram Truth Social Voat (defunct) Websites American Renaissance Breitbart News The Daily Stormer Infowars Kingdom Identity Ministries Kuruc.info Metapedia Occidental Observer The Occidental Quarterly Rebel News Red Ice Reddit (r/The_Donald) The Right Stuff StoneToss Stormfront TruNews Vanguard News Network VDARE WorldNetDaily Memes " Basket of deplorables " " Beta male " " Cuckservative " Fashwave Happy Merchant " It's okay to be white " Moon Man NPC OK gesture " Owning the libs " Pepe the Frog " Red pill and blue pill " Right Wing Death Squad " Remove Kebab " " Shadilay " " Snowflake " " Social justice warrior " Trash Doves Triple parentheses Undercut Groups AltRight Corporation American Freedom Party Anti-Communist Action The Base Deplorable Pride Diagolon Groypers Hundred-Handers Identity Evropa (defunct) Les Identitaires National Policy Institute Patriot Front Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Rise Above Movement Traditionalist Worker Party (defunct) Vanguard America Washington Summit Publishers Events Incidents Berkeley protests Comicsgate DeploraBall End Domestic Terrorism rally Gamergate Macron e-mail leaks Unite the Right rally Unite the Right 2 Attacks Assault of DeAndre Harris Charlottesville car attack Christchurch mosque shootings Murder of Blaze Bernstein Murder of Timothy Caughman Pittsburgh synagogue shooting Portland train attack Lists Timeline of activities involving the Proud Boys People James Allsup Andrew Anglin Andrew "weev" Auernheimer Steve Bannon Theodore "Vox Day" Beale Carl "Sargon of Akkad" Benjamin Owen Benjamin Peter Brimelow Christopher Cantwell Mike Cernovich Alain de Benoist John Derbyshire Jack Donovan David Duke Mike Enoch Guillaume Faye Haakon Forwald Daniel Friberg Nick Fuentes Jean-François Gariépy Ben Garrison Austin "Augustus Sol Invictus" Gillespie Tim "Baked Alaska" Gionet Jim Goad Faith Goldy Paul Gottfried Matthew Heimbach Michael A. Hoffman II Sam Hyde Dillon Irizarry Charles C. Johnson Greg Johnson William Daniel Johnson Alex Jones Jason Jorjani Ruuben Kaalep Tom Kawcyznski Jason Kessler Douglas Murray Steve King Elliott Kline Nick Land Lana Lokteff Laura Loomer Norman Lowell Kevin MacDonald Jeremy MacKenzie Stephen McNallen Merlin Miller Stephen Miller Stefan Molyneux Paul Nehlen Paul "GypsyCrusader" Nicholas Miller Ethan Nordean Jack Posobiec Bronze Age Pervert Paul Ray Ramsey William Regnery II Colin "Millennial Woes" Robertson Thomas Rousseau Steve Sailer Martin Sellner Lauren Southern Richard B. Spencer Brett Stevens Jared Taylor Tila Tequila Daryush "Roosh V" Valizadeh Paul Joseph Watson Lucian Wintrich Curtis Yarvin Milo Yiannopoulos Opposition and criticism People Antifa Steven "Destiny" Bonnell II Ian "Vaush" Kochinski Harry "Hbomberguy" Brewis Ian "Innuendo Studios" Danskin Robert Evans Emily Gorcenski Daryle Lamont Jenkins Angela Nagle David Neiwert Shaun Abigail "Philosophy Tube" Thorn Natalie "ContraPoints" Wynn Donna Zuckerberg Media Alt-America Angry Goy II Culture Warlords Devil's Bargain Feels Good Man I Don't Speak German It Came from Something Awful Kill All Normies Knowledge Fight White Right: Meeting the Enemy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐tcjng
Cached time: 20250815222456
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.720 seconds
Real time usage: 0.906 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4261/1000000
Revision size: 38782/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 174546/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7746/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 153383/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.347/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8088064/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  589.489      1 -total
 33.36%  196.650      1 Template:Reflist
 19.98%  117.794      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 15.13%   89.161      7 Template:Cite_web
 10.00%   58.922      1 Template:Short_description
  8.01%   47.247      1 Template:Multiple_image
  6.59%   38.837      8 Template:Cite_news
  5.47%   32.250      2 Template:Navbox
  5.37%   31.676      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.72%   27.847      1 Template:Neo-Confederates Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:860333:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815222456 and revision id 1301181639. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neo-Confederates&oldid=1301181639 " Categories : Neo-Confederates White supremacy in the United States Confederate States of America Alt-right Anti-communism in the United States Cultural history of the American Civil War Culture of the Southern United States Historiography of the American Civil War History of the Southern United States Lost Cause of the Confederacy Political movements Political terminology Politics and race Politics of the Southern United States Racial segregation Reconstruction Era Right-wing populism in the United States Separatism in the United States Social history of the American Civil War White separatism Paleoconservatism Paleolibertarianism Fascism in the United States Neo-fascism in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from December 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 14:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neo-Confederates 8 languages Add topic

