Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Early career 1.2 Military service 2 Early political career Toggle Early political career subsection 2.1 Local politics 2.2 Member of Parliament 2.3 Deputy Labour Leader 2.4 Leader of the Opposition 3 Deputy Prime Minister Toggle Deputy Prime Minister subsection 3.1 1945 election 4 Prime Minister Toggle Prime Minister subsection 4.1 Domestic policy 4.1.1 Nationalisation 4.1.2 Health 4.1.3 Welfare 4.1.4 Education 4.1.5 Economy 4.1.6 Energy 4.2 Foreign policy 4.2.1 Decolonisation 4.2.1.1 East Asia 4.2.1.2 South Asia 4.2.1.3 Palestine 4.2.1.4 Africa 4.3 Elections 5 Return to opposition 6 Global policy 7 Retirement 8 Death 9 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 9.1 Statues 9.2 Cultural depictions 10 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 10.1 Religious views 11 Honours and arms 12 See also 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Notes 13.2 Citations 14 Bibliography 15 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 15.1 Works 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Clement Attlee 92 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1945 to 1951 "Attlee" redirects here. For other uses, see Atlee .

The Right Honourable The Earl Attlee KG OM CH KStJ TD PC FRS 1949 portrait Prime Minister of the United Kingdom In office 26 July 1945 – 26 October 1951 Monarch George VI Deputy Herbert Morrison Preceded by Winston Churchill Succeeded by Winston Churchill Leader of the Opposition In office 26 October 1951 – 25 November 1955 Monarchs George VI Elizabeth II Prime Minister Winston Churchill Anthony Eden Preceded by Winston Churchill Succeeded by Herbert Morrison In office 23 May – 26 July 1945 ( 1945-05-23 – 1945-07-26 ) Monarch George VI Prime Minister Winston Churchill Preceded by Arthur Greenwood Succeeded by Winston Churchill In office 25 October 1935 – 11 May 1940 Monarchs George V Edward VIII George VI Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin Neville Chamberlain Preceded by George Lansbury Succeeded by Hastings Lees-Smith Leader of the Labour Party In office 25 October 1935 – 7 December 1955 Deputy Arthur Greenwood Herbert Morrison Preceded by George Lansbury Succeeded by Hugh Gaitskell Deputy Leader of the Labour Party In office 25 October 1932 – 25 October 1935 Leader George Lansbury Preceded by J. R. Clynes Succeeded by Arthur Greenwood Wartime ministerial offices Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom De facto 19 February 1942 – 23 May 1945 Prime Minister Winston Churchill Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Herbert Morrison (de facto) Lord President of the Council In office 28 September 1943 – 23 May 1945 Prime Minister Winston Churchill Preceded by Sir John Anderson Succeeded by The Lord Woolton Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs In office 15 February 1942 – 24 September 1943 Prime Minister Winston Churchill Preceded by Viscount Cranborne Succeeded by Viscount Cranborne Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal In office 12 May 1940 – 15 February 1942 Prime Minister Winston Churchill Preceded by Kingsley Wood Succeeded by Stafford Cripps Interwar ministerial offices Postmaster General In office 13 March 1931 – 25 August 1931 Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald Preceded by Hastings Lees-Smith Succeeded by William Ormsby-Gore Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster In office 23 May 1930 – 13 March 1931 Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald Preceded by Oswald Mosley Succeeded by The Lord Ponsonby Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for War In office 23 January 1924 – 4 November 1924 Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald Preceded by Wilfrid Ashley Succeeded by Richard Onslow Parliamentary offices Member of the House of Lords Lord Temporal Hereditary peerage 25 January 1956 – 8 October 1967 Preceded by Earldom created Succeeded by The 2nd Earl Attlee Member of Parliament for Walthamstow West In office 23 February 1950 – 16 December 1955 Preceded by Valentine McEntee Succeeded by Edward Redhead Member of Parliament for Limehouse In office 15 November 1922 – 3 February 1950 Preceded by William Pearce Succeeded by Constituency abolished Personal details Born Clement Richard Attlee ( 1883-01-03 ) 3 January 1883 Putney, London , England Died 8 October 1967 (1967-10-08) (aged 84) Westminster, London , England Resting place Westminster Abbey Political party Labour Spouse Violet Millar ​ ​ ( m.

1922 ; died 1964 ) ​ Children 4, including Martin, 2nd Earl Attlee Education Haileybury Alma mater University College, Oxford Occupation Politician Barrister Lecturer Social worker Soldier Signature Military service Branch/service British Army Territorial Army Years of service 1914–1931 Rank Major Unit South Lancashire Regiment Tank Corps Battles/wars First World War Gallipoli campaign Mesopotamian campaign Western Front Awards Territorial Decoration 1914–15 Star British War Medal Victory Medal This article is part of a series about Clement Attlee Labour Party MP for Limehouse Labour Leader 1935 general election 1935 leadership election Norway Debate Churchill war ministry War cabinet crisis 1945 general election Prime Minister Cabinet Potsdam Conference National Insurance National Coal Board Anglo-American loan Winter of 1946-47 Partition of India Partition of Palestine National Health Service British Rail 1950 general election Korean War 1951 general election Post-Prime Minister 1955 general election v t e Clement Richard Attlee, 1st Earl Attlee (3 January 1883 – 8 October 1967) was a British statesman who was Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1945 to 1951 and Leader of the Labour Party from 1935 to 1955. Attlee was Deputy Prime Minister during the wartime coalition government under Winston Churchill , and Leader of the Opposition on three occasions: from 1935 to 1940, briefly in 1945 and from 1951 to 1955. He remains the longest serving Labour leader.

Attlee was born into an upper middle class family, the son of a wealthy London solicitor. After attending Haileybury College and the University of Oxford , he practised as a barrister . The volunteer work he carried out in London's East End exposed him to poverty, and his political views shifted leftwards thereafter. He joined the Independent Labour Party , gave up his legal career, and began lecturing at the London School of Economics ; with his work briefly interrupted by service as an officer in the First World War . In 1919, he became mayor of Stepney and in 1922 was elected to Parliament as the Member for Limehouse . Attlee served in the first Labour minority government led by Ramsay MacDonald in 1924, and then joined the Cabinet during MacDonald's second minority (1929–1931). After retaining his seat in Labour's landslide defeat of 1931 , he became the party's Deputy Leader .

Elected Leader of the Labour Party in 1935, and at first advocating pacificism and opposing re-armament , he became a critic of Neville Chamberlain 's policy of appeasement in the lead-up to the Second World War . Attlee took Labour into the wartime coalition government in 1940 and served under Winston Churchill, initially as Lord Privy Seal and then as Deputy Prime Minister from 1942.

[ note 1 ] The Labour Party, led by Attlee, won a landslide victory in the 1945 general election , on their post-war recovery platform.

[ note 2 ] They inherited a country close to bankruptcy following the Second World War and beset by food, housing and resource shortages. Attlee led the construction of the first Labour majority government , which aimed to maintain full employment , a mixed economy and a greatly enlarged system of social services provided by the state. To this end, it undertook the nationalisation of public utilities and major industries, and implemented wide-ranging social reforms, including the passing of the National Insurance Act 1946 and National Assistance Act 1948 , the formation of the National Health Service (NHS) in 1948, and the enlargement of public subsidies for council house building. His government also reformed trade union legislation, working practices and children's services; it created the National Parks system, passed the New Towns Act 1946 and established the town and country planning system . Attlee's foreign policy focused on decolonisation efforts, including the partition of India (1947), the independence of Burma and Ceylon , and the dissolution of the British mandates of Palestine and independence of Transjordan . Attlee and Bevin encouraged the United States to take a vigorous role in the Cold War . He supported the Marshall Plan to rebuild Western Europe with American money and, in 1949, promoted the NATO military alliance against the Soviet bloc . After leading Labour to a narrow victory at the 1950 general election , he sent British troops to fight alongside South Korea in the Korean War .

[ note 3 ] Despite his social reforms and economic programme, the pre-existing wartime shortages of food, housing and resources persisted throughout his premiership, alongside recurrent currency crises and dependence on US aid. His party was narrowly defeated by the Conservatives in the 1951 general election , despite winning the most votes. He continued as Labour leader but retired after losing the 1955 general election and was elevated to the House of Lords , where he served until his death in 1967. In public, he was modest and unassuming, but behind the scenes his depth of knowledge, quiet demeanour, objectivity and pragmatism proved decisive.

[ 1 ] He is often ranked as one of the greatest British prime ministers , receiving particular praise for his government's welfare state reforms, creation of the NHS, continuation of the " Special Relationship " with the US, and involvement in NATO.

[ 2 ] Early life [ edit ] Clement Richard Attlee was born on 3 January 1883 in Putney , Surrey (now part of London), into an upper middle class family, the seventh of eight children. His father was Henry Attlee, a solicitor, and his mother was Ellen Bravery Watson, daughter of Thomas Simons Watson, secretary for the Art Union of London .

[ 3 ] His parents were "committed Anglicans" who read prayers and psalms each morning at breakfast.

[ 4 ] Attlee grew up in a two-storey villa with a large garden and tennis court, staffed by three servants and a gardener. His father, a political Liberal , had inherited family interests in milling and brewing, and became a senior partner in the law firm of Druces, also serving a term as president of the Law Society of England and Wales . In 1898 he purchased a 200-acre (81 ha) estate, Comarques in Thorpe-le-Soken , Essex. At the age of nine, Attlee was sent to board at Northaw Place , a boys' preparatory school in Hertfordshire . In 1896 he followed his brothers to Haileybury College , where he was a middling student. He was influenced by the Darwinist views of his housemaster Frederick Webb Headley , and in 1899 he published an attack on striking London cab-drivers in the school magazine, predicting they would soon have to "beg for their fares".

[ 4 ] In 1901, Attlee went up to University College, Oxford , reading modern history . He and his brother Tom "were given a generous stipend by their father and embraced the university lifestyle—rowing, reading and socializing". He was later described by a tutor as "level-headed, industrious, dependable man with no brilliance of style ... but with excellent sound judgement". At university he had little interest in politics or economics, later describing his views at this time as "good old fashioned imperialist conservative". He graduated Bachelor of Arts in 1904 with second-class honours .

[ 4 ] Attlee then trained as a barrister at the Inner Temple and was called to the bar in March 1906. He worked for a time at his father's law firm Druces and Attlee but did not enjoy the work, and had no particular ambition to succeed in the legal profession.

[ 5 ] He also played football for non-League club Fleet .

[ 6 ] Attlee's father died in 1908, leaving an estate valued for probate at £75,394 (equivalent to £9,943,044 in 2023 [ 7 ] ).

[ 8 ] Early career [ edit ] In 1906, Attlee became a volunteer at Haileybury House, a charitable club for working-class boys in Stepney in the East End of London run by his old school, and from 1907 to 1909 he served as the club's manager. Until then, his political views had been more conservative. However, after his shock at the poverty and deprivation he saw while working with the slum children, he came to the view that private charity would never be sufficient to alleviate poverty and that only direct action and income redistribution by the state would have any serious effect. This sparked a process that caused him to convert to socialism . He joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in 1908 and became active in local politics.

[ 9 ] Following his father's death in November 1908, Attlee gave up his legal career and devoted himself to politics and social work. His father left him an income of £400 a year (equivalent to £50,000 in 2023).

[ 7 ] In 1909, he stood unsuccessfully at his first election, as an ILP candidate for Stepney Borough Council.

[ 9 ] He got a job briefly working as a secretary for Beatrice Webb in 1909, before becoming a secretary for Toynbee Hall . He worked for Webb's campaign of popularisation of the Minority Report as he was very active in Fabian Society circles, in which he would go round visiting many political societies—Liberal, Conservative and socialist—to explain and popularise the ideas, as well as recruiting lecturers deemed suitable to work on the campaign. In 1911, he was employed by the Government as an "official explainer"—touring the country to explain Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George 's National Insurance Act . He spent the summer of that year touring Essex and Somerset on a bicycle, explaining the Act at public meetings. A year later, he became a lecturer at the London School of Economics , teaching social science and public administration .

[ 10 ] Military service [ edit ] Following the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914, Attlee applied to join the British Army . Initially his application was turned down, as his age of 31 was seen as being too old; however, he was eventually commissioned as a temporary lieutenant in the 6th (Service) Battalion, South Lancashire Regiment , on 30 September 1914.

[ 11 ] On 9 February 1915 he was promoted to captain , [ 12 ] and on 14 March was appointed battalion adjutant .

[ 13 ] The 6th South Lancashires were part of the 38th Brigade of the 13th (Western) Division , which served in the Gallipoli campaign in Turkey . Attlee's decision to fight caused a rift between him and his older brother Tom, who, as a conscientious objector , spent much of the war in prison.

[ 14 ] After a period spent fighting in Gallipoli, Attlee collapsed after falling ill with dysentery and was put on a ship bound for England to recover. When he woke up he wanted to get back to action as soon as possible, and asked to be let off the ship in Malta, where he stayed in hospital in order to recover. His hospitalisation coincided with the Battle of Sari Bair , which saw a large number of his comrades killed. Upon returning to action, he was informed that his company had been chosen to hold the final lines during the evacuation of Suvla . As such, he was the penultimate man to be evacuated from Suvla Bay , the last being General Stanley Maude .

[ 15 ] Attlee (seen in the centre) in 1916, aged 33, whilst serving in Mesopotamia.

The Gallipoli Campaign had been engineered by the First Lord of the Admiralty , Winston Churchill . Although it was unsuccessful, Attlee believed that it was a bold strategy which could have been successful if it had been better implemented on the ground. This led to an admiration for Churchill as a military strategist, something which would make their working relationship in later years productive.

[ 16 ] He later served in the Mesopotamian campaign in what is now Iraq , where in April 1916 he was badly wounded, being hit in the leg by shrapnel from friendly fire while storming an enemy trench during the Battle of Hanna . The battle was an unsuccessful attempt to relieve the Siege of Kut , and many of Attlee's fellow soldiers were also wounded or killed. He was sent firstly to India , and then back to the UK to recover. On 18 December 1916 he was transferred to the Heavy Section of the Machine Gun Corps , [ 17 ] and 1 March 1917 he was promoted to the temporary rank of major , [ 18 ] leading him to be known as "Major Attlee" for much of the inter-war period . He would spend most of 1917 training soldiers at various locations in England.

[ 19 ] From 2 to 9 July 1917, he was the temporary commanding officer (CO) of the newly formed L (later 10th) Battalion, the Tank Corps at Bovington Camp, Dorset . From 9 July, he assumed command of the 30th Company of the same battalion; however, he did not deploy to France with it in December 1917, [ 20 ] as he was transferred back to the South Lancashire Regiment on 28 November.

[ 21 ] After fully recovering from his injuries, he was sent to France in June 1918 to serve on the Western Front for the final months of the war. After being discharged from the Army in January 1919, he returned to Stepney , and returned to his old job lecturing part-time at the London School of Economics .

[ 22 ] Early political career [ edit ] Local politics [ edit ] Attlee returned to local politics in the immediate post-war period, becoming mayor of the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney , one of London's most deprived inner-city boroughs, in 1919. During his time as mayor, the council undertook action to tackle slum landlords who charged high rents but refused to spend money on keeping their property in habitable condition. The council served and enforced legal orders on homeowners to repair their property. It also appointed health visitors and sanitary inspectors, reducing the infant mortality rate, and took action to find work for returning unemployed ex-servicemen.

[ 23 ] In 1920, while mayor, he wrote his first book, The Social Worker , which set out many of the principles that informed his political philosophy and that were to underpin the actions of his government in later years. The book attacked the idea that looking after the poor could be left to voluntary action. He wrote that: In a civilised community, although it may be composed of self-reliant individuals, there will be some persons who will be unable at some period of their lives to look after themselves, and the question of what is to happen to them may be solved in three ways – they may be neglected, they may be cared for by the organised community as of right, or they may be left to the goodwill of individuals in the community.

[ 24 ] [...] Charity is only possible without loss of dignity between equals. A right established by law, such as that to an old age pension, is less galling than an allowance made by a rich man to a poor one, dependent on his view of the recipient's character, and terminable at his caprice.

[ 25 ] In 1921, George Lansbury , the Labour mayor of the neighbouring borough of Poplar , and future Labour Party leader, launched the Poplar Rates Rebellion ; a campaign of disobedience seeking to equalise the poor relief burden across all the London boroughs. Attlee, who was a personal friend of Lansbury, strongly supported this. However, Herbert Morrison , the Labour mayor of nearby Hackney , and one of the main figures in the London Labour Party , strongly denounced Lansbury and the rebellion. During this period, Attlee developed a lifelong dislike of Morrison.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Member of Parliament [ edit ] At the 1922 general election , Attlee became the Member of Parliament (MP) for the constituency of Limehouse in Stepney . At the time, he admired Ramsay MacDonald and helped him get elected as Labour Party leader at the 1922 leadership election . He served as MacDonald's Parliamentary Private Secretary for the brief 1922 parliament. His first taste of ministerial office came in 1924, when he served as Under-Secretary of State for War in the short-lived first Labour government , led by MacDonald.

[ 29 ] Attlee opposed the 1926 General Strike , believing that strike action should not be used as a political weapon. However, when it happened, he did not attempt to undermine it. At the time of the strike, he was chairman of the Stepney Borough Electricity Committee. He negotiated a deal with the Electrical Trade Union so that they would continue to supply power to hospitals, but would end supplies to factories. One firm, Scammell and Nephew Ltd, took a civil action against Attlee and the other Labour members of the committee (although not against the Conservative members who had also supported this). The court found against Attlee and his fellow councillors and they were ordered to pay £300 damages. The decision was later reversed on appeal, but the financial problems caused by the episode almost forced Attlee out of politics.

[ 30 ] In 1927, he was appointed a member of the multi-party Simon Commission , a royal commission set up to examine the possibility of granting self-rule to India . Due to the time he needed to devote to the commission, and contrary to a promise MacDonald made to Attlee to induce him to serve on the commission, he was not initially offered a ministerial post in the second Labour government , which entered office after the 1929 general election .

[ 31 ] Attlee's service on the Commission equipped him with a thorough exposure to India and many of its political leaders. By 1933 he argued that British rule was alien to India and was unable to make the social and economic reforms necessary for India's progress. He became the British leader most sympathetic to Indian independence (as a dominion), preparing him for his role in deciding on independence in 1947.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] In May 1930, Labour MP Oswald Mosley left the party after its rejection of his proposals for solving the unemployment problem, and Attlee was given Mosley's post of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster . In March 1931, he became Postmaster General , a post he held for five months until August, when the Labour government fell , after failing to agree on how to tackle the financial crisis of the Great Depression .

[ 34 ] That month MacDonald and a few of his allies formed a National Government with the Conservatives and Liberals , leading them to be expelled from Labour. MacDonald offered Attlee a job in the National Government, but he turned down the offer and opted to stay loyal to the main Labour party.

[ 35 ] After Ramsay MacDonald formed the National Government, Labour was deeply divided. Attlee had long been close to MacDonald and now felt betrayed—as did most Labour politicians. During the course of the second Labour government, Attlee had become increasingly disillusioned with MacDonald, whom he came to regard as vain and incompetent, and of whom he later wrote scathingly in his autobiography. He would write: [ 36 ] In the old days I had looked up to MacDonald as a great leader. He had a fine presence and great oratorical power. The unpopular line which he took during the First World War seemed to mark him as a man of character. Despite his mishandling of the Red Letter episode, I had not appreciated his defects until he took office a second time. I then realised his reluctance to take positive action and noted with dismay his increasing vanity and snobbery, while his habit of telling me, a junior Minister, the poor opinion he had of all his Cabinet colleagues made an unpleasant impression. I had not, however, expected that he would perpetrate the greatest betrayal in the political history of this country ... The shock to the Party was very great, especially to the loyal workers of the rank-and-file who had made great sacrifices for these men.

Deputy Labour Leader [ edit ] The general election held in October 1931 proved disastrous for the Labour Party, which lost over 200 seats, returning only 52 MPs to Parliament. The vast majority of the party's senior figures, including the Leader Arthur Henderson , lost their seats. Attlee, however, narrowly retained his Limehouse seat, with his majority being slashed from 7,288 to just 551. He was one of only three Labour MPs who had experience of government to retain their seats, along with George Lansbury and Stafford Cripps . Accordingly, Lansbury was elected Leader unopposed, with Attlee as his deputy.

[ 37 ] Most of the remaining Labour MPs after 1931 were elderly trade-union officials who could not contribute much to debates; Lansbury was in his 70s, and Stafford Cripps – another main figure of the Labour front-bench who had entered Parliament in January 1931 – lacked parliamentary experience. As one of the most capable and experienced of the remaining Labour MPs, Attlee therefore shouldered a lot of the burden of providing an opposition to the National Government in the years 1931 to 1935 ; during this time he had to extend his knowledge of subjects which he had not studied in any depth before (such as finance and foreign affairs) in order to provide an effective opposition to the government.

[ 38 ] Attlee effectively served as Labour's acting-leader for nine months from December 1933, after Lansbury fractured his thigh in an accident; this raised Attlee's public profile considerably. It was during this period, however, that personal financial problems almost forced Attlee to quit politics altogether. His wife had become ill, and at that time there was no separate salary for the Leader of the Opposition . On the verge of resigning from Parliament, he was persuaded to stay by Stafford Cripps, a wealthy socialist, who agreed to make a donation to party funds to pay him an additional salary until Lansbury could take over again.

[ 39 ] During 1932–33 Attlee flirted with, and then drew back from radicalism – influenced by Stafford Cripps, who was then on the radical wing of the party. He was briefly a member of the Socialist League , which had been formed by former Independent Labour Party (ILP) members who opposed the ILP's disaffiliation from the main Labour Party in 1932. At one point he agreed with the proposition put forward by Cripps that gradual reform was inadequate and that a socialist government would have to pass an emergency powers act, allowing it to rule by decree to overcome any opposition by vested interests until it was safe to restore democracy. He admired Oliver Cromwell 's strong-armed rule and use of major generals to control England. After looking more closely at Hitler , Mussolini , Stalin , and even his former colleague Oswald Mosley (leader of the new blackshirt fascist movement in Britain), Attlee retreated from radicalism, distanced himself from the League, and argued instead that the Labour Party must adhere to constitutional methods and stand forthright for democracy and against totalitarianism either of the left or of the right. He always supported the crown , and as Prime Minister was close to King George VI .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Leader of the Opposition [ edit ] George Lansbury , a committed pacifist , resigned as the Leader of the Labour Party at the 1935 Party Conference on 8 October, after delegates voted in favour of sanctions against Italy for its aggression against Abyssinia . Lansbury had strongly opposed the policy, and felt unable to continue leading the party. Taking advantage of the disarray in the Labour Party, the Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin announced on 19 October that a general election would be held on 14 November. With no time for a leadership contest, the party agreed that Attlee should serve as interim leader, on the understanding that a leadership election would be held after the general election.

[ 42 ] Attlee therefore led Labour through the 1935 election , which saw the party stage a partial comeback from its disastrous 1931 performance, winning 38 per cent of the vote, the highest share Labour had won up to that point, and gaining over one hundred seats.

[ 43 ] Attlee stood in the subsequent leadership election , held soon afterward, where he was opposed by Herbert Morrison , who had just re-entered parliament in the recent election, and Arthur Greenwood : Morrison was seen as the favourite, but was distrusted by many sections of the party, especially the left wing. Arthur Greenwood meanwhile was a popular figure in the party; however, his leadership bid was severely hampered by his alcohol problem . Attlee was able to come across as a competent and unifying figure, particularly having already led the party through a general election. He went on to come first in both the first and second ballots, formally being elected Leader of the Labour Party on 3 December 1935.

[ 44 ] Throughout the 1920s and most of the 1930s, the Labour Party's official policy had been to oppose rearmament, instead supporting internationalism and collective security under the League of Nations .

[ 45 ] At the 1934 Labour Party Conference, Attlee declared that, "We have absolutely abandoned any idea of nationalist loyalty. We are deliberately putting a world order before our loyalty to our own country. We say we want to see put on the statute book something which will make our people citizens of the world before they are citizens of this country".

[ 46 ] During a debate on defence in Commons a year later, Attlee said "We are told (in the White Paper) that there is danger against which we have to guard ourselves. We do not think you can do it by national defence. We think you can only do it by moving forward to a new world. A world of law, the abolition of national armaments with a world force and a world economic system. I shall be told that that is quite impossible".

[ 47 ] Shortly after those comments, Adolf Hitler proclaimed that German rearmament offered no threat to world peace. Attlee responded the next day noting that Hitler's speech, although containing unfavourable references to the Soviet Union , created "A chance to call a halt in the armaments race ... We do not think that our answer to Herr Hitler should be just rearmament. We are in an age of rearmaments, but we on this side cannot accept that position".

[ 48 ] Attlee played little part in the events that would lead up to the abdication of Edward VIII , for despite Baldwin's threat to step down if Edward attempted to remain on the throne after marrying Wallis Simpson , Labour was widely accepted not to be a viable alternative government, owing to the National Government's overwhelming majority in the Commons. Attlee, along with Liberal leader Archibald Sinclair , was eventually consulted with by Baldwin on 24 November 1936, and Attlee agreed with both Baldwin and Sinclair that Edward could not remain on the throne, firmly eliminating any prospect of any alternative government forming were Baldwin to resign.

[ 49 ] In April 1936, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Neville Chamberlain , introduced a Budget which increased the amount spent on the armed forces. Attlee made a radio broadcast in opposition to it, saying: [The budget] was the natural expression of the character of the present Government. There was hardly any increase allowed for the services which went to build up the life of the people, education and health. Everything was devoted to piling up the instruments of death. The Chancellor expressed great regret that he should have to spend so much on armaments, but said that it was absolutely necessary and was due only to the actions of other nations. One would think to listen to him that the Government had no responsibility for the state of world affairs. [...] The Government has now resolved to enter upon an arms race, and the people will have to pay for their mistake in believing that it could be trusted to carry out a policy of peace. [...] This is a War Budget. We can look in the future for no advance in Social Legislation. All available resources are to be devoted to armaments.

[ 50 ] In June 1936, the Conservative MP Duff Cooper called for an Anglo-French alliance against possible German aggression and called for all parties to support one. Attlee condemned this: "We say that any suggestion of an alliance of this kind—an alliance in which one country is bound to another, right or wrong, by some overwhelming necessity—is contrary to the spirit of the League of Nations, is contrary to the Covenant, is contrary to Locarno is contrary to the obligations which this country has undertaken, and is contrary to the professed policy of this Government".

[ 51 ] At the Labour Party conference at Edinburgh in October Attlee reiterated that "There can be no question of our supporting the Government in its rearmament policy".

[ 52 ] However, with the rising threat from Nazi Germany , and the ineffectiveness of the League of Nations, this policy eventually lost credibility. By 1937, Labour had jettisoned its pacifist position and came to support rearmament and oppose Neville Chamberlain's policy of appeasement .

[ 53 ] However Attlee and the Labour Party strongly opposed conscription when it was passed in April 1939.

[ 54 ] Attlee with General José Miaja and other members of the General Staff and Popular Front Committee in Madrid , December 1937 At the end of 1937, Attlee and a party of three Labour MPs visited Spain and visited the British Battalion of the International Brigades fighting in the Spanish Civil War . One of the companies was named the "Major Attlee Company" in his honour.

[ 55 ] Attlee was supportive of the Republican government in Spain, and at the 1937 Labour conference moved the wider Labour Party towards opposing what he considered the "farce" of the Non-Intervention Committee organised by the British and French governments. In the House of Commons, Attlee stated, "I cannot understand the delusion that if Franco wins with Italian and German aid, he will immediately become independent. I think it is a ridiculous proposition." [ 56 ] Dalton, the Labour Party's spokesman on foreign policy, also thought that Franco would ally with Germany and Italy. However, Franco's subsequent behaviour proved it was not such a ridiculous proposition.

[ 57 ] As Dalton later acknowledged, Franco skilfully maintained Spanish neutrality, whereas Hitler would likely have occupied Spain if Franco had lost the Civil War.

[ 58 ] In 1938, Attlee opposed the Munich Agreement , in which Chamberlain negotiated with Hitler to give Germany the German-speaking parts of Czechoslovakia , the Sudetenland : We all feel relief that war has not come this time... we cannot, however, feel that peace has been established, but that we have nothing but an armistice in a state of war. We have been unable to go in for care-free rejoicing. We have felt that we are in the midst of a tragedy... [and] humiliation. This has not been a victory for reason and humanity. It has been a victory for brute force. At every stage of the proceedings there have been time limits laid down... [the] terms laid down as ultimata. We have seen to-day a gallant, civilised and democratic people betrayed and handed over to a ruthless despotism... The events of these last few days constitute one of the greatest diplomatic defeats that this country and France have ever sustained. There can be no doubt that it is a tremendous victory for Herr Hitler. Without firing a shot, by the mere display of military force, he has achieved a dominating position in Europe which Germany failed to win after four years of war. He has overturned the balance of power in Europe... [and] destroyed the last fortress of democracy in Eastern Europe which stood in the way of his ambition. He has opened his way to the food, the oil and the resources which he requires in order to consolidate his military power, and he has successfully defeated and reduced to impotence the forces that might have stood against the rule of violence.

[ 59 ] [...] The cause [of the crisis which we have undergone] was not the existence of minorities in Czechoslovakia; it was not that the position of the Sudeten Germans had become intolerable. It was not the wonderful principle of self-determination. It was because Herr Hitler had decided that the time was ripe for another step forward in his design to dominate Europe... The minorities question is no new one. [...] [And] short of a drastic and entire reshuffling of these populations there is no possible solution to the problem of minorities in Europe except toleration.

[ 60 ] However, the new Czechoslovakian state did not provide equal rights to the Slovaks and Sudeten Germans, [ 61 ] with the historian Arnold J. Toynbee already having noted that "for the Germans, Magyars and Poles, who account between them for more than one quarter of the whole population, the present regime in Czechoslovakia is not essentially different from the regimes in the surrounding countries".

[ 62 ] Anthony Eden in the Munich debate acknowledged that there had been "discrimination, even severe discrimination" against the Sudeten Germans.

[ 63 ] In 1937, Attlee wrote a book entitled The Labour Party in Perspective that sold fairly well in which he set out some of his views. He argued that there was no point in Labour compromising on its socialist principles in the belief that this would achieve electoral success. He wrote: "I find that the proposition often reduces itself to this – that if the Labour Party would drop its socialism and adopt a Liberal platform, many Liberals would be pleased to support it. I have heard it said more than once that if Labour would only drop its policy of nationalisation everyone would be pleased, and it would soon obtain a majority. I am convinced it would be fatal for the Labour Party." He also wrote that there was no point in "watering down Labour's socialist creed in order to attract new adherents who cannot accept the full socialist faith. On the contrary, I believe that it is only a clear and bold policy that will attract this support".

[ 64 ] In the late 1930s, Attlee sponsored a Jewish mother and her two children, enabling them to leave Germany in 1939 and move to the UK. On arriving in Britain, Attlee invited one of the children into his home in Stanmore , north-west London, where he stayed for several months.

[ 65 ] Deputy Prime Minister [ edit ] See also: Churchill war ministry Attlee as Lord Privy Seal, visiting a munitions factory in 1941 Attlee remained as Leader of the Opposition when the Second World War broke out in September 1939. The ensuing disastrous Norwegian campaign would result in a motion of no confidence in Neville Chamberlain .

[ 66 ] Although Chamberlain survived this, the reputation of his administration was so badly and publicly damaged that it became clear a coalition government would be necessary. Even if Attlee had personally been prepared to serve under Chamberlain in an emergency coalition government, he would never have been able to carry Labour with him. Consequently, Chamberlain tendered his resignation, and Labour and the Conservatives entered a coalition government led by Winston Churchill on 10 May 1940, [ 27 ] with Attlee joining the Cabinet as Lord Privy Seal on 12 May.

[ 67 ] Attlee and Churchill quickly agreed that the War Cabinet would consist of three Conservatives (initially Churchill, Chamberlain and Lord Halifax ) and two Labour members (initially himself and Arthur Greenwood ) and that Labour should have slightly more than one third of the posts in the coalition government.

[ 68 ] Attlee and Greenwood played a vital role in supporting Churchill during a series of War Cabinet debates over whether or not to negotiate peace terms with Hitler following the Fall of France in May 1940; both supported Churchill and gave him the majority he needed in the War Cabinet to continue Britain's resistance.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ page needed ] Only Attlee and Churchill remained in the War Cabinet from the formation of the Government of National Unity in May 1940 through to the election in May 1945. Attlee was initially the Lord Privy Seal, before becoming Britain's first ever Deputy Prime Minister in 1942, as well as becoming the Dominions Secretary [ 27 ] [ 70 ] [ page needed ] and Lord President of the Council on 28 September 1943.

[ 71 ] Attlee himself played a generally low key but vital role in the wartime government, working behind the scenes and in committees to ensure the smooth operation of government. In the coalition government , three inter-connected committees effectively ran the country. Churchill chaired the first two, the War cabinet and the Defence Committee, with Attlee deputising for him in these, and answering for the government in Parliament when Churchill was absent. Attlee himself instituted, and later chaired the third body, the Lord President's Committee , which was responsible for overseeing domestic affairs. As Churchill was most concerned with overseeing the war effort, this arrangement suited both men. Attlee himself had largely been responsible for creating these arrangements with Churchill's backing, streamlining the machinery of government and abolishing many committees. He also acted as a conciliator in the government, smoothing over tensions which frequently arose between Labour and Conservative Ministers.

[ 72 ] [ 27 ] [ 73 ] Many Labour activists were baffled by the top leadership role for a man they regarded as having little charisma; Beatrice Webb wrote in her diary in early 1940: He looked and spoke like an insignificant elderly clerk, without distinction in the voice, manner or substance of his discourse. To realise that this little nonentity is the Parliamentary Leader of the Labour Party ... and presumably the future P.M. [Prime Minister] is pitiable".

[ 74 ] Attlee meeting King George VI following Labour's 1945 election victory 1945 election [ edit ] Main article: 1945 United Kingdom general election Following the defeat of Nazi Germany and the end of the War in Europe in May 1945, Attlee and Churchill favoured the coalition government remaining in place until Japan had been defeated. However, Herbert Morrison made it clear that the Labour Party would not be willing to accept this, and Churchill was forced to tender his resignation as Prime Minister and call an immediate election.

[ 27 ] The war had set in motion profound social changes within Britain and had ultimately led to a widespread popular desire for social reform . This mood was epitomised in the Beveridge Report of 1942, by the Liberal economist William Beveridge . The Report assumed that the maintenance of full employment would be the aim of post-war governments, and that this would provide the basis for the welfare state . Immediately upon its release, it sold hundreds of thousands of copies. All major parties committed themselves to fulfilling this aim, but most historians say that Attlee's Labour Party was seen by the electorate as the party most likely to follow it through.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Labour campaigned on the theme of "Let Us Face the Future", positioning themselves as the party best placed to rebuild Britain following the war, [ 77 ] and were widely viewed as having run a strong and positive campaign, while the Conservative campaign centred entirely on Churchill.

[ 76 ] Despite opinion polls indicating a strong Labour lead, opinion polls were then viewed as a novelty which had not proven their worth, and most commentators expected that Churchill's prestige and status as a "war hero" would ensure a comfortable Conservative victory.

[ 76 ] Before polling day, The Manchester Guardian surmised that "the chances of Labour sweeping the country and obtaining a clear majority ... are pretty remote".

[ 78 ] [ page needed ] The News of the World predicted a working Conservative majority, while in Glasgow a pundit forecast the result as Conservatives 360, Labour 220, Others 60.

[ 79 ] Churchill, however, made some costly errors during the campaign. In particular, his suggestion during one radio broadcast that a future Labour Government would require "some form of a gestapo" to implement their policies was widely regarded as being in very bad taste and massively backfired.

[ 27 ] When the results of the election were announced on 26 July, they came as a surprise to most, including Attlee himself. Labour had won power by a huge landslide, winning 49.7 per cent of the vote to the Conservatives' 36.2 per cent.

[ 80 ] This gave them 393 seats in the House of Commons, a working majority of 146. This was the first time in history that the Labour Party had won a majority in Parliament .

[ 81 ] When Attlee went to see King George VI at Buckingham Palace to be appointed Prime Minister, the notoriously laconic Attlee and the famously tongue-tied King stood in silence; Attlee finally volunteered the remark, "I've won the election". The King replied "I know. I heard it on the Six O'Clock News".

[ 82 ] Prime Minister [ edit ] Main article: Attlee ministry See also: Post-war Britain (1945–1979) Attlee in 1950 Premiership of Clement Attlee 26 July 1945 – 26 October 1951 Monarch George VI Cabinet Attlee ministry Party Labour Election 1945 1950 Seat 10 Downing Street ← Winston Churchill Winston Churchill → Coat of Arms of HM Government Domestic policy [ edit ] Francis (1995) argues there was consensus both in the Labour's national executive committee and at party conferences on a definition of socialism that stressed moral improvement as well as material improvement. The Attlee government was committed to rebuilding British society as an ethical commonwealth, using public ownership and controls to abolish extremes of wealth and poverty. Labour's ideology contrasted sharply with the contemporary Conservative Party's defence of individualism, inherited privileges, and income inequality.

[ 83 ] On 5 July 1948, Clement Attlee replied to a letter dated 22 June from James Murray and ten other MPs who raised concerns about West Indians who arrived on board the HMT Empire Windrush .

[ 84 ] As for the prime minister himself, he was not much focused on economic policy, letting others handle the issues.

[ 85 ] Nationalisation [ edit ] Attlee's government also carried out their manifesto commitment for nationalisation of basic industries and public utilities. The Bank of England and civil aviation were nationalised in 1946.

Coal mining , the railways , road haulage, canals and Cable and Wireless were nationalised in 1947, and electricity and gas followed in 1948. The steel industry was nationalised in 1951. By 1951 about 20 per cent of the British economy had been taken into public ownership .

[ 86 ] Nationalisation failed to provide workers with a greater say in the running of the industries in which they worked. It did, however, bring about significant material gains for workers in the form of higher wages, reduced working hours, [ 87 ] and improvements in working conditions, especially in regards to safety.

[ 88 ] As historian Eric Shaw noted of the years following nationalisation, the electricity and gas supply companies became "impressive models of public enterprise" in terms of efficiency, and the National Coal Board was not only profitable, but working conditions for miners had significantly improved as well.

[ 89 ] Within a few years of nationalisation, a number of progressive measures had been carried out which did much to improve conditions in the mines, including better pay, a five-day working week, a national safety scheme (with proper standards at all the collieries), a ban on boys under the age of 16 going underground, the introduction of training for newcomers before going down to the coalface, and the making of pithead baths into a standard facility.

[ 90 ] The newly established National Coal Board offered sick pay and holiday pay to miners.

[ 91 ] As noted by Martin Francis : Union leaders saw nationalisation as a means to pursue a more advantageous position within a framework of continued conflict, rather than as an opportunity to replace the old adversarial form of industrial relations. Moreover, most workers in nationalised industries exhibited an essentially instrumentalist attitude, favouring public ownership because it secured job security and improved wages rather than because it promised the creation of a new set of socialist relationships in the workplace.

[ 92 ] [ page needed ] Health [ edit ] Trafford General Hospital , known as the birthplace of the NHS Attlee's Health Minister , Aneurin Bevan , fought hard against the general disapproval of the medical establishment, including the British Medical Association , by creating the National Health Service in 1948. This was a publicly funded healthcare system, which offered treatment for all, regardless of income, free of charge at the point of use. Reflecting pent-up demand that had long existed for medical services, the NHS treated some 8.5 million dental patients and dispensed more than 5 million pairs of spectacles during its first year of operation.

[ 93 ] [ page needed ] Consultants benefited from the new system by being paid salaries that provided an acceptable standard of living without the need for them to resort to private practice.

[ 94 ] [ page needed ] The NHS brought major improvements in the health of working-class people, with deaths from diphtheria, pneumonia, and tuberculosis significantly reduced.

[ 95 ] [ page needed ] Although there were often disputes about its organisation and funding, British political parties continued to voice their general support for the NHS in order to remain electable.

[ 96 ] In the field of health care, funds were allocated to modernisation and extension schemes aimed at improving administrative efficiency. Improvements were made in nursing accommodation in order to recruit more nurses and reduce labour shortages which were keeping 60,000 beds out of use, and efforts were made to reduce the imbalance "between an excess of fever and tuberculosis (TB) beds and a shortage of maternity beds".

[ 97 ] [ page needed ] BCG vaccinations were introduced for the protection of medical students, midwives, nurses, and contacts of patients with tuberculosis, [ 98 ] a pension scheme was set up for employees of the newly established NHS, [ 99 ] The National Health Service (Superannuation) Regulations 1947 laid down a number of provisions for beneficiaries including an officer's pension and retiring allowance, an injury allowance,  a short service gratuity,  a death gratuity, a widow's pension, and supplementary payments in the case of special classes of officers. Provision was also made for the allocation of part of pension or injury allowance to spouse of dependent.

[ 100 ] The Radioactive Substances Act 1948 set out general provisions to control radioactive substances.

[ 101 ] Numerous lesser reforms were also introduced, some of which were of great benefit to certain segments of British society, such as the mentally deficient and the blind.

[ 102 ] [ page needed ] Between 1948 and 1951, Attlee's government increased spending on health from £6 billion to £11 billion: an increase of over 80%, and from 2.1% to 3.6% of GDP.

[ 103 ] Welfare [ edit ] The government set about implementing the Wartime plans of William Beveridge 's plans for the creation of a 'cradle to grave' welfare state , and set in place an entirely new system of social security . Among the most important pieces of legislation was the National Insurance Act 1946 , in which people in work paid a flat rate of national insurance . In return, they (and the wives of male contributors) were eligible for flat-rate pensions, sickness benefit, unemployment benefit, and funeral benefit.

[ 86 ] Various provisions were included in the National Insurance Act 1946 including unemployment and sickness benefit, maternity grant and attendance allowance, maternity allowance, widow's benefit, widow's pensions in special cases,  guardian's allowance, retirement pension, and death grant.

[ 104 ] Various other pieces of legislation provided for child benefit and support for people with no other source of income.

[ 86 ] In 1949, unemployment, sickness and maternity benefits were exempted from taxation.

[ 105 ] A block grant introduced in 1948 helped the social services provided by local authorities.

[ 106 ] [ page needed ] Personal Social Services or welfare services were developed in 1948 for individual and families in general, particularly special groups such as the mentally disordered, deprived children, the elderly, and the handicapped.

[ 107 ] [ page needed ] The Attlee Government increased pensions and other benefits, with pensions raised to become more of a living income than they had ever been. War pensions and allowances (for both World Wars) were increased by an act of 1946 [ which?

] which gave the wounded man with an allowance for his wife and children if he married after he had been wounded, thereby removing a grievance of more than twenty years standing.

[ 108 ] [ page needed ] Other improvements were made in war pensions during Attlee's tenure as prime minister. A Constant Attendance Allowance was tripled, an Unemployability Allowance was tripled from 10s to 30s a week, and a special hardship allowance of up to £1 a week was introduced. In addition, the 1951 Budget made further improvements in the supplementary allowances for many war pensioners. From 1945 onwards, three out of every four pension claims had been successful, whilst after the First World War only one pension claim in three was allowed.

[ 109 ] Under the Superannuation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1948, employees of a body representative of local authorities or of the officers of local authorities could be admitted "on suitable terms to the superannuation fund of a local authority".

[ 110 ] In 1951, a comforts allowance was introduced that was automatically paid to war pensioners "receiving unemployability supplement and constant attendance allowance".

[ 111 ] The Personal injuries (Civilians) Scheme of 1947 included various benefits such as  an exceptional maximum rate of constant attendance allowance of 40s a week, and an allowance for wear and tear of clothing caused by the use of artificial limbs and appliances. In addition, allowances payable while a pensioner underwent inpatient treatment "are normally no longer subject to a deduction in respect of decreased home expenditure." Various changes were also made in respect of gainfully employed persons who sustained war injuries and civil defence volunteers who war service injuries. These included the provision of allowances for the wife and children for injured persons receiving injury allowance or disablement pension, amendments to the provisions for an allowance to a pensioner deemed unemployable by reason of his pensioned disablement "to secure that he receives in the aggregate by way of unemployability allowance and any social service benefits for which he is eligible at least 20s. a week in addition to his pension," increases in the allowance payable for a wife of a person receiving treatment allowance, unemployability allowance or injury allowance under certain conditions and "if no allowance is payable for a wife, an allowance may be granted for a dependant adult," and  a social hardship allowance for partially disabled men "who, though not unemployable, is prevented by his pensioned disablement from resuming his former occupation or taking up one of equivalent standard." Also, "Where a man dies as the direct result of a qualifying injury his widow may be awarded a pension (with allowances for his children) without regard to the date of marriage." [ 112 ] A more extensive system of social welfare benefits [ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] had been established by the Attlee Government, which did much to reduce acute social deprivation. The cumulative impact of the Attlee's Government's health and welfare policies was such that all the indices of health (such as statistics of school medical or dental officers, or of medical officers of health) showed signs of improvement, with continual improvements in survival rates for infants and increased life expectancy for the elderly.

[ 106 ] The success of the Attlee Government's welfare legislation in reducing poverty was such that, in the general election of 1950, according to one study, "Labour propaganda could make much of the claim that social security had eradicated the most abject destitution of the 1930s".

[ 93 ] [ page needed ] Education [ edit ] The Attlee government ensured provisions of the Education Act 1944 were fully implemented, with free secondary education becoming a right for the first time. Fees in state grammar schools were eliminated, while new, modern secondary schools were constructed.

[ 116 ] [ page needed ] The school leaving age was raised to 15 in 1947, an accomplishment helped brought into fruition by initiatives such as the HORSA ("Huts Operation for Raising the School-leaving Age") scheme and the S.F.O.R.S.A. (furniture) scheme.

[ 117 ] University scholarships were introduced to ensure that no one who was qualified "should be deprived of a university education for financial reasons", [ 118 ] while a large school building programme was organised.

[ 119 ] A rapid increase in the number of trained teachers took place, and the number of new school places was increased.

[ 120 ] Under the Education Act of 1946 [ 121 ] and the Education (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1948, [ 122 ] local authorities were empowered to provide clothing to pupils.

Increased Treasury funds were made available for education, particularly for upgrading school buildings suffering from years of neglect and war damage.

[ 123 ] [ page needed ] Prefabricated classrooms were built, and 928 new primary schools were constructed between 1945 and 1950. The provision of free school meals was expanded, and opportunities for university entrants were increased.

[ 124 ] [ page needed ] State scholarships to universities were increased, [ 125 ] [ page needed ] and the government adopted a policy of supplementing university scholarships awards to a level sufficient to cover fees plus maintenance.

[ 117 ] Many thousands of ex-servicemen were assisted to go through college who could never have contemplated it before the war.

[ 126 ] Free milk was also made available to all schoolchildren for the first time.

[ 127 ] [ page needed ] In addition, spending on technical education rose, and the number of nursery schools was increased.

[ 128 ] Salaries for teachers were also improved, and funds were allocated towards improving existing schools.

[ 129 ] [ page needed ] In 1947 the Arts Council of Great Britain was set up to encourage the arts.

[ 130 ] The Ministry of Education was established under the 1944 Act, and free County Colleges were set up for the compulsory part-time instruction of teenagers between the ages of 15 and 18 who were not in full-time education.

[ 131 ] [ page needed ] An Emergency Training Scheme was also introduced which turned out an extra 25,000 teachers in 1945–1951.

[ 132 ] In 1947, Regional Advisory Councils were set up to bring together industry and education to find out the needs of young workers "and advise on the provision required, and to secure reasonable economy of provision".

[ 133 ] [ page needed ] That same year, thirteen Area Training Organisations were set up in England and one in Wales to coordinate teacher training.

[ 134 ] Attlee's government, however, failed to introduce the comprehensive education for which many socialists had hoped. This reform was eventually carried out by Harold Wilson 's government. During its time in office, the Attlee government increased spending on education by over 50 per cent, from £6.5 billion to £10 billion.

[ 135 ] Economy [ edit ] Petticoat Lane Market in London, 1947 The most significant problem facing Attlee and his ministers remained the economy, as the war effort had left Britain nearly bankrupt.

[ 136 ] Overseas investments had been used up to pay for the war. The transition to a peacetime economy, and the maintaining of strategic military commitments abroad led to continuous and severe problems with the balance of trade . This resulted in strict rationing of food and other essential goods continuing in the post war period to force a reduction in consumption in an effort to limit imports, boost exports, and stabilise the Pound Sterling so that Britain could trade its way out of its financial state.

[ 137 ] The abrupt end of the American Lend-Lease programme in August 1945 almost caused a crisis. Some relief was provided by the Anglo-American loan , negotiated in December 1945. The conditions attached to the loan included making the pound fully convertible to the US dollar. When this was introduced in July 1947, it led to a currency crisis and convertibility had to be suspended after just five weeks.

[ 86 ] The UK benefited from the American Marshall Aid program in 1948, and the economic situation improved significantly. Another balance of payments crisis in 1949 forced Chancellor of the Exchequer, Stafford Cripps , into devaluation of the pound.

[ 86 ] Despite these problems, one of the main achievements of Attlee's government was the maintenance of near full employment . The government maintained most of the wartime controls over the economy, including control over the allocation of materials and manpower, and unemployment rarely rose above 500,000, or 3 per cent of the total workforce.

[ 86 ] Labour shortages proved a more frequent problem. The inflation rate was also kept low during his term.

[ 89 ] The rate of unemployment rarely rose above 2 per cent during Attlee's time in office, whilst there was no hard-core of long-term unemployed. Both production and productivity rose as a result of new equipment, while the average working week was shortened.

[ 138 ] [ page needed ] The government was less successful in housing, which was the responsibility of Aneurin Bevan . The government had a target to build 400,000 new houses a year to replace those which had been destroyed in the war, but shortages of materials and manpower meant that less than half this number were built. Nevertheless, millions of people were rehoused as a result of the Attlee government's housing policies. Between August 1945 and December 1951, 1,016,349 new homes were completed in England, Scotland, and Wales.

[ 139 ] When the Attlee government was voted out of office in 1951, the economy had been improved compared to 1945. The period from 1946 to 1951 saw continuous full employment and steadily rising living standards, which increased by about 10 per cent each year. During that same period, the economy grew by 3 per cent a year, and by 1951 the UK had "the best economic performance in Europe, while output per person was increasing faster than in the United States".

[ 140 ] [ page needed ] Careful planning after 1945 also ensured that demobilisation was carried out without having a negative impact upon economic recovery, and that unemployment stayed at very low levels.

[ 123 ] [ page needed ] In addition, the number of motor cars on the roads rose from 3 million to 5 million from 1945 to 1951, and seaside holidays were taken by far more people than ever before.

[ 141 ] A Monopolies and Restrictive Practices (Inquiry and Control) Act was passed in 1948, which allowed for investigations of restrictive practices and monopolies.

[ 110 ] However, some economic historians have argued that the UK failed to develop economically after the war, with failure to support industry leaving the economy not recovering as effectively as Germany.

[ 137 ] [ 142 ] [ 143 ] [ 144 ] Energy [ edit ] 1947 proved a particularly difficult year for the government; an exceptionally cold winter that year caused coal mines to freeze and cease production, creating widespread power cuts and food shortages. The Minister of Fuel and Power , Emanuel Shinwell was widely blamed for failing to ensure adequate coal stocks, and soon resigned from his post. The Conservatives capitalised on the crisis with the slogan 'Starve with Strachey and shiver with Shinwell' (referring to the Minister of Food John Strachey ).

[ 145 ] The crisis led to an unsuccessful plot by Hugh Dalton to replace Attlee as Prime Minister with Ernest Bevin . Later that year Stafford Cripps tried to persuade Attlee to stand aside for Bevin. These plots petered out after Bevin refused to cooperate. Later that year, Dalton resigned as Chancellor after inadvertently leaking details of the budget to a journalist. He was replaced by Cripps.

[ 146 ] Foreign policy [ edit ] In foreign affairs, the Attlee government was concerned with four main issues: post-war Europe, the onset of the Cold War, the establishment of the United Nations, and decolonisation. The first two were closely related, and Attlee was assisted by Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin . Attlee also attended the later stages of the Potsdam Conference , where he negotiated with President Harry S. Truman and Joseph Stalin .

Attlee shaking hands with US Secretary of State James F. Byrnes upon his arrival at National Airport in Washington, 1945 Attlee with Harry S. Truman and Joseph Stalin at the Potsdam Conference , 1945 In the immediate aftermath of the war, the Government faced the challenge of managing relations with Britain's former war-time ally, Stalin and the Soviet Union . Ernest Bevin was a passionate anti-communist , based largely on his experience of fighting communist influence in the trade union movement. Bevin's initial approach to the USSR as Foreign Secretary was "wary and suspicious, but not automatically hostile".

[ 139 ] Attlee himself sought warm relations with Stalin. He put his trust in the United Nations, rejected notions that the Soviet Union was bent on world conquest, and warned that treating Moscow as an enemy would turn it into one. This put Attlee at sword's point with his foreign minister, the Foreign Office, and the military who all saw the Soviets as a growing threat to Britain's role in the Middle East. Suddenly in January 1947, Attlee reversed his position and agreed with Bevin on a hardline anti-Soviet policy.

[ 147 ] In an early "good-will" gesture that was later heavily criticised, the Attlee government allowed the Soviets to purchase, under the terms of a 1946 UK-USSR Trade agreement , a total of 25 Rolls-Royce Nene jet engines in September 1947 and March 1948. The agreement included an agreement not to use them for military purposes. The price was fixed under a commercial contract; a total of 55 jet engines were sold to the USSR in 1947.

[ 148 ] However, the Cold War intensified during this period and the Soviets, who at the time were well behind the West in jet technology, reverse-engineered the Nene and installed their own version in the MiG-15 interceptor. This was used to good effect against US-UK forces in the subsequent Korean War , as well as in several later MiG models.

[ 149 ] After Stalin took political control of most of Eastern Europe, and began to subvert other governments in the Balkans, Attlee's and Bevin's worst fears of Soviet intentions were realised. The Attlee government then became instrumental in the creation of the successful NATO defence alliance to protect Western Europe against any Soviet expansion.

[ 150 ] In a crucial contribution to the economic stability of post-war Europe, Attlee's Cabinet was instrumental in promoting the American Marshall Plan for the economic recovery of Europe. He called it one of the "most bold, enlightened and good-natured acts in the history of nations".

[ 151 ] A group of Labour MPs, organised under the banner of " Keep Left ", urged the government to steer a middle way between the two emerging superpowers, and advocated the creation of a "third force" of European powers to stand between the US and USSR. However, deteriorating relations between Britain and the USSR, as well as Britain's economic reliance on America following the Marshall Plan, steered policy towards supporting the US.

[ 86 ] In January 1947, fear of both Soviet and American nuclear intentions led to a secret meeting of the Cabinet, where the decision was made to press ahead with the development of Britain's independent nuclear deterrent , an issue which later caused a split in the Labour Party. Britain's first successful nuclear test, however, did not occur until 1952, one year after Attlee had left office.

[ 86 ] The London dock strike of July 1949, led by Communists, was suppressed when the Attlee government sent in 13,000 Army troops and passed special legislation to promptly end the strike. His response reveals Attlee's growing concern that Soviet expansionism, supported by the Communist Party of Britain , was a genuine threat to national security, and that the docks were highly vulnerable to sabotage ordered by Moscow. He noted that the strike was caused not by local grievances, but to help communist unions who were on strike in Canada. Attlee agreed with MI5 that he faced "a very present menace".

[ 152 ] Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin (left) with Attlee in 1945 Decolonisation [ edit ] Decolonisation was never a major election issue, but Attlee gave the matter a great deal of attention and was the chief leader in beginning the process of decolonisation of the British Empire .

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] East Asia [ edit ] In August 1948, the Chinese Communists' victories caused Attlee to begin preparing for a Communist takeover of China. It kept open consulates in Communist-controlled areas and rejected the Chinese Nationalists' requests that British citizens assist in the defence of Shanghai. By December, the government concluded that although British property in China would likely be nationalised, British traders would benefit in the long run from a stable, industrialising Communist China. Retaining Hong Kong was especially important to him; although the Chinese Communists promised to not interfere with its rule, Britain reinforced the Hong Kong Garrison during 1949. When the victorious Chinese Communists government declared on 1 October 1949 that it would exchange diplomats with any country that ended relations with the Chinese Nationalists, Britain became the first western country to formally recognise the People's Republic of China in January 1950.

[ 155 ] In 1954, a Labour Party delegation including Attlee visited China at the invitation of then Foreign Minister Zhou Enlai . Attlee became the first high-ranking western politician to meet Mao Zedong .

[ 156 ] South Asia [ edit ] Attlee orchestrated the granting of independence to India and Pakistan in 1947. Attlee in 1928–1934 had been a member of the Indian Statutory Commission (otherwise known as the Simon Commission). He became the Labour Party expert on India and by 1934 was committed to granting India the same independent dominion status that Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa had recently been given .

[ 157 ] He faced strong resistance from the die-hard Conservative imperialists, led by Churchill, who opposed both independence and efforts led by Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin to set up a system of limited local control by Indians themselves.

[ 158 ] Attlee and the Labour leadership were sympathetic to both the Indian National Congress led by Jawaharlal Nehru and the Pakistan movement led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah . During the Second World War, Attlee was in charge of Indian affairs. He set up the Cripps Mission in 1942, which tried and failed to bring the factions together and unite behind the war effort. When Gandhi and Congress called for passive resistance in the Quit India movement of 1942–1945, the British government ordered the widespread arrest and internment for the duration of tens of thousands of Congress leaders as part of its efforts to crush the revolt.

[ 159 ] Labour's election Manifesto in 1945 called for "the advancement of India to responsible self-government".

[ 160 ] Attlee did not object.

[ 161 ] By contrast, the Muslim League , led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah, strongly supported the war effort. They greatly enlarged their membership and won favour from London for their decision. Attlee retained a fondness for Congress and until 1946, accepted their thesis that they were a non-religious party that accepted Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, and everyone else.

[ 162 ] Nevertheless, this difference in opinion between the Congress and the Muslim League towards the British war effort encouraged Attlee and his government to consider further negotiations with the Muslim League.

The Muslim League insisted that it was the only true representative of all of the Muslims of India. With violence escalating in India after the war, but with British financial power at a low ebb, large-scale military involvement was impossible. Viceroy Archibald Wavell said he needed a further seven army divisions to prevent communal violence if independence negotiations failed. No divisions were available; independence was the only option.

[ 163 ] Given the increasing demands of the Muslim League, independence implied a partition that set off heavily Muslim Pakistan from the main portion of India.

[ 164 ] After becoming Prime Minister in 1945 Attlee originally planned to give India dominion status in 1948.

[ 165 ] Attlee suggested in his memoirs that "traditional" colonial rule in Asia was no longer viable. He said that he expected it to meet renewed opposition after the war both by local national movements as well as by the United States.

[ 166 ] The prime minister's biographer John Bew says that Attlee hoped for a transition to a multilateral world order and a Commonwealth , and that the old British Empire "should not be supported beyond its natural lifespan" and instead be ended "on the right note." His exchequer Hugh Dalton meanwhile feared that post-war Britain could no longer afford to garrison its empire.

[ 167 ] Ultimately the Labour government gave full independence to India and Pakistan in 1947 through the Indian Independence Act . This involved creating a demarcation between the two regions which was known as the Radcliffe Line . The boundary between the newly created states of Pakistan and India involved the widespread resettlement of millions of Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims. Almost immediately, extreme anti-Hindu and anti-Sikh violence ensued in Lahore , Multan and Dacca when the Punjab province and the Bengal province were split in the Partition of India . This was followed by a rapid increase in widespread anti-Muslim violence in several areas including Amritsar , Rajkot , Jaipur , Calcutta and Delhi . Historian Yasmin Khan estimates that over a million people were killed of which several were women and children.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] Gandhi himself was assassinated in January 1948.

[ 170 ] Attlee remarked Gandhi as the "greatest citizen" of India and added, "this one man has been the major factor in every consideration of the Indian problem. He had become the expression of the aspirations of the Indian people for independence".

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] [ 173 ] Historian Andrew Roberts says the independence of India was a "national humiliation" but it was necessitated by urgent financial, administrative, strategic and political needs.

[ 174 ] Churchill in 1940–1945 had tightened the hold on India and imprisoned the Congress leadership, with Attlee's approval. Labour had looked forward to making it a fully independent dominion like Canada or Australia. Many of the Congress leaders in the India had studied in England, and were highly regarded as fellow idealistic socialists by Labour leaders. Attlee was the Labour expert on India and took special charge of decolonisation.

[ 175 ] Attlee found that Churchill's viceroy, Field Marshal Wavell, was too imperialistic, too keen on military solutions, and too neglectful of Indian political alignments.

[ 176 ] The eventual appointee for new viceroy, Lord Mountbatten , the dashing war hero and a cousin of the King, was put forward by V. K. Krishna Menon as a candidate acceptable to all, in a series of clandestine meetings with Sir Stafford Scripps, and with Attlee.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] Attlee also sponsored the peaceful transition to independence in 1948 of Burma (Myanmar) and Ceylon (Sri Lanka).

[ 179 ] Palestine [ edit ] VE Day celebrations in British-controlled Jerusalem (1945) One of the most urgent problems facing Attlee concerned the future of the British mandate in Palestine , which had become too troublesome and expensive to handle. British policies in Palestine were perceived by the Zionist movement and the Truman administration to be pro-Arab and anti-Jewish, and Britain soon found itself unable to maintain public order in the face of a Jewish insurgency and a civil war .

During this period, 70,000 Holocaust survivors attempted to reach Palestine as part of the Aliyah Bet refugee movement. Attlee's government tried several tactics to prevent the migration.

[ 180 ] Five ships were bombed by the Secret Intelligence Service (though with no casualties) with a fake Palestinian group created to take responsibility.

[ 181 ] The navy apprehended over 50,000 refugees en route, interning them in detention camps in Cyprus . Conditions in the camps were harsh and faced global criticism. Later, the refugee ship Exodus 1947 would be sent back to mainland Europe, instead of being taken to Cyprus.

[ 180 ] In response to the increasingly unpopular mandate, Attlee ordered the evacuation of all British military personnel and handed over the issue to the United Nations, a decision which was widely supported by the general public in Britain.

[ 182 ] With the establishment of the state of Israel in 1948, the camps in Cyprus were eventually closed, with their former occupants finally completing their journey to the new country.

[ 180 ] Attlee remained hostile to Israel years after its establishment. In 1958, describing the Israelis as extremely aggressive against the neighbouring Arab states and describing the Balfour Declaration as a mistake.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Africa [ edit ] The government's policies with regard to the other colonies, particularly those in Africa, focused on keeping them as strategic Cold War assets while modernising their economies. The Labour Party had long attracted aspiring leaders from Africa and had developed elaborate plans before the war. Implementing them overnight with an empty treasury proved too challenging.

[ 185 ] A major military base was built in Kenya , and the African colonies came under an unprecedented degree of direct control from London. Development schemes were implemented to help solve Britain's post-war balance of payments crisis and raise African living standards. This "new colonialism" worked slowly, and had failures such as the Tanganyika groundnut scheme .

[ 186 ] Elections [ edit ] The 1950 election gave Labour a massively reduced majority of five seats compared to the triple-digit majority of 1945. Although re-elected, the result was seen by Attlee as very disappointing, and was widely attributed to the effects of post-war austerity denting Labour's appeal to middle-class voters.

[ 187 ] With such a small majority leaving him dependent on a small number of MPs to govern, Attlee's second term was much tamer than his first. Some major reforms were nevertheless passed, particularly regarding industry in urban areas and regulations to limit air and water pollution.

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] By 1951, the Attlee government was exhausted, with several of its most senior ministers ailing or ageing, and with a lack of new ideas.

[ 190 ] Attlee's record for settling internal differences in the Labour Party fell in April 1951, when there was a damaging split over an austerity Budget brought in by the Chancellor, Hugh Gaitskell , to pay for the cost of Britain's participation in the Korean War .

Aneurin Bevan resigned to protest against the new charges for "teeth and spectacles" in the National Health Service introduced by that Budget, and was joined in this action by several senior ministers, including the future Prime Minister Harold Wilson , then the President of the Board of Trade . Thus escalated a battle between the left and right wings of the Party that continues today.

[ 191 ] Finding it increasingly impossible to govern, Attlee's only chance was to call a snap election in October 1951, in the hope of achieving a more workable majority and to regain authority.

[ 192 ] The gamble failed: Labour narrowly lost to the Conservative Party, despite winning considerably more votes (achieving the largest Labour vote in electoral history). Attlee tendered his resignation as Prime Minister the following day, after six years and three months in office.

[ 193 ] Return to opposition [ edit ] Following the defeat in 1951, Attlee continued to lead the party as Leader of the Opposition. His last four years as leader were, however, widely seen as one of the Labour Party's weaker periods.

[ 86 ] The period was dominated by infighting between the Labour Party's right wing, led by Hugh Gaitskell , and its left, led by Aneurin Bevan . Many Labour MPs felt that Attlee should have retired following 1951 election and allowed a younger man to lead the party. Bevan openly called for him to stand down in the summer of 1954.

[ 194 ] One of his main reasons for staying on as leader was to frustrate the leadership ambitions of Herbert Morrison , whom Attlee disliked for both political and personal reasons.

[ 86 ] At one time, Attlee had favoured Aneurin Bevan to succeed him as leader, but this became problematic after Bevan almost irrevocably split the party.

[ 195 ] Attlee, now aged 72, contested the 1955 general election against Anthony Eden , which saw Labour lose 18 seats, and the Conservatives increase their majority.

In an interview with the News Chronicle columnist Percy Cudlipp in mid-September 1955, Attlee made clear his own thinking together with his preference for the leadership succession, stating: Labour has nothing to gain by dwelling in the past. Nor do I think we can impress the nation by adopting a futile left-wingism. I regard myself as Left of Centre which is where a Party Leader ought to be. It is no use asking, 'What would Keir Hardie have done?' We must have at the top men brought up in the present age, not, as I was, in the Victorian Age.

[ 196 ] He retired as Leader of the Labour Party on 7 December 1955, having led the party for twenty years, and on 14 December Hugh Gaitskell was elected as his successor.

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] Global policy [ edit ] He was one of the signatories of the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution .

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] As a result, for the first time in human history, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt a Constitution for the Federation of Earth .

[ 201 ] Attlee was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1954 for his support of the League of Nations and the United Nations , and received further nominations in 1955 and 1964, but was unsuccessful on each occasion.

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] Retirement [ edit ] Attlee with John F. Kennedy in 1961 He subsequently retired from the House of Commons and was elevated to the peerage as Earl Attlee and Viscount Prestwood on 16 December 1955, [ 80 ] taking his seat in the House of Lords on 25 January.

[ 204 ] He believed Eden had been forced into taking a strong stand on the Suez Crisis by his backbenchers.

[ 205 ] In 1958, Attlee, along with numerous notables, established the Homosexual Law Reform Society : this campaigned for the decriminalisation of homosexual acts in private by consenting adults, a reform that was voted through Parliament nine years later.

[ 206 ] In May 1961, he travelled to Washington, D.C., to meet with President Kennedy .

[ 207 ] In 1962, he spoke twice in the House of Lords against the British government's application for the UK to join the European Communities ("Common Market"). In his second speech delivered in November, Attlee claimed that Britain had a separate parliamentary tradition from the Continental European countries that comprised the EC. He also claimed that if Britain became a member, EC rules would prevent the British government from planning the economy and that Britain's traditional policy had been outward-looking rather than Continental.

[ 208 ] He attended Winston Churchill's funeral in January 1965. He was frail by that time, and had to remain seated in the freezing cold as the coffin was carried, having tired himself out by standing at the rehearsal the previous day. He lived to see the Labour Party return to power under Harold Wilson in 1964, and also to see his old constituency of Walthamstow West fall to the Conservatives in a by-election in September 1967 .

[ 209 ] Death [ edit ] Attlee died peacefully in his sleep of pneumonia , at the age of 84 at Westminster Hospital on 8 October 1967.

[ 195 ] Two thousand people attended his funeral in November, including the then-Prime Minister Harold Wilson and the Duke of Kent , representing the Queen . He was cremated and his ashes were buried at Westminster Abbey .

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] Upon his death, the title passed to his son Martin Richard Attlee, 2nd Earl Attlee (1927–1991), who defected from Labour to the SDP in 1981. It is now held by Clement Attlee's grandson John Richard Attlee, 3rd Earl Attlee . The third earl (a member of the Conservative Party ) retained his seat in the Lords as one of the hereditary peers to remain under an amendment to Labour's House of Lords Act 1999 .

[ 212 ] Attlee's estate was sworn for probate purposes at a value of £7,295, [ 213 ] (equivalent to £167,246 in 2023 [ 7 ] ) a relatively modest sum for so prominent a figure, and only a fraction of the £75,394 in his father's estate when he died in 1908.

[ 8 ] Legacy [ edit ] Portrait by George Harcourt , 1946 The quotation about Attlee, "A modest man, but then he has so much to be modest about", is commonly ascribed to Churchill—though Churchill denied saying it, and respected Attlee's service in the War cabinet .

[ 214 ] Attlee's modesty and quiet manner hid a great deal that has only come to light with historical reappraisal. Attlee himself is said to have responded to critics with a limerick : "There were few who thought him a starter, Many who thought themselves smarter. But he ended PM, CH and OM, an Earl and a Knight of the Garter".

[ 215 ] His leadership style of consensual government, acting as a chairman rather than a president, won him much praise from historians and politicians alike.

Christopher Soames , the British Ambassador to France during the Conservative government of Edward Heath and cabinet minister under Margaret Thatcher , remarked that "Mrs Thatcher was not really running a team. Every time you have a Prime Minister who wants to make all the decisions, it mainly leads to bad results. Attlee didn't. That's why he was so damn good".

[ 216 ] The journalist and broadcaster Anthony Howard called him "the greatest Prime Minister of the 20th century".

[ 217 ] Thatcher herself wrote in her 1995 memoirs, which charted her life from her beginnings in Grantham to her victory at the 1979 general election , that she admired Attlee, writing: "Of Clement Attlee, however, I was an admirer. He was a serious man and a patriot. Quite contrary to the general tendency of politicians in the 1990s, he was all substance and no show".

[ 218 ] Attlee's government presided over the successful transition from a wartime economy to peacetime, tackling problems of demobilisation, shortages of foreign currency, and adverse deficits in trade balances and government expenditure . Further domestic policies that he brought about included the creation of the National Health Service and the post-war welfare state , which became key to the reconstruction of post-war Britain. Attlee and his ministers did much to transform the UK into a more prosperous and egalitarian society during their time in office with reductions in poverty and a rise in the general economic security of the population.

[ 219 ] Statue of Attlee in its former position outside Limehouse Library In foreign affairs, he did much to assist with the post-war economic recovery of Europe. He proved a loyal ally of the US at the onset of the Cold War . Due to his style of leadership, it was not he, but Ernest Bevin who masterminded foreign policy. It was Attlee's government that decided Britain should have an independent nuclear weapons programme, and work on it began in 1947.

[ 220 ] Bevin, Attlee's Foreign Secretary, famously stated that "We've got to have it [nuclear weapons] and it's got to have a bloody Union Jack on it". The first operational British nuclear bomb detonated in October 1952, about one year after Attlee had left office. Independent British atomic research was prompted partly by the 1946 US McMahon Act , which nullified wartime expectations of postwar US–UK collaboration in nuclear research, and prohibited Americans from communicating nuclear technology even to allied countries who had participated in the wartime development of the atomic bomb. British atomic bomb research was kept secret even from some members of Attlee's own cabinet, whose loyalty or discretion seemed uncertain.

[ 221 ] Although a socialist , Attlee still believed in the British Empire of his youth. He thought of it as an institution that was a power for good in the world. Nevertheless, he saw that a large part of it needed to be self-governing. Using the Dominions of Canada, Australia, and New Zealand as a model, he continued the transformation of the empire into the modern-day British Commonwealth .

[ 222 ] His greatest achievement, surpassing many of these, was perhaps the establishment of a political and economic consensus about the governance of Britain that all three major parties subscribed to for three decades, fixing the arena of political discourse until the late-1970s.

[ 223 ] In 2004, he was voted the most successful British Prime Minister of the 20th century by a poll of 139 academics organised by Ipsos MORI .

[ 2 ] Blue plaque erected in 1984 by Greater London Council at 17 Monkhams Avenue A blue plaque unveiled in 1979 commemorates Attlee at 17 Monkhams Avenue, in Woodford Green in the London Borough of Redbridge .

[ 224 ] Attlee was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1947 .

[ 225 ] Attlee was awarded an Honorary Fellowship of Queen Mary College on 15 December 1948.

[ 226 ] In the 1960s a new suburb near Curepipe in British Mauritius was given the name Cité Atlee [ sic ] in his honour.

[ 227 ] [ failed verification ] Statues [ edit ] The Statue of Clement Attlee in its new position at Queen Mary University of London On 30 November 1988, a bronze statue of Clement Attlee was unveiled by Harold Wilson (the next Labour Prime Minister after Attlee) outside Limehouse Library in Attlee's former constituency.

[ 228 ] By then Wilson was the last surviving member of Attlee's cabinet, [ 229 ] and the unveiling of the statue would be one of the last public appearances by Wilson, who was by that point in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease ; he died at the age of 79 in May 1995.

[ 230 ] Limehouse Library was closed in 2003, after which the statue was vandalised. The council surrounded it with protective hoarding for four years, before eventually removing it for repair and recasting in 2009.

[ 229 ] The restored statue was unveiled by Peter Mandelson in April 2011, in its new position less than a mile away at the Queen Mary University of London 's Mile End campus.

[ 231 ] There is also a statue of Clement Attlee in the Houses of Parliament [ 232 ] that was erected, instead of a bust, by parliamentary vote in 1979. The sculptor was Ivor Roberts-Jones .

Cultural depictions [ edit ] Further information: Cultural depictions of British prime ministers § Clement Attlee Personal life [ edit ] Attlee met Violet Millar while on a long trip with friends to Italy in 1921. They fell in love [ 233 ] and were soon engaged, marrying at Christ Church, Hampstead , on 10 January 1922. It was a devoted marriage, with Attlee providing protection and Violet providing a home that was an escape for Attlee from political turmoil. She died in 1964.

[ 234 ] They had four children: Lady Janet Helen (1923–2019), [ 235 ] she married the scientist Harold Shipton (1920–2007) [ 236 ] at Ellesborough Parish Church in 1947.

[ 237 ] Lady Felicity Ann (1925–2007), married a business executive, John Keith Harwood (1926–1989), at Little Hampden in 1955 [ 238 ] [ 239 ] Martin Richard, Viscount Prestwood, later 2nd Earl Attlee (1927–1991), married Anne Henderson on 16 February 1955.

Lady Alison Elizabeth (1930–2016), [ 240 ] married Richard Davis at Great Missenden in 1952.

[ 241 ] Religious views [ edit ] Although his parents were devout Anglicans, with one of his brothers becoming a clergyman and one of his sisters a missionary , Attlee himself is usually regarded as an agnostic. In an interview he described himself as "incapable of religious feeling", saying that he believed in "the ethics of Christianity" but not "the mumbo-jumbo". When asked whether he was an agnostic, Attlee replied "I don't know".

[ 242 ] [ 243 ] Honours and arms [ edit ] Main article: List of awards and honours received by Clement Attlee Coat of arms of Clement Attlee Coronet A coronet of an Earl Crest On a Mount Vert two Lions addorsed Or Escutcheon Azure, on a Chevron Or between three Hearts of the Last winged Argent as many Lions rampant Sable Supporters On either side a Welsh Terrier sejant Proper Motto Labor vincit omnia (Labour conquers all) Orders The Most Noble Order of the Garter [ 244 ] See also [ edit ] Briggs Plan Ethical socialism Information Research Department Malayan Emergency New village History of the United Kingdom (1945–present) References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Attlee worked backstage to handle much of the detail and organisational work in Parliament, as Churchill took centre stage with his attention on diplomacy, military policy and broader issues.

[ citation needed ] ^ The 12% national swing from Conservative to Labour remains the largest achieved by any party at a British general election.

[ citation needed ] ^ Attlee sent British troops to fight in the Malayan Emergency (1948) and the Royal Air Force to participate in the Berlin Airlift , and commissioned an independent nuclear deterrent for the UK.

Citations [ edit ] ^ Kenneth Harris, Attlee (1982). pp.566–569; Robert Pearce, Attlee (1967) pp1-5, 189–190; John Bew, Clement Attlee (2017), pp. 546–553.

^ a b "Rating British Prime Ministers" . Ipsos MORI. 29 November 2004. Archived from the original on 12 September 2011 . Retrieved 2 October 2011 .

^ Davies, Edward J. "The Ancestry of Clement Attlee", Genealogists' Magazine , 31(2013–15): 380–87.

^ a b c "Clement Attlee" . Spartacus Education.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2023 . Retrieved 2 August 2017 .

^ Beckett 1998 , p. 17.

^ Borrows, Bill (27 April 2015).

"Why football can be a dangerous game for politicians" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 2 September 2022 .

^ a b c UK Retail Price Index inflation figures are based on data from Clark, Gregory (2017).

"The Annual RPI and Average Earnings for Britain, 1209 to Present (New Series)" .

MeasuringWorth . Retrieved 7 May 2024 .

^ a b "Attlee Henry of 10 Billiter-square London and Westcott Portinscull-road Putney Surrey died 19 November 1908" in Probate Index for 1908 at probatesearch.service.gov.uk, accessed 7 August 2016 ^ a b Beckett 1998 , pp. 18–35.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 34–43.

^ "No. 28985" .

The London Gazette (Supplement). 25 November 1914. p. 9961.

^ "No. 29098" .

The London Gazette . 12 March 1915. p. 2504.

^ "No. 29124" .

The London Gazette (2nd supplement). 10 April 1915. p. 3556.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 43–45, 52.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 47–50.

^ Beckett 1998 , p. 46.

^ "No. 29894" .

The London Gazette (2nd supplement). 6 January 1917. p. 358.

^ "No. 30038" .

The London Gazette (Supplement). 27 April 1917. p. 4050.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 50–51.

^ The National Archive WO 95/101 War History of 10th Battalion, Tank Corps , pp. 1–2.

^ "No. 30425" .

The London Gazette (3rd supplement). 13 December 1917. p. 13038.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 55–58.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 62–63.

^ Attlee 1920 , p. 30.

^ Attlee 1920 , p. 75.

^ Beckett 1998 , p. 122.

^ a b c d e f Howell 2006 .

^ Rennie, John.

"Lansbury v Morrison, the battle over Poplarism" .

eastlondonhistory.com .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 28 July 2017 .

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 74–77.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 80–82.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 83–91.

^ Howard & Bridge 1988 .

^ Howard, Brasted; Bridge, Carl (1988). "The British Labour Party and Indian Nationalism, 1907–1947".

South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies .

11 (2): 69– 99.

doi : 10.1080/00856408808723113 .

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 96–99.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 101–102.

^ "Ramsay MacDonald" .

Spartacus Educational .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2017 . Retrieved 26 July 2017 .

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 104–105.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 108–109.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 112–113.

^ Attlee, Clement (18 February 1952).

"Tribute from Labor's Attlee to George and the monarchy" .

Life . Vol. 32, no. 7.

Archived from the original on 24 February 2024 . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

It was my privilege for six years to serve King George as First Minister of the Crown and for five years during the war as Deputy Prime Minister. The longer I served him the greater was my respect and admiration for him. I can never forget his kindness and consideration to me. He had a great sense of duty, high courage, good judgment and warm human sympathy. He was in the fullest sense of the term a good man.

^ Bew 2017 , pp. 23, 173–188, 208.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 116–117.

^ Thomas-Symonds 2012 , pp. 68–70.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 121–130.

^ Vickers 2013 , p. 92.

^ Talus 1945 , p. 17.

^ "Defence (1935)" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Commons. 11 March 1935 . Retrieved 20 March 2013 .

^ "Defence Policy (1935)" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Commons. 22 May 1935 . Retrieved 20 March 2013 .

^ Williams 2003 .

^ "Mr. Attlee on a war budget".

The Times . 23 April 1936. p. 16.

^ "Mr Duff Cooprrs Speech (1936)" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Commons. 29 June 1936 . Retrieved 9 January 2016 .

^ Talus 1945 , p. 37.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 131–134.

^ Kenneth Harris, Attlee (1982) pp. 161–162.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 134–135.

^ "Foreign Affairs (1939)" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Commons. 31 January 1939. col. 72 . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ Holroyd-Doveton, John (2013).

Maxim Litvinov: A Biography . Woodland Publications. p. 395.

^ Dalton, Hugh (1957).

The Fateful Years; Memoirs 1931–1945 . London: Frederick Muller. p. 97.

^ "Prime Minister's Statement" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Commons. 3 October 1938. col. 51 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ "Prime Minister's Statement" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Commons. 3 October 1938. col. 54 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ Holroyd-Doveton, John (2013).

Maxim Litvinov: A Biography . Woodland Publications. p. 320.

^ Toynbee, Arnold J.

(24 July 1937).

"Czechoslovakia's German problem" .

The Economist . Vol. 128. The Economist Intelligence Unit N.A., Incorporated. p. 183 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ "Prime Minister's Statement" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Commons. 3 October 1938. col. 81 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 140–141.

^ Syal, Rajeev (20 November 2018).

"Clement Attlee took in Jewish child refugee who fled Nazis" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 20 November 2018 . Retrieved 20 November 2018 .

^ "The Norway Campaign in World War Two" . BBC. 30 March 2011.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2009 . Retrieved 2 October 2011 .

^ "No. 34856" .

The London Gazette . 24 May 1940. p. 3107.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 157–158.

^ Beckett 1998 , pp. 163–164.

^ a b Marr 2007 .

^ "No. 36193" .

The London Gazette . 1 October 1943. p. 4365.

^ Beckett 1998 , p. 164.

^ Crowcroft, Robert (11 March 2014).

"Clement Attlee: enigmatic, out of time – and formidable" . Gov.uk.

Archived from the original on 3 August 2017 . Retrieved 3 August 2017 .

^ Quoted by Paul Addison in V. Bogdanor (2016).

From New Jerusalem to New Labour: British Prime Ministers from Attlee to Blair . Springer. p. 9.

ISBN 9780230297005 .

^ Steven Fielding, "What did 'the people' want?: the meaning of the 1945 general election".

Historical Journal 35#3 (1992): 623–639.

^ a b c Addison, Dr Paul.

"Why Churchill Lost in 1945" .

BBC History .

Archived from the original on 26 December 2019 . Retrieved 9 August 2017 .

^ "British Labour Party election manifesto, 1945 [archived]" . Archived from the original on 20 July 2018 . Retrieved 9 January 2016 .

^ The Manchester Guardian 4 July 1945 ^ Kynaston, David (2008).

Austerity Britain 1945–51 . London: Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

70– 71.

ISBN 978-0-7475-9923-4 .

^ a b R. C. Whiting, "Attlee, Clement Richard, first Earl Attlee (1883–1967)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , 2004.

^ "VOTE2001 – THE ELECTION BATTLES 1945–1997" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2020 . Retrieved 19 December 2011 .

^ Kynaston, David (2010).

Austerity Britain, 1945–1951 . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 75.

ISBN 9780802779588 .

^ Francis, Martin. " Economics and Ethics: The Nature of Labour's Socialism, 1945–1951 Archived 19 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine ", Twentieth Century British History (1995) 6#2, pp. 220–43.

^ "The National Archives – Homepage" .

The National Archives .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2018 . Retrieved 10 May 2018 .

^ Alec Cairncross (2013).

Years of Recovery: British Economic Policy 1945–51 . Routledge. p. 49.

ISBN 9781136597701 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Thorpe, Andrew. (2001) A History of the British Labour Party , Palgrave; ISBN 0-333-92908-X ^ Pelling, Henry.

The Labour Governments, 1945–51 .

^ Cawood, Ian.

Britain in the Twentieth Century .

^ a b Shaw, Eric.

The Labour Party since 1945 .

^ Kynaston, David.

Austerity Britain 1945–1951 .

^ "The Labour Government 1945–51 – The Welfare State: Revision, Page 11" .

bbc.co.uk . Archived from the original on 28 March 2016 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ Francis, Martin.

Ideas and Policies Under Labour, 1945–1951 .

^ a b Jefferys 2014 .

^ Timmins, Nicholas.

The Five Giants: A Biography of the Welfare State .

^ Lowe, Norman.

Mastering Modern World History (second edition) ^ Blendon, R.J. & K. Donelan (1989).

"British public opinion on National Health Service reform" (PDF) .

Health Affairs .

8 (4): 52– 62.

doi : 10.1377/hlthaff.8.4.52 .

PMID 2606439 . Retrieved 5 October 2014 .

^ Chick, Martin.

Industrial Policy in Britain 1945–1951: Economic Planning, Nationalisation and the Labour Governments ^ Poverty, inequality and health in Britain, 1800–2000: a reader edited by George Davey Smith, Daniel Dorling, and Mary Shaw ^ Emslie, Stuart; Hancock, Charles, eds. (30 July 2008).

Issues in Healthcare Risk Management . Oxford: Healthcare Governance Limited. p. 179.

ISBN 9780955852602 . Retrieved 21 July 2012 .

^ Statutory Rules and Orders Other Than Those of a Local, Personal Or Temporary Character (varies Slightly).Volume 1, Part, By Great Britain. Laws, statutes, etc · 1948, p. 1373 ^ Rees, Naomi; Watson, David (30 April 2000).

International Standards for Food Safety . Springer.

ISBN 9780834217683 . Retrieved 9 January 2016 .

^ Hill, C. P.

British Economic and Social History, 1700–1964 .

^ Ten Years of New Labour (edited by Matt Beech and Simon Lee) [ page needed ] ^ "National Insurance Act, 1946", Compendious Abstract of Public General Acts , HMSO, 1823, p. 710 – via Google Books ^ "HC S Budget Resolution and Economic Situation" . Margaret Thatcher Foundation. 5 May 1966 . Retrieved 20 March 2013 .

^ a b Morgan, Kenneth O.

Labour in Power, 1945–1951 .

^ Byrne, Tony & Colin F. Padfield.

Social Services: Made Simple .

^ Socialism: The British Way (edited by Donald Munro).

^ Fifty Facts for Labour , published by the Labour Party, Transport House, Smith Square, London, SW1, October 1951.

^ a b Crabbe, R. J. W.; Poyser, C. A. (22 August 2013).

Pension and Widows' and Orphans' Funds . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781107621749 . Retrieved 9 January 2016 .

^ Welfare Policy Under the Conservatives, 1951–1964: A Guide to Documents in the Public Record Office by Paul Bridgen and Rodney Lowe ^ Statutory Rules and Orders Other Than Those of a Local, Personal, Or Temporary Character 1947 . 1947. pp.

1589– 1638.

^ Hardman Brookshire, Jerry (1995).

Clement Attlee . Manchester University Press. p. 79.

ISBN 978-0-7190-3244-8 .

^ The British Labour Party and Welfare: The Legacies of the Attlee and Wilson Governments By Vittorio Trevitt, Published by History Is Now, October 20, 2024 ^ Ideas and Economic Crises in Britain from Attlee to Blair (1945-2005) By Matthias Matthijs, 2012, P.62 ^ Hopkins, Eric.

Industrialisation and Society: A Social History, 1830–1951 .

^ a b "Next Steps in Education" .

^ Abbott, Ian; Rathbone, Michael; Whitehead, Phillip (12 November 2012).

Education Policy .

ISBN 9781446271568 .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2024 . Retrieved 9 January 2016 .

^ Lomas, Janis (29 October 2014).

The Home Front in Britain . Springer.

ISBN 9781137348999 .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2024 . Retrieved 9 January 2016 .

^ Abbott, Ian; Rathbone, Michael; Whitehead, Phillip (12 November 2012).

Education Policy .

ISBN 9781446271568 . Retrieved 9 January 2016 .

^ Education Act 1946 1946 CHAPTER 50 ^ Education (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1948 1948 CHAPTER 40 ^ a b Jefferys, Kevin.

The Labour Party since 1945 .

^ Hartley, Cathy.

A Historical Dictionary of British Women .

^ Pelling, Henry & Alastair J. Reid.

A Short History of the Labour Party .

^ Munro 1948 .

^ Oddy, Derek J.

From Plain Fare to Fusion Food: British Diet from the 1890s to the 1990s .

^ Tomlinson, Jim (1997).

Democratic Socialism and Economic Policy: The Attlee Years, 1945–1951 . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. p. 244.

ISBN 9780521892599 .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2024 . Retrieved 21 July 2012 .

^ Pritt, Denis Nowell.

The Labour Government 1945–51 .

^ Smith, D. (2013).

Freedom and Faith: A Question of Scottish Identity . St. Andrew Press, Ltd. p. 54.

ISBN 9780861538133 . Retrieved 5 October 2014 .

^ Hodge, B. & W. L. Mellor.

Higher School Certificate History .

^ "Powered by Google Docs" .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2012 . Retrieved 2 October 2011 .

^ Whitaker's Almanack , J. Whitaker & Sons, 1987 ^ Gillard, Derek.

"Education in England – Timeline" . educationengland.org.uk.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2011 . Retrieved 5 October 2014 .

^ Beech & Lee 2008 .

^ Gilbert, Bentley Brinkerhoff (2021).

"Britain since 1945 Labour and the welfare state (1945–51)" .

Britannica .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2024 . Retrieved 26 October 2021 .

^ a b Cowcroft, Robert; Theakston, Kevin (2013). "The Fall of the Attlee Government, 1951". In Heppell, T; Theakston, Kevin (eds.).

How Labour Governments Fall: From Ramsay Macdonald to Gordon Brown (PDF) . Palgrave Macmillan UK.

ISBN 978-0-230-36180-5 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 January 2024 . Retrieved 5 December 2023 .

^ Thompson, David.

England in the Twentieth Century (1914–63) .

^ a b Morgan 1984 .

^ Ten Years of New Labour (edited by Matt Beech and Simon Lee) ^ Hill 1970 .

^ Brown, Derek (14 March 2001).

"1945–51: Labour and the creation of the welfare state" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 30 November 2023 . Retrieved 5 December 2023 .

^ Myers, John (13 September 2020).

"The plot against Mercia" .

UnHerd .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2023 . Retrieved 5 December 2023 .

^ Barnett, Correlli (1995).

The Lost Victory: British Dreams and British Realities . Macmillan. pp.

170– 171.

^ Sandbrook, Dominic (9 January 2010).

"Winter of 1947" . Jubileeriver.co.uk. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 20 March 2013 .

^ Foot, Michael (2011).

Aneurin Bevan: A Biography: Volume 2: 1945–1960 . Faber & Faber. p. 75.

ISBN 9780571280858 .

^ Smith Raymond, Zametica John (1985). "The Cold Warrior: Clement Attlee reconsidered, 1945–7".

International Affairs .

61 (2): 237– 252.

doi : 10.2307/2617482 .

JSTOR 2617482 .

^ "Jet Engines Foreign Sales (1948)" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Commons. 22 November 1948 . Retrieved 28 April 2020 .

^ Gordon, Yefim.

Mikoyan–Gurevich MIG-15: The Soviet Union's Long-Lived Korean War Fighter , Midland Press (2001), ISBN 978-1857801057 .

^ Morgan 1984 , ch. 6; Thomas-Symonds 2012 , pp. 2–4, 127.

^ Field, Frank (2009).

Attlee's Great Contemporaries: The Politics of Character . Bloomsbury. p. 38.

ISBN 9781441129444 .

^ Deery, Phillip (1998). " 'A Very Present Menace'? Attlee, Communism and the Cold War".

Australian Journal of Politics and History .

44 (1): 69– 93.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8497.00005 .

^ David Wilsford (1995).

Political Leaders of Contemporary Western Europe: A Biographical Dictionary . Greenwood Publishing Group. p.

21 .

ISBN 9780313286230 .

^ Nicholas Owen, "Attlee governments: The end of empire 1945–51".

Contemporary British History 3#4 (1990): 12–16.

^ Wolf, David C. (1983). " 'To Secure a Convenience': Britain Recognizes China – 1950".

Journal of Contemporary History .

18 (2): 299– 326.

doi : 10.1177/002200948301800207 .

JSTOR 260389 .

S2CID 162218504 .

^ "Letter from Mao Zedong to Clement Attlee sells for £605,000" .

The Guardian . 15 December 2015.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 January 2020 .

^ Bew 2017 , pp. 186–187.

^ Herman, Arthur (2008).

Gandhi & Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age . pp.

321– 325.

^ Bew 2017 , p. 433.

^ Craig, F. W. S.

(1970).

British General Election Manifestos: 1918–1966 . p. 105.

^ Herman, Gandhi & Churchill (2008) pp. 486-95.

^ Kenneth Harris, Attlee (1982) pp. 362–64 ^ David Chandler, The Oxford Illustrated History of the British Army (1994) p. 331 ^ Harris, Attlee (1982) pp. 367–69.

^ "Churchill and India: Again & Again & Again & Again" .

International Churchill Society . 4 July 2013.

Archived from the original on 17 May 2021 . Retrieved 17 May 2021 .

^ Attlee, Clement (1954).

As It Happened . Viking Press. p. 254.

^ Bew, John (2016).

Citizen Clem . Quercus Editions Limited. p. 414.

^ Yasmin Khan, The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan (Yale UP, 2005) pp. 6, 83–103, 211.

^ Peter Lyon (2008).

Conflict Between India and Pakistan: An Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO. p. 19.

ISBN 9781576077122 .

^ "Gandhi Is Killed By A Hindu; India Shaken, World Mourns; 15 Die In Rioting In Bombay Three Shots Fired" New York Times 30 January 1948 Archived 7 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ British Broadcasting Corporation (1948).

London Calling . British Broadcasting Corporation. p. 4.

Archived from the original on 19 May 2023 . Retrieved 19 May 2023 .

^ Polak, H. S. L.

; Brailsford, H. N.

; Pethick-Lawrence, Frederick (1986).

Mahatma Gandhi, the Father of Modern India . Anmol Publications. p. 303.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 .

^ Bew 2017 , p. 441.

^ Andrew Roberts, Eminent Churchillians (1994) p. 78.

^ Kenneth Harris, Attlee (1982) pp. 362–387.

^ Irial Glynn, "'An Untouchable in the Presence of Brahmins' Lord Wavell's Disastrous Relationship with Whitehall During His Time as Viceroy to India, 1943–7".

Modern Asian Studies 41#3 (2007): 639–663.

^ "Aminossehe, Sherin, ( born 26 Nov. 1976), Director, Infrastructure, since 2019, and Race Champion, Ministry of Defence" , Who's Who , Oxford University Press, 1 December 2022, doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.u294527 , ISBN 978-0-19-954088-4 , retrieved 13 March 2024 ^ Moore R. J. (1981). "Mountbatten, India, and the Commonwealth".

Journal of Commonwealth & Comparative Politics .

19 (1): 5– 43.

doi : 10.1080/14662048108447372 .

^ Paul H. Kratoska (2001).

South East Asia, Colonial History: Peaceful transitions to independence (1945–1963) . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9780415247849 .

^ a b c "Cyprus Detention Camps" .

encyclopedia.ushmm.org .

Archived from the original on 8 February 2023 . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ "Operation Embarrass? You bet: Britain's secret war on the Jews – The Jewish Chronicle" .

The Jewish Chronicle . 21 September 2010.

Archived from the original on 8 February 2023 . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ Ellen Jenny Ravndal, "Exit Britain: British Withdrawal From the Palestine Mandate in the Early Cold War, 1947–1948".

Diplomacy & Statecraft 21#3 (2010): 416–433.

^ "Lord Attlee, British Ex-premier, Attacks Israel in House of Lords" .

Jewish Telegraphic Agency . 20 March 2015 . Retrieved 9 December 2024 .

^ "Attlee Explains Why He Thought the Balfour Declaration a "mistake" " .

Jewish Telegraphic Agency . 20 March 2015 . Retrieved 9 December 2024 .

^ Kelemen, Paul (2007).

"Planning for Africa: The British Labour Party's Colonial Development Policy, 1920–1964" .

Journal of Agrarian Change .

7 (1): 76– 98.

Bibcode : 2007JAgrC...7...76K .

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-0366.2007.00140.x .

^ Hyam, Ronald (1988). "Africa and the Labour government, 1945–1951".

Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History .

16 (3): 148– 172.

doi : 10.1080/03086538808582773 .

^ "1950: Labour majority slashed" .

BBC News . 5 April 2005.

Archived from the original on 30 July 2017 . Retrieved 26 April 2012 .

^ Morgan 1984 , pp. 409–461.

^ H. G. Nicholas, The British general election of 1950 (1999).

^ Morgan 1984 , p. 460.

^ Robert Leach; et al. (2011).

British Politics . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 129.

ISBN 9780230344228 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Robert Pearce, "The 1950 and 1951 General Elections in Britain: Robert Pearce Asks Why Labour's Period in Office under Clement Attlee Came to an End" History Review (March 2008) v 60 online Archived 19 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ Robert Crowcroft and Kevin Theakston. "The Fall of the Attlee Government, 1951". in Timothy Heppell and Kevin Theakston, eds.

How Labour Governments Fall (Palgrave Macmillan, 2013). pp. 61–82.

^ Williams, Charles.

Harold Macmillan (2009), p. 221 ^ a b Beckett 1998 .

^ Thomas Edward Broadie Howarth (1985).

Prospect and Reality: Great Britain 1945–1955 . Collins.

ISBN 9780002162814 .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 .

^ Bew 2017 , p. 532.

^ Thomas-Symonds, Nicklaus (2010).

Attlee: A Life in Politics . London: I B Tauris. p. 260.

^ "Letters from Thane Read asking Helen Keller to sign the World Constitution for world peace. 1961" .

Helen Keller Archive . American Foundation for the Blind.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 July 2023 .

^ "Letter from World Constitution Coordinating Committee to Helen, enclosing current materials" .

Helen Keller Archive . American Foundation for the Blind.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

^ "Preparing earth constitution | Global Strategies & Solutions | The Encyclopedia of World Problems" .

The Encyclopedia of World Problems | Union of International Associations (UIA) .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2023 . Retrieved 15 July 2023 .

^ "Nomination Archive – Clement Richard Lord Attlee" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 21 June 2022 .

^ "Nomination Archive – Earl (Clement) Attlee" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 21 June 2022 .

^ "Earl Attlee (1956)" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Lords. 25 January 1956.

^ Bew 2016 , p. 538.

^ Harrison, Brian (2009).

Seeking a Role: The United Kingdom 1951—1970 . OUP Oxford. p. 166.

ISBN 9780191606786 .

^ Rowe, Abbie (16 May 1961).

"MEETING WITH CLEMENT ATTLEE, 1ST EARL ATTLEE, FORMER BRITISH PRIME MINISTER AND LABOUR PARTY LEADER, 12:00PM" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum .

Archived from the original on 26 May 2021 . Retrieved 19 January 2021 .

^ "Britain and the Common Market (1962)" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Lords. 8 November 1962 . Retrieved 28 April 2020 .

^ Beckett 2015, p.467 ^ Parkinson, Justin; Davies, Chris (15 April 2013).

"Prime ministers' funerals from Pitt to Heath" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2017 . Retrieved 4 September 2016 .

^ "Earl Attlee's Remains Interred Aka Service Of Memorial And Burial For Earl Attlee (1967)" .

Warner-Pathé . 13 April 2014.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 July 2017 – via Youtube.

^ "Hereditary Peers in the House of Lords Since 1999" (PDF) .

researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 June 2015 . Retrieved 29 May 2021 .

^ "Attlee the rt hon Clement Richard of 1 Kings Bench Walk Temple London EC4 died 8 October 1967 Probate London 4 January £7295" in Probate Index for 1968 at probatesearch.service.gov.uk, accessed 7 August 2016 ^ Arnstein, Walter L.

Britain Yesterday and Today: 1830 to the Present , Chapter 19, p. 363 ^ Kenneth Harris, Attlee (1982) ^ Hennessy, Peter.

The Prime Minister: The Office and its Holders since 1945 , Chapter 7, p. 150 ^ Anthony Howard – Clement Attlee: the greatest Prime Minister of 20th century (20/41) Archived 3 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine , video on YouTube.

^ "Clement Attlee (excerpts from M, Thatcher in primary sources section towards bottom)" . Spartacus Educational.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2023 . Retrieved 2 August 2017 .

^ Tanner, Duncan; Pat Thane & Nick Tiratsoo.

Labour's First Century .

^ Regina Cowen Karp, ed. (1991).

Security with Nuclear Weapons?: Different Perspectives on National Security . Oxford University Press. p. 145ff.

ISBN 9780198278399 .

^ Peter Hennessy, Cabinets and the Bomb , Oxford University Press, 2007.

^ Lloyd Lorna (1997). "Britain and the transformation from empire to Commonwealth: The significance of the immediate post-war years".

The Round Table .

86 (343): 333– 360.

doi : 10.1080/00358539708454371 .

^ Peter Clarke, "Attlee: The Making of the Postwar Consensus" in Peter Clarke, A Question of Leadership: Gladstone to Thatcher (Harmondsworth, 1992), pp. 193–21 ^ "ATTLEE, RICHARD CLEMENT (1883–1976)" . English Heritage.

Archived from the original on 8 August 2012 . Retrieved 5 August 2012 .

^ Bridges, Lord (1968).

"Clement Richard Attlee First Earl Attlee. 1883–1967" .

Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society .

14 : 15– 36.

doi : 10.1098/rsbm.1968.0002 .

JSTOR 769437 .

^ The Times , 16 December 1948, p. 3.

^ Luckoo, Priya (13 May 2016).

"Cité Atlee souffle ses 50 bougies" . L'Express.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 .

^ "December03" . Btinternet.com. 30 November 1988. Archived from the original on 16 September 2011 . Retrieved 2 October 2011 .

^ a b "Vandalised Attlee statue being moved to safety" . East London Advertiser. 12 November 2009. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017 . Retrieved 3 August 2017 .

^ "Harold Wilson" . Number 10. Archived from the original on 11 October 2011 . Retrieved 2 October 2011 .

^ "Lord Mandelson joins Lord Hennessy to unveil Clement Attlee statue" .

Queen Mary University of London . Archived from the original on 18 August 2011 . Retrieved 8 July 2011 .

^ "Artwork – Clement Attlee, 1st Earl Attlee" .

UK Parliament .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2019 . Retrieved 4 January 2019 .

^ Bew 2016 , p. 115.

^ Bew 2017 , pp. 115–118.

^ "Janet Helen Attlee Shipton" .

Standard-Examiner . Archived from the original on 16 February 2019 . Retrieved 12 March 2019 .

^ "Professor Harold Shipton", The Times (London), 14 May 2007.

^ "Janet Attlee's wedding 1947" . British Pathe.

Archived from the original on 28 June 2013 . Retrieved 27 October 2012 .

^ "Felicity Attlee weds 1955" . British Pathe.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2012 . Retrieved 27 October 2012 .

^ "J. Keith Harwood, 62; Ex-Macy's Executive" Archived 1 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times , 24 May 1989, p. 25.

^ "DAVIS – Deaths Announcements – Telegraph Announcements" .

announcements.telegraph.co.uk . Archived from the original on 24 December 2016 . Retrieved 24 December 2016 .

^ "Mr. Attlee's Daughter Weds – Alison Attlee… 1952" . British Pathe.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2016 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ Brookshire 1995 , p. 15.

^ "Clement Attlee" .

Humanist Heritage .

Humanists UK .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 April 2023 .

^ Burke's Peerage, Baronetage and Knightage . Burke's Peerage & Gentry LLC. 2003. p. 183.

ISBN 0971196621 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Attlee, Clement Richard (1920).

The Social Worker . London: G. Bell.

Beckett, Francis (1998).

Clem Attlee: A Biography . Blake.

ISBN 978-1860661013 .

Bew, John (2016).

Citizen Clem: A Biography of Attlee . Riverrun.

Bew, John (2017).

Clement Attlee: The Man Who Made Modern Britain . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780190203405 .

Brookshire, Jerry Hardman (1995).

Clement Attlee . New York: Manchester University Press.

ISBN 0-7190-3244-X .

Bullock, Alan (1983). "8".

Ernest Bevin: Foreign Secretary .

Harris, Kenneth. (1982) Attlee W.W. Norton.

Howell, David (2006). Beckett, Francis (ed.).

Attlee . 20 British Prime Ministers of the 20th Century. Haus Publishing.

ISBN 1904950647 .

Jefferys, Kevin (14 January 2014).

The Attlee Governments 1945–1951 . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-89894-8 .

Marr, Andrew (2007).

A History of Modern Britain (2009 ed.).

Pan Books .

Pearce, Robert (1997).

Attlee . Longman.

ISBN 0582256909 .

Beech, Matt; Lee, Simon (2008).

Ten Years of New Labour . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0230574434 .

Hill, C. P. (1970).

British Economic and Social History, 1700–1964 (3rd rev. ed.). Hodder & Stoughton Educational.

ISBN 978-0713116243 .

Kay, Kingsley (1946).

"Development of industrial hygiene in Canada" (PDF) .

Industrial Safety Survey .

XXII (1). Montreal: 1– 11.

PMID 20279825 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2016.

Lowe, Norman (1997).

Mastering Modern World History . Palgrave Master Series (3rd rev. ed.). Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0333685235 .

Morgan, Kenneth O.

(1984).

Labour in Power, 1945–51 . OUP.

ISBN 978-0192158659 .

Munro, Donald, ed. (1948).

Socialism: The British Way . Essential Books.

Pearce, Robert. (1967) Attlee Longman.

Reeves, Rachel; McIvor, Martin (2014). "Clement Attlee and the foundations of the British welfare state".

Renewal: A Journal of Labour Politics .

22 (3/4).

Talus (1945).

Your Alternative Government . London: Eyre and Spottiswoode.

Thomas-Symonds, Nicklaus (2012).

Attlee: A Life in Politics . I.B.Tauris.

ISBN 978-1780762159 .

Vickers, Rhiannon (2013).

The Labour Party and the World . Vol. 1: The Evolution of Labour's Foreign Policy, 1900– 51.

Manchester University Press .

ISBN 9781847791313 .

Williams, Susan (2003).

The People's King: The True Story of the Abdication . London: Penguin Books.

ISBN 0-7139-9573-4 .

Further reading [ edit ] Biographical Beckett, Francis .

Clem Attlee (1998) – updated and expanded under the title Clem Attlee: Labour's Great Reformer (2015) Bew, John.

Citizen Clem: A Biography of Attlee, (London: 2016, British edition); Clement Attlee: The Man Who Made Modern Britain (New York: Oxford University Press, 2017, U.S. edition) Burridge, Trevor.

Clement Attlee: A Political Biography (1985), scholarly Cohen, David.

Churchill & Attlee: The Unlikely Allies who Won the War (Biteback Publishing, 2018), popular Crowcroft, Robert.

Attlee's War: World War II and the Making of a Labour Leader (IB Tauris, 2011) Harris, Kenneth.

Attlee (1982), scholarly authorised biography Howell, David.

Attlee (2006) Jago, Michael.

Clement Attlee: The Inevitable Prime Minister (2014) Pearce, Robert.

Attlee (1997), 206pp Thomas-Symonds, Nicklaus.

Attlee: A Life in Politics (IB Tauris, 2010).

Whiting, R. C. "Attlee, Clement Richard, first Earl Attlee (1883–1967)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , 2004; online edn, Jan 2011 accessed 12 June 2013 Archived 24 February 2024 at the Wayback Machine doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/30498 Biographies of his cabinet and associates Rosen, Greg. ed.

Dictionary of Labour Biography . ( Politicos Publishing , 2002); ISBN 1-902301-18-8 Morgan, Kenneth O.

Labour people: Leaders and Lieutenants, Hardie to Kinnock (1987) Scholarly studies Addison, Paul .

No Turning Back: The Peaceful Revolutions of Post-War Britain (2011) excerpt and text search Archived 24 February 2024 at the Wayback Machine Brady, Robert A. (1950).

Crisis in Britain. Plans and Achievements of the Labour Government...

. University of California Press.

, detailed coverage of nationalisation, welfare state and planning.

Crowcroft, Robert, and Kevin Theakston. "The Fall of the Attlee Government, 1951", in Timothy Heppell and Kevin Theakston, eds.

How Labour Governments Fall (Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2013). pp. 61–82.

Francis, Martin.

Ideas and policies under Labour, 1945–1951: building a new Britain ( Manchester University Press , 1997).

Golant, W. "The Emergence of CR Attlee as Leader of the Parliamentary Labour Party in 1935", Historical Journal , 13#2 (1970): 318–332.

in JSTOR Archived 5 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine Hennessy, Peter (2006).

Never Again: Britain 1945–1951 (2 ed.). London: Penguin Books.

ISBN 0-14-101602-7 .

online Jackson, Ben. "Citizen and Subject: Clement Attlee's Socialism", History Workshop Journal (2018). Vol. 86 pp. 291–298.

online [ dead link ] .

Jefferys, Kevin. "The Attlee Years, 1935–1955", in Brivati, Brian, and Heffernan, Richard, eds., The Labour Party: A Centenary History , Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2000. 68–86.

Kynaston, David.

Austerity Britain, 1945–1951 (2008).

Mioni, Michele. "The Attlee government and welfare state reforms in post-war Italian Socialism (1945–51): Between universalism and class policies", Labor History , 57#2 (2016): 277–297. DOI:10.1080/0023656X.2015.1116811 Morgan, Kenneth O.

Labour in Power 1945–1951 (1984), 564 pp.. an influential scholarly study online Ovendale, R. ed., The foreign policy of the British Labour governments, 1945–51 (1984) · Pugh, Martin .

Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party (2011) excerpt and text search Archived 22 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine Smith, Raymond; Zametica, John (1985). "The Cold Warrior: Clement Attlee Reconsidered, 1945-7".

International Affairs .

61 (2): 237– 252.

doi : 10.2307/2617482 .

JSTOR 2617482 .

Swift, John.

Labour in Crisis: Clement Attlee & the Labour Party in Opposition, 1931–1940 (2001) Thornton, Stephen. "The brace of the Cabinet: the legacy of Clement Attlee as deputy prime minister." Contemporary British History (2024): 1–24.

Tomlinson, Jim.

Democratic Socialism and Economic Policy: The Attlee Years, 1945–1951 (2002) Excerpt and text search Archived 15 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Weiler, Peter. "British Labour and the cold war: the foreign policy of the Labour governments, 1945–1951", Journal of British Studies , 26#1 (1987): 54–82.

in JSTOR Archived 6 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine Works [ edit ] Clement Attlee published his memoirs, As it Happened , in 1954.

Francis Williams' A Prime Minister Remembers , based on interviews with Attlee, was published in 1961.

Attlee's other publications The Social Worker (1920) Metropolitan Borough Councils Their Constitution, Powers and Duties – Fabian Tract No 190 (1920) The Town Councillor (1925) The Will and the Way to Socialism (1935) The Labour Party in Perspective (1937) Collective Security Under the United Nations (1958) Empire into Commonwealth (1961) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Clement Attlee .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Clement Attlee .

Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Clement Attlee Clement Attlee – Thanksgiving Speech 1950 – UK Parliament Living Heritage More about Clement Attlee on the Downing Street website.

Works by or about Clement Attlee at the Internet Archive Works by Clement Attlee at Faded Page (Canada) Works by Clement Attlee at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) "Archival material relating to Clement Attlee" .

UK National Archives .

Annotated bibliography for Clement Attlee from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues Portraits of Clement Richard Attlee, 1st Earl Attlee at the National Portrait Gallery, London Newspaper clippings about Clement Attlee in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Drawing of Clement Attlee in the UK Parliamentary Collections Parliament of the United Kingdom Preceded by William Pearce Member of Parliament for Limehouse 1922 – 1950 Constituency abolished Preceded by Valentine McEntee Member of Parliament for Walthamstow West 1950 – 1955 Succeeded by Edward Redhead Political offices Preceded by Oswald Mosley Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 1930–1931 Succeeded by The Lord Ponsonby of Shulbrede Preceded by George Lansbury Leader of the Opposition 1935–1940 Succeeded by Hastings Lees-Smith Preceded by Kingsley Wood Lord Privy Seal 1940–1942 Succeeded by Stafford Cripps Preceded by The Viscount Cranborne Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs 1942–1943 Succeeded by The Viscount Cranborne New office Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (de facto) 1942–1945 Succeeded by Herbert Morrison Preceded by John Anderson Lord President of the Council 1943–1945 Succeeded by The Lord Woolton Preceded by Winston Churchill Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 1945–1951 Succeeded by Winston Churchill First Lord of the Treasury 1945–1951 Leader of the Opposition 1951–1955 Succeeded by Herbert Morrison Preceded by Winston Churchill Minister of Defence 1945–1946 Succeeded by A. V. Alexander Party political offices New office Chairman of the New Fabian Research Bureau 1931–1934 Succeeded by The Viscount Addison Preceded by J. R. Clynes Deputy Leader of the Labour Party 1932–1935 Succeeded by Arthur Greenwood Preceded by George Lansbury Leader of the Labour Party 1935–1955 Succeeded by Hugh Gaitskell Civic offices Preceded by F. J. Miles Mayor of Stepney 1919–1920 Succeeded by Thomas Joseph Cahill Peerage of the United Kingdom New creation Earl Attlee Viscount Prestwood 1955–1967 Succeeded by Martin Attlee Links to related articles v t e Clement Attlee Premiership Attlee ministry General elections 1935 1945 1950 1951 1955 Constituencies Limehouse Walthamstow West Career Simon Commission 1935 party leadership election Norway Debate Wartime coalition government 1940 War cabinet crisis Potsdam Conference Gen 75 Committee Operation Hurricane National Insurance Act 1946 National Health Service Act 1946 Anglo-American loan Partition of India Tanganyika groundnut scheme Agriculture Act 1947 Transport Act 1947 Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain Family Violet Attlee (wife) Martin Attlee (son) Cultural depictions The Gathering Storm (TV, 1974) Edward & Mrs. Simpson (TV, 1978) Goodnight Sweetheart (TV, 1999) Bertie and Elizabeth (TV, 2002) Dunkirk (TV, 2004) Into the Storm (TV, 2009) The Crown (TV, 2016) Darkest Hour (Film, 2017) Red Joan (Film, 2018) Related articles Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Earl Attlee Honours Toynbee Hall 1950 Dissolution Honours 1951 Prime Minister's Resignation Honours Category v t e Prime ministers of the United Kingdom ( list ) Great Britain Walpole (Orford) Wilmington Pelham Newcastle Devonshire Newcastle Bute G. Grenville Rockingham Chatham (Pitt the Elder) Grafton North Rockingham Shelburne Portland Pitt the Younger United Kingdom Pitt the Younger Addington Pitt the Younger Lord Grenville Portland Perceval Liverpool Canning Goderich Wellington Grey Melbourne Wellington Peel Melbourne Peel Russell Derby Aberdeen Palmerston Derby Palmerston Russell Derby Disraeli Gladstone Disraeli (Beaconsfield) Gladstone Salisbury Gladstone Salisbury Gladstone Rosebery Salisbury Balfour Campbell-Bannerman Asquith Lloyd George Law Baldwin MacDonald Baldwin MacDonald Baldwin Chamberlain Churchill Attlee Churchill Eden Macmillan Douglas-Home Wilson Heath Wilson Callaghan Thatcher Major Blair Brown Cameron May Johnson Truss Sunak Starmer Category v t e Deputy prime ministers of the United Kingdom Formally titled Michael Heseltine (1995–1997) John Prescott (1997–2007) Nick Clegg (2010–2015) Dominic Raab (2021–2022) Thérèse Coffey (2022) Dominic Raab (2022–2023) Oliver Dowden (2023–2024) Angela Rayner (2024–present) Others fitting definition Clement Attlee (1940–1945) Anthony Eden (1951–1955) Rab Butler (1955–1963) George Brown (1964–1968) Reginald Maudling (1970–1972) William Whitelaw (1979–1988) Geoffrey Howe (1989–1990) George Osborne (2015–2016) Damian Green (2017) David Lidington (2018–2019) Dominic Raab (2019–2021) v t e Leaders of Labour Leaders Keir Hardie Arthur Henderson George Barnes Ramsay MacDonald Arthur Henderson William Adamson J. R. Clynes Ramsay MacDonald Arthur Henderson George Lansbury Clement Attlee Herbert Morrison ^ Hugh Gaitskell George Brown, Baron George-Brown ^ Harold Wilson James Callaghan Michael Foot Neil Kinnock John Smith Margaret Beckett ^ Tony Blair Gordon Brown Harriet Harman ^ Ed Miliband Harriet Harman ^ Jeremy Corbyn Keir Starmer Deputy Leaders Clynes Graham Clement Attlee Greenwood Morrison Griffiths Bevan George Brown Jenkins Short Michael Foot Denis Healey Roy Hattersley Margaret Beckett John Prescott Harriet Harman Watson Angela Rayner General Secretaries MacDonald Henderson Middleton Phillips Williams Barker ^ Nicholas Hayward Mortimer Whitty Sawyer McDonagh Triesman Carter Watt Collins McNicol Formby Evans Treasurers Henderson MacDonald Henderson Lathan Greenwood Gaitskell Bevan Nicholas Davies Callaghan Atkinson Varley Booth McCluskie Burlison Prosser Elsby Dromey Holland Leaders in the Lords Haldane Cripps Ponsonby Snell Addison Jowitt Alexander Pakenham Shackleton Shepherd Peart Hughes Richard Jay Williams Amos Ashton Royall Smith of Basildon Scottish Labour Leaders Dewar McLeish Jamieson ^ McConnell Jamieson ^ Alexander Jamieson ^ Gray Lamont Sarwar ^ Murphy Gray ^ Dugdale Rowley ^ Baillie ^ Leonard Sarwar PLP Chairs Hardie Henderson Barnes MacDonald Henderson Hodge * Wardle * Adamson Clynes MacDonald Henderson Lansbury Attlee Lees-Smith * Pethick-Lawrence * Greenwood * Gaitskell Wilson Houghton Mikardo Hughes Willey Dormand Orme Hoyle Soley Corston Clwyd Lloyd Watts Cryer EPLP Leaders Stewart Prescott Castle Lomas Martin Seal Ford Green David Donnelly Murphy Titley Willmott Corbett v t e Leaders of the opposition of the United Kingdom House of Commons Fox Howick Ponsonby Tierney Peel Althorp Peel Russell Peel Russell Bentinck Granby Granby / Herries / Disraeli Disraeli Russell Disraeli Palmerston Disraeli Gladstone Disraeli Gladstone Hartington Northcote Gladstone Hicks Beach Gladstone Balfour Harcourt Campbell-Bannerman Balfour Chamberlain Balfour Law Vacant Carson Asquith Maclean Asquith MacDonald Baldwin MacDonald Baldwin Henderson Lansbury Attlee Lees-Smith Pethick-Lawrence Greenwood Attlee Churchill Attlee Morrison Gaitskell Brown Wilson Douglas-Home Heath Wilson Heath Thatcher Callaghan Foot Kinnock Smith Beckett Blair Major Hague Duncan Smith Howard Cameron Harman Miliband Harman Corbyn Starmer Sunak Badenoch House of Lords Grenville Grey 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne Wellington 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne Wellington Melbourne Wellington Melbourne 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne Stanley 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne Derby (Stanley) Granville Derby Russell Granville Malmesbury Cairns Richmond Granville Beaconsfield 3rd Marquess of Salisbury Granville 3rd Marquess of Salisbury Granville Kimberley 3rd Marquess of Salisbury Rosebery Kimberley Spencer Ripon 5th Marquess of Lansdowne Crewe Curzon of Kedleston Haldane Parmoor 4th Marquess of Salisbury Hailsham Parmoor Ponsonby of Shulbrede Snell Addison 5th Marquess of Salisbury Addison Jowitt Alexander of Hillsborough Carrington Shackleton Carrington Peart Cledwyn of Penrhos Richard Cranborne Strathclyde Royall of Blaisdon Smith of Basildon True v t e Defence secretaries of the United Kingdom Ministers for co-ordination of defence Sir Thomas Inskip Lord Chatfield Ministers for defence Winston Churchill Clement Attlee A. V. Alexander Manny Shinwell Winston Churchill Harold Alexander Harold Macmillan Selwyn Lloyd Sir Walter Monckton Anthony Head Duncan Sandys Harold Watkinson Peter Thorneycroft Secretaries of state for defence Peter Thorneycroft Denis Healey Lord Carrington Ian Gilmour Roy Mason Fred Mulley Francis Pym John Nott Michael Heseltine George Younger Tom King Malcolm Rifkind Michael Portillo George Robertson Geoff Hoon John Reid Des Browne John Hutton Bob Ainsworth Liam Fox Philip Hammond Michael Fallon Gavin Williamson Penny Mordaunt Ben Wallace Grant Shapps John Healey v t e Secretaries of State for Dominion Affairs Leo Amery Sidney Webb, Lord Passfield J. H. Thomas Malcolm MacDonald Edward, Lord Stanley Malcolm MacDonald Sir Thomas Inskip (later Viscount Caldecote) Anthony Eden Thomas Inskip, Viscount Caldecote Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, Viscount Cranborne Clement Attlee Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, Viscount Cranborne Christopher Addison, Viscount Addison v t e War Cabinet of Winston Churchill Prime Minister Minister of Defence Winston Churchill (1940–1945) Deputy Prime Minister Clement Attlee (1942–1945) Lord President of the Council Neville Chamberlain (1940) Sir John Anderson (1940–1943) Clement Attlee (1943–1945) Lord Privy Seal Clement Attlee (1940–1942) Sir Stafford Cripps (1942) Chancellor of the Exchequer Sir Kingsley Wood (1940–1943) Sir John Anderson (1943–1945) Foreign Secretary Viscount Halifax (1940) Anthony Eden (1940–1945) Home Secretary Herbert Morrison (1940–1945) Minister of Aircraft Production Lord Beaverbrook (1940–1941) Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs Clement Attlee (1942–1943) Minister of Labour and National Service Ernest Bevin (1940–1945) Minister Resident Middle East Oliver Lyttelton (1942) Richard Casey (1942–1944) Lord Moyne (1944) Minister without Portfolio Arthur Greenwood (1940–1942) Minister of Reconstruction Lord Woolton (1943–1945) Minister of State Lord Beaverbrook (1941) Minister of Supply Lord Beaverbrook (1941–1942) Minister of Production Lord Beaverbrook (1942) Oliver Lyttelton (1942–1945) v t e Labour Party History Main History of the Labour Party Topics Electoral history General election manifestos History of the socialist movement in the United Kingdom European Parliamentary Labour Party Scottish Labour Party (1888) Independent Labour Party Labour Representation Committee Gladstone–MacDonald pact National Labour Organisation Labour Independent Group Campaign for Democratic Socialism Lib–Lab pact Formation of SDP Gang of Four Limehouse Declaration Militant tendency The longest suicide note in history Labour Listens One more heave New Labour Tony's Cronies Blue Labour One Nation Labour Chakrabarti Inquiry Leadership Leaders Hardie Henderson Barnes MacDonald Henderson Adamson Clynes MacDonald Henderson Lansbury Attlee Morrison ^ Gaitskell Brown ^ Wilson Callaghan Foot Kinnock Smith Beckett ^ Blair Brown Harman ^ Miliband Harman ^ Corbyn Starmer Deputy Leaders Clynes Graham Attlee Greenwood Morrison Griffiths Bevan Brown Jenkins Short Foot Healey Hattersley Beckett Prescott Harman Watson Rayner General Secretaries MacDonald Henderson Middleton Phillips Williams Barker ^ Nicholas Hayward Mortimer Whitty Sawyer McDonagh Triesman Carter Watt Collins McNicol Formby Evans Treasurers Henderson MacDonald Henderson Lathan Greenwood Gaitskell Bevan Nicholas Davies Callaghan Atkinson Varley Booth McCluskie Burlison Prosser Elsby Dromey Holland Leaders in the Lords Haldane Cripps Ponsonby Snell Addison Jowitt Alexander Pakenham Shackleton Shepherd Peart Hughes Richard Jay Williams Amos Ashton Royall Smith of Basildon Scottish Labour Leaders Dewar McLeish Jamieson ^ McConnell Jamieson ^ Alexander Jamieson ^ Gray Lamont Sarwar ^ Murphy Gray ^ Dugdale Rowley ^ Baillie ^ Leonard Baillie ^ Sarwar PLP Chairs Hardie Henderson Barnes MacDonald Henderson Hodge * Wardle * Adamson Clynes MacDonald Henderson Lansbury Attlee Lees-Smith * Pethick-Lawrence * Greenwood * Gaitskell Wilson Houghton Mikardo Hughes Willey Dormand Orme Hoyle Soley Corston Clwyd Lloyd Watts Cryer Morden EPLP Leaders Stewart Prescott Castle Lomas Martin Seal Ford Green David Donnelly Murphy Titley Willmott Corbett Party Chairman Clarke Reid McCartney Blears Harman Watson Lavery Rayner Dodds Reeves * = wartime, in opposition ^ Interim/Acting Internal elections and selections Leadership elections 1922 Ramsay MacDonald 1931 Arthur Henderson 1932 George Lansbury 1935 Clement Attlee 1955 Hugh Gaitskell 1960 1961 1963 Harold Wilson 1976 James Callaghan 1980 Michael Foot 1983 Neil Kinnock 1988 1992 John Smith 1994 Tony Blair 2007 Gordon Brown 2010 Ed Miliband 2015 Jeremy Corbyn 2016 2020 Keir Starmer Deputy Leadership elections 1952 Herbert Morrison 1953 1956 Jim Griffiths 1959 Aneurin Bevan 1960 George Brown 1961 1962 1970 Roy Jenkins 1971 1972 Edward Short 1976 Michael Foot 1980 Denis Healey 1981 1983 Roy Hattersley 1988 1992 Margaret Beckett 1994 John Prescott 2007 Harriet Harman 2015 Tom Watson 2020 Angela Rayner Shadow Cabinet elections and reshuffles Sep 1931 (Henderson) Nov 1931 1932 (Lansbury) 1933 1934 1935 (Attlee) 1936 1937 1938 1939 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 (Gaitskell) 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 (Wilson) 1970 1971 1972 1973 1979 (Callaghan) 1980 (Foot) 1981 1982 1983 (Kinnock) 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 (Smith) 1993 1994 (Blair) 1995 1996 2010 (Miliband) June 2016 (Corbyn) May 2021 (Starmer) November 2021 2023 Party structure Constitution Clause IV Executive National Executive Committee General Secretary Treasurer Parliamentary Parliamentary Labour Party Chief Whip of the Labour Party Conference Labour Party Conference Subnational Scottish Labour Welsh Labour Labour Party in Northern Ireland Directly elected city mayoral authorities London Labour CLPs Constituency Labour Party Labour International Miscellaneous National Policy Forum Affiliated trade unions Trade Union and Labour Party Liaison Organisation Labour Co-operative Co-operative Party Labour – Federation of Labour Groups Associated organisations List Organisations associated with the Labour Party Sectional groups Young Labour Labour International LGBT+ Labour Labour for Trans Rights Labour Students BAME Labour Disability Labour Factional groups Blue Labour Campaign for Labour Party Democracy Christians on the Left Compass Fabian Society Young Fabians Future Britain Centre-Left Grassroots Alliance Jewish Labour Movement Labour Campaign for Electoral Reform Labour CND Labour Friends of Israel Labour Friends of Palestine & the Middle East Labour Growth Group Labour Party Irish Society Labour Representation Committee (2004) Labour Women's Network Momentum Open Labour National Union of Labour and Socialist Clubs Progressive Britain Red Wall Caucus Revolutionary Communist Party Formerly Socialist Appeal Socialist Health Association Socialist Educational Association Socialist Environment and Resources Association Socialist Campaign Group Socialist Youth Network Socialist societies Media publications LabourList Tribune Party alliances Current Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats Progressive Alliance Socialist International v t e 1935 Labour Party leadership election Interim Leader: Clement Attlee Clement Attlee Arthur Greenwood Herbert Morrison v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e World Constitutional Convention call signatories Constitution for the Federation of Earth World Constitution Coordinating Committee Thane Read Philip Isely Margaret Isely Georgia Lloyd Countries Costa Rica Pakistan Senegal Sierra Leone Tanzania Heads of government Presidents Edgar Faure Francisco Orlich Bolmarcich José Figueres Ferrer Julius Nyerere Léopold Sédar Senghor Muhammad Ayub Khan Otilio Ulate Blanco Vice-presidents Jaramogi Oginga Odinga Prime Ministers Clement Attlee Milton Margai Tetsu Katayama Governors Culbert Olson Hiroo Ōhara Mayors E.C. Quaye Setsuo Yamada Shinzo Hamai Politicians International Cornelis Berkhouwer National Ahmed Ebrahim Haroon Jaffer Akira Kazami B. Satya Narayan Reddy Chiyo Sakakibara Diwan Chaman Lall Ezequiel Padilla Peñaloza Gerhard Jahn Hisato Ichimada Henry Usborne Ichirō Kiyose Inder Kumar Gujral Irène de Lipkowski John Foster Kanaiyalal Maneklal Munshi Kenzō Matsumura Komla Agbeli Gbedemah Lewis Silkin N. G. Ranga Pascoal Ranieri Mazzilli Patrick Wolrige-Gordon William Beveridge Religious leaders Abbé Pierre Dana McLean Greeley George MacLeod John Collins Martin Niemöller Michael Scott Nobel laureates Physics Alfred Kastler C. F. Powell Hideki Yukawa Max Born Chemistry Frederick Sanger (twice) Otto Hahn Physiology or Medicine Albert Szent-Györgyi Dickinson W. Richards Hermann Joseph Muller Macfarlane Burnet Literature Bertrand Russell Salvatore Quasimodo Peace John Boyd Orr Joseph Rotblat Multiple Linus Pauling (Chemistry & Peace) Scientists Charles C. Price Edward Condon Edris Rice-Wray Carson Harlow Shapley Jean Orcel Pitirim Sorokin Priyadaranjan Ray René Dumont Wilder Penfield Human rights activists Martin Luther King Jr.

Humanitarians André and Magda Trocmé (Righteous Among the Nations) Brock Chisholm Veterans Hugh B. Hester Varied fields Arthur Ernest Bishop (inventor) David Alfaro Siqueiros (Social realist) E. M. L. Odjidja (teacher) Edward J. Sparling (educator) Erich Kahler (scholar) Gregorio Bermann (humanist) Gerard Piel (science editor) Henri Laugier (scholar) Hugh J. Schonfield (scholar & pacifist) Kaoru Ōta (union leader) Kay Boyle (writer) Lloyd Morain (humanist) Mark Van Doren (writer & scholar) Maurício Campos de Medeiros (teacher) Oscar Niemeyer (architect) Ōuchi Hyōei (economist) Rameshwari Nehru (social worker) Satish Gujral (artist) Shigeri Yamataka (feminist) Sophia Wadia (theosophist) Stanley Slotkin (businessman) Stuart Hall (cultural theorist) Tamaki Uemura ( YWCA executive) Tano Jōdai (teacher & pacifist) Toyohiko Kagawa (pacifist) Related World Committee for a World Constitutional Convention Provisional World Parliament Other World constitution World government World federalism Source: [1] [2] [3] [4] Category Portals : Biography Politics United Kingdom Socialism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clement_Attlee&oldid=1306130066 " Categories : Clement Attlee 1883 births 1967 deaths 20th-century prime ministers of the United Kingdom Academics of Ruskin College Academics of the London School of Economics Alumni of University College, Oxford Alumni of the Inns of Court School of Law British anti-communists British anti-Zionists British Army personnel of World War I British Empire in World War II British secretaries of state for Dominion affairs British socialists British social democrats Burials at Westminster Abbey Chancellors of the Duchy of Lancaster Deaths from pneumonia in England Deputy prime ministers of the United Kingdom Earls Attlee British agnostics English men's footballers Fellows of the Royal Society Fleet Town F.C. players Foreign Office personnel of World War II Knights of the Garter Labour Party (UK) MPs for English constituencies Labour Party (UK) hereditary peers Labour Party prime ministers of the United Kingdom Leaders of the Labour Party (UK) Leaders of the opposition (United Kingdom) Lord presidents of the Council Lords Privy Seal Mayors of places in Greater London Members of Stepney Metropolitan Borough Council Members of the Fabian Society Members of the Order of Merit Members of the Order of the Companions of Honour Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom Ministers in the Attlee governments, 1945–1951 Ministers in the Churchill wartime government, 1940–1945 National Council for Civil Liberties people People educated at Haileybury and Imperial Service College People from Putney People of the Cold War South Lancashire Regiment officers UK MPs 1922–1923 UK MPs 1923–1924 UK MPs 1924–1929 UK MPs 1929–1931 UK MPs 1931–1935 UK MPs 1935–1945 UK MPs 1945–1950 UK MPs 1950–1951 UK MPs 1951–1955 UK MPs 1955–1959 UK MPs who were granted peerages Postmasters general of the United Kingdom United Kingdom home front during World War II World War II political leaders Earls created by Elizabeth II Members of the Inner Temple British Eurosceptics British people of the Palestine Emergency Labour Party (UK) mayors People of the Korean War World Constitutional Convention call signatories First Lords of the Treasury Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Pages containing London Gazette template with parameter supp set to y Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2024 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from July 2020 Use dmy dates from January 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2021 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2022 CS1: long volume value Articles with dead external links from January 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links Men's association football players not categorized by position This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 03:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Clement Attlee 92 languages Add topic

