Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 2.1 Classical foundationalism 2.2 Modest foundationalism 2.3 Internalism and externalism 3 Criticisms 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Foundationalism 21 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Foundationalist ) Epistemological theory This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article contains weasel words : vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information .

Such statements should be clarified or removed .

( November 2022 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Foundationalism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Epistemology Outline Category Schools Coherentism Contextualism Dogmatism Empiricism Fallibilism Fideism Foundationalism Infallibilism Infinitism Naturalism Perspectivism Pragmatism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Solipsism Structuralism Concepts Action Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Belief Credence Certainty Data Experience Information Justification Induction Knowledge Meaning Rationality Reason Truth Wisdom Domains Applied epistemology Evolutionary epistemology Formal epistemology Historical epistemology Metaepistemology Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Epistemologists Aristotle Sextus Empiricus Edmund Gettier Wang Yangming René Descartes David Hume Immanuel Kant W. V. O. Quine more...

Related fields Epistemic cognition Epistemic logic Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science v t e Foundationalism concerns philosophical theories of knowledge resting upon non-inferential justified belief , or some secure foundation of certainty such as a conclusion inferred from a basis of sound premises.

[ 1 ] The main rival of the foundationalist theory of justification is the coherence theory of justification , whereby a body of knowledge, not requiring a secure foundation, can be established by the interlocking strength of its components, like a puzzle solved without prior certainty that each small region was solved correctly.

[ 1 ] Identifying the alternatives as either circular reasoning or infinite regress , and thus exhibiting the regress problem , Aristotle made foundationalism his own clear choice, positing basic beliefs underpinning others.

[ 2 ] Descartes , the most famed foundationalist, discovered a foundation in the fact of his own existence and in the "clear and distinct" ideas of reason, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] whereas Locke found a foundation in experience .  Differing foundations may reflect differing epistemological emphases— empiricists emphasizing experience , rationalists emphasizing reason —but may blend both.

[ 1 ] In the 1930s, debate over foundationalism revived.

[ 2 ] Whereas Moritz Schlick viewed scientific knowledge like a pyramid where a special class of statements does not require verification through other beliefs and serves as a foundation, Otto Neurath argued that scientific knowledge lacks an ultimate foundation and acts like a raft.

[ 2 ] In the 1950s, the dominance of foundationalism was challenged by a number of philosophers such as Willard Van Orman Quine and Wilfrid Sellars .

[ 2 ] Quine's ontological relativity found any belief networked [ clarification needed ] to one's beliefs on all of reality, while auxiliary beliefs somewhere in the vast network are readily modified to protect desired beliefs.

Classically, foundationalism had posited infallibility of basic beliefs and deductive reasoning between beliefs—a strong foundationalism.

[ 2 ] Around 1975, weak foundationalism emerged.

[ 2 ] Thus recent foundationalists have variously allowed fallible basic beliefs, and inductive reasoning between them, either by enumerative induction or by inference to the best explanation .

[ 2 ] And whereas internalists require cognitive access to justificatory means, externalists find justification without such access.

History [ edit ] Part of a series on René Descartes Philosophy Cartesianism Rationalism Foundationalism Mechanism Doubt and certainty Existence of God Dream argument Cogito, ergo sum Evil demon Trademark argument Causal adequacy principle Mind–body dichotomy Analytic geometry Coordinate system Cartesian circle Folium Rule of signs Cartesian diver Balloonist theory Wax argument Res cogitans Res extensa Works Rules for the Direction of the Mind The Search for Truth The World Discourse on the Method La Géométrie Meditations on First Philosophy Principles of Philosophy Passions of the Soul People Christina, Queen of Sweden Francine Descartes v t e Foundationalism was initiated by French early modern philosopher René Descartes .

[ 3 ] In his Meditations , Descartes challenged the contemporary principles of philosophy by arguing that everything he knew he learnt from or through his senses. He used various arguments to challenge the reliability of the senses, citing previous errors and the possibilities that he was dreaming or being deceived by an Evil Demon which rendered all of his beliefs about the external world false.

[ 4 ] Descartes attempted to establish the secure foundations for knowledge to avoid scepticism . He contrasted the information provided by senses, which is unclear and uncertain, with the truths of geometry , which are clear and distinct. Geometrical truths are also certain and indubitable; Descartes thus attempted to find truths which were clear and distinct because they would be indubitably true and a suitable foundation for knowledge.

[ 5 ] His method was to question all of his beliefs until he reached something clear and distinct that was indubitably true. The result was his cogito ergo sum —'I think therefore I am', or the belief that he was thinking—as his indubitable belief suitable as a foundation for knowledge.

[ 3 ] This resolved Descartes' problem of the Evil Demon. Even if his beliefs about the external world were false, his beliefs about what he was experiencing were still indubitably true, even if those perceptions do not relate to anything in the world.

[ 6 ] Several other philosophers of the early modern period, including John Locke , G. W. Leibniz , George Berkeley , David Hume , and Thomas Reid , accepted foundationalism as well.

[ 7 ] Baruch Spinoza was interpreted as metaphysical foundationalist by G. W. F. Hegel , a proponent of coherentism .

[ 8 ] Immanuel Kant 's foundationalism rests on his theory of categories .

[ 9 ] In late modern philosophy , foundationalism was defended by J. G. Fichte in his book Grundlage der gesamten Wissenschaftslehre (1794/1795), [ 10 ] Wilhelm Windelband in his book Über die Gewißheit der Erkenntniss (1873), [ 11 ] and Gottlob Frege in his book Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik (1884).

[ 12 ] In contemporary philosophy , foundationalism has been defended by Edmund Husserl , [ 13 ] Bertrand Russell [ 14 ] and John McDowell .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Definition [ edit ] Foundationalism is an attempt to respond to the regress problem of justification in epistemology. According to this argument, every proposition requires justification to support it, but any justification also needs to be justified itself. If this goes on ad infinitum , it is not clear how anything in the chain could be justified. Foundationalism holds that there are 'basic beliefs' which serve as foundations to anchor the rest of our beliefs.

[ 17 ] Strong versions of the theory assert that an indirectly justified belief is completely justified by basic beliefs; more moderate theories hold that indirectly justified beliefs require basic beliefs to be justified, but can be further justified by other factors.

[ 18 ] Since ancient Greece , Western philosophy has pursued a solid foundation as the ultimate and eternal reference system for all knowledge . This foundation serves not only as a starting point but also as the fundamental basis for understanding the truth of existence. Thinking is the process of proving the validity of knowledge, not proving the rationality of the foundation from which knowledge is shaped. This means, with ultimate cause, the foundation is true, absolute, entire and impossible to prove.

Neopragmatist philosopher Richard Rorty , a proponent of anti-foundationalism , said that the fundamentalism confirmed the existence of the privileged representation [ 19 ] which constitutes the foundation, from which dominates epistemology.

[ clarification needed ] The earliest foundationalism is Plato 's theory of Forms , which shows the general concept as a model for the release of existence, which is only the faint copy of the Forms of eternity, that means, understanding the expression of objects leads to acquiring all knowledge, then acquiring knowledge accompanies achieving the truth. Achieving the truth means understanding the foundation. This idea still has some appeal in for example international relations studies.

[ 20 ] Classical foundationalism [ edit ] Foundationalism holds basic beliefs exist, which are justified without reference to other beliefs, and that nonbasic beliefs must ultimately be justified by basic beliefs. Classical foundationalism maintains that basic beliefs must be infallible if they are to justify nonbasic beliefs, and that only deductive reasoning can be used to transfer justification from one belief to another.

[ 21 ] Laurence BonJour has argued that the classical formulation of foundationalism requires basic beliefs to be infallible, incorrigible, indubitable, and certain if they are to be adequately justified.

[ 22 ] Mental states and immediate experience are often taken as good candidates for basic beliefs because it is argued that beliefs about these do not need further support to be justified.

[ 23 ] Modest foundationalism [ edit ] As an alternative to the classic view, modest foundationalism does not require that basic perceptual beliefs are infallible, but holds that it is reasonable to assume that perceptual beliefs are justified unless evidence to the contrary exists.

[ 24 ] This is still foundationalism because it maintains that all non-basic beliefs must be ultimately justified by basic beliefs, but it does not require that basic beliefs are infallible and allows inductive reasoning as an acceptable form of inference.

[ 25 ] For example, a belief that 'I see red' could be defeated with psychological evidence showing my mind to be confused or inattentive. Modest foundationalism can also be used to avoid the problem of inference. Even if perceptual beliefs are infallible, it is not clear that they can infallibly ground empirical knowledge (even if my belief that the table looks red to me is infallible, the inference to the belief that the table actually is red might not be infallible). Modest foundationalism does not require this link between perception and reality to be so strong; our perception of a table being yellow is adequate justification to believe that this is the case, even if it is not infallible.

[ 24 ] Reformed epistemology is a form of modest foundationalism which takes religious beliefs as basic because they are non-inferentially justified: their justification arises from religious experience , rather than prior beliefs. This takes a modest approach to foundationalism—religious beliefs are not taken to be infallible, but are assumed to be prima facie justified unless evidence arises to the contrary.

[ 26 ] Internalism and externalism [ edit ] Foundationalism can take internalist and externalist forms. Internalism requires that a believer's justification for a belief must be accessible to them for it to be justified.

[ 27 ] Foundationalist internalists have held that basic beliefs are justified by mental events or states, such as experiences, that do not constitute beliefs. Alternatively, basic beliefs may be justified by some special property of the belief itself, such as its being self-evident or infallible . Externalism maintains that it is unnecessary for the means of justification of a belief to be accessible to the believer.

[ 28 ] Reliabilism is an externalist foundationalist theory, initially proposed by Alvin Goldman , which argues that a belief is justified if it is reliably produced, meaning that it will be probably true. Goldman distinguished between two kinds of justification for beliefs: belief-dependent and belief-independent. A belief-dependent process uses prior beliefs to produce new beliefs; a belief-independent process does not, using other stimuli instead. Beliefs produced this way are justified because the processes that cause them are reliable; this might be because we have evolved to reach good conclusions when presented with sense-data , meaning the conclusions we draw from our senses are usually true.

[ 7 ] Criticisms [ edit ] See also: Anti-foundationalism Critics of foundationalism often argue that for a belief to be justified it must be supported by other beliefs; [ 7 ] in Donald Davidson 's phrase, "only a belief can be a reason for another belief". For instance, Wilfrid Sellars argued that non- doxastic mental states cannot be reasons, and so noninferential warrant cannot be derived from them. Similarly, critics of externalist foundationalism argue that only mental states or properties the believer is aware of could make a belief justified.

Postmodernists and post-structuralists such as Richard Rorty and Jacques Derrida have attacked foundationalism on the grounds that the truth of a statement or discourse is only verifiable in accordance with other statements and discourses. Rorty in particular elaborates further on this, claiming that the individual, the community, the human body as a whole have a 'means by which they know the world' (this entails language, culture, semiotic systems, mathematics, science etc.). In order to verify particular means, or particular statements belonging to certain means (e.g., the propositions of the natural sciences), a person would have to 'step outside' the means and critique them neutrally, in order to provide a foundation for adopting them. However, this is impossible. The only way in which one can know the world is through the means by which they know the world; a method cannot justify itself. This argument can be seen as directly related to Wittgenstein 's theory of language, drawing a parallel between postmodernism and late logical positivism that is united in critique of foundationalism.

[ 29 ] See also [ edit ] Constructivist epistemology Ethical intuitionism Evidentialism Foundherentism Panrationalism Pragmatism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Simon Blackburn, The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy , 2nd (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005), p 139 .

^ a b c d e f g h Ted Poston, "Foundationalism" (Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy) ^ a b Grenz & Franke 2001, p. 31 ^ Hatfield, Gary (3 December 2008).

"René Descartes" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 28 March 2013 .

^ Skirry, Justin (13 September 2008).

"René Descartes (1596–1650): Overview" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 28 March 2013 .

^ Kind, Amy (18 November 2005).

"Introspection" . internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 28 March 2013 .

^ a b c Fumerton, Richard (21 February 2000).

"Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 19 August 2018 .

^ James Kreines , Reason in the World: Hegel's Metaphysics and Its Philosophical Appeal , Oxford University Press, 2015, p. 25: "Spinoza's foundationalism (Hegel argues) threatens to eliminate all determinate reality, leaving only one indeterminate substance." ^ Tom Rockmore , On Foundationalism: A Strategy for Metaphysical Realism , Rowman & Littlefield, 2004, p. 65.

^ Frederick C. Beiser , German Idealism: The Struggle Against Subjectivism, 1781–1801 , Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2002, p. 236.

^ Frederick C. Beiser (2014), The Genesis of Neo-Kantianism, 1796–1880 (Oxford: Oxford University Press), p. 517.

^ Tom Rockmore , On Foundationalism: A Strategy for Metaphysical Realism , Rowman & Littlefield, 2004, p. 111.

^ Barry Smith and David Woodruff Smith, eds., The Cambridge Companion to Husserl , Cambridge University Press, p. 292.

^ Carlo Cellucci, Rethinking Knowledge: The Heuristic View , Springer, 2017, p. 32.

^ John McDowell, Mind and World . Harvard University Press, 1994, p. 29.

^ Roger F. Gibson, "McDowell's Direct Realism and Platonic Naturalism", Philosophical Issues Vol. 7, Perception (1996), pp. 275–281.

^ O'Brien 2006, pp. 61–62 ^ Audi 2003, p. 194 ^ Rorty, Richard (1979). Philosophy and the mirror of nature. Princeton University Press. pp. 165–173 ^ Smith, Steve, Ownens Patrica, "Alternative approaches to international relations theory" in "The Globalisation of World Politics", Baylis, Smith and Owens, OUP, 4th ed, p177 ^ Lemos 2007, pp. 50–51 ^ BonJour 1985, p. 27 ^ Dancy 1985, pp. 53–54 ^ a b O'Brien 2006, pp. 72–74 ^ Lemos 2007, p.55 ^ O'Brien 2006, p. 184 ^ O'Brien 2006, p.87 ^ O'Brien 2006, p. 88 ^ Rorty, Richard (1993), Guignon, Charles (ed.), "Wittgenstein, Heidegger, and the reification of language" , The Cambridge Companion to Heidegger , Cambridge Companions to Philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

337– 357, doi : 10.1017/ccol0521385709.014 , ISBN 978-1-139-00051-2 , retrieved 9 March 2023 Bibliography [ edit ] Audi, Robert (2003).

Epistemology: A Contemporary Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-28109-6 .

BonJour, Laurence (1985).

The Structure of Empirical Knowledge . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-67484-381-3 .

Coelho, Ivo (2010). "Foundationalism". In Puthenpurackal, Johnson J. (ed.).

ACPI Encyclopaedia of Philosophy . Asian Trading Corporation.

ISBN 978-8-17086-574-2 .

Dancy, Jonathan (1985).

Introduction to Contemporary Epistemology . Blackwell.

ISBN 0-631-13622-3 .

Franke, John R.; Grenz, Stanley James (2001).

Beyond Foundationalism: Shaping Theology in a Postmodern Context . Westminster John Knox Press.

ISBN 9780664257699 .

Greco, John (2000).

Putting Skeptics in Their Place . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-04553-7 .

Lemos, Noah Mercelino (2007).

An Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-13946-185-6 .

O'Brien, Dan (2006).

An introduction to the Theory of Knowledge . Polity.

ISBN 978-0-74563-316-9 .

External links [ edit ] Fumerton, Richard.

"Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Foundationalism at PhilPapers Foundationalism at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project "Foundationalism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Links to related articles v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐ssxvf
Cached time: 20250816111009
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.602 seconds
Real time usage: 0.755 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3177/1000000
Revision size: 19446/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 348023/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 87482/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 122982/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.304/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8098995/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  549.680      1 -total
 19.21%  105.616      1 Template:Navboxes
 17.83%   98.032      1 Template:Reflist
 15.12%   83.102      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.98%   82.318      1 Template:Epistemology_sidebar
 13.47%   74.065      4 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 12.41%   68.242      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 12.24%   67.265      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.12%   66.635      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.93%   54.567     13 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11300:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816111009 and revision id 1296350903. Rendering was triggered because: diff-page Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Foundationalism&oldid=1296350903 " Categories : Foundationalism Philosophical analogies Theories of justification Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with weasel words from November 2022 Articles needing additional references from November 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from October 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2020 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 13:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Foundationalism 21 languages Add topic

