Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Events 2 Festivals 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ashadha 22 languages Afrikaans বাংলা भोजपुरी डोटेली ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ मराठी მარგალური ဘာသာမန် Nederlands नेपाली Norsk bokmål ଓଡ଼ିଆ ភាសាខ្មែរ Русский संस्कृतम् سنڌي தமிழ் తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Aashaadha ) 4th month of the Hindu calendar Ashadha Ratha Yatra in Odisha, India .

Native name आषाढ ( Sanskrit ) Calendar Hindu calendar Month number 4 Season Rainy Gregorian equivalent June-July Significant days Jagannath Ratha Yatra Guru Purnima Shayani Ekadashi ← Jyestha Shraavana → Ashadha or Aashaadha is a month of the Hindu calendar that corresponds to June/July in the Gregorian calendar .

[ 1 ] In India's national civil calendar , this month is the fourth month of the year. In Hindu astrology , Ashada begins with the Sun 's entry into Gemini . It is the first of the two months that comprise the monsoon season.

The corresponding month in the Bengali calendar , Aṣaṛh , is the third month.

In lunar religious calendars, Ashadha begins on a new moon and is usually the fourth month of the year.

Events [ edit ] Shukla Paksha Krishna Paksha 1. Prathma 1. Prathma 2.

Dwitiya 2. Dwitiya 3.

Tritiya 3. Tritiya 4.

Chaturthi 4. Chaturthi 5.

Panchami 5. Panchami 6.

Shashti 6. Shashti 7.

Saptami 7. Saptami 8.

Ashtami 8. Ashtami 9.

Navami 9. Navami 10.

Dashami 10. Dashami 11.

Ekadashi 11. Ekadashi 12.

Dwadashi 12. Dwadashi 13.

Thrayodashi 13. Thrayodashi 14.

Chaturdashi 14. Chaturdashi 15.

Purnima 15.

Amavasya Festivals [ edit ] Rath Yatra that is dedicated to Jagannath is held in the month of Asadha every year in Puri and other places.

Guru Purnima , a festival dedicated to the Guru , is celebrated on the Purnima (Full Moon) day of the month. Prior to it Shayani Ekadashi , is observed on the eleventh lunar day ( Ekadashi ) of the bright fortnight ( Shukla paksha ). " Aadi Amavasai " is an important festival in Tamil Nadu and auspicious for Mariamman .

In many parts of Nepal , the arrival of monsoon marks a special time for cultivating rice. This occasion starts with farmers, men and women, planting rice ( Nepali : राेपाइँ ) while singing plantation songs. The farmers then participate in the mud festival, throwing mud at each other and welcoming the monsoon season. The festival ends with people sharing " dahi chiura ( Nepali : दही चिउरा )" (literally "beaten rice with curds") with each other.

Kakkada month in Kodava calendar in Coorg, is considered one of the significant and auspicious days.

Aati soppu , kakkada paayasa are the delicacies prepared on this day.

In many parts of Gujarat , Dashamaa Vart dedicated to Dashamaa or Momai maa is observed on the Amavasya of Asadha every year.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Hinduism portal Hindu units of measurement Hindu astronomy Jyotish References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aashaadha .

^ Henderson, Helene. (Ed.) (2005) Holidays, festivals, and celebrations of the world dictionary Third edition. Electronic edition. Detroit: Omnigraphics, p. xxix.

ISBN 0-7808-0982-3 ^ "Sawan 2023 festivals full calendar: Hariyali Teej, Raksha Bandhan to Janmashtami; dates of 12 major fasts and festivals" .

Hindustan Times . 10 July 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Significance, festivals and fasting of Ashadha month v t e Days and months of the Hindu calendar Days Pratipada Dvitiya Tritiya Chaturthi Panchami Shashthi Saptami Ashtami Navami Dashami Ekadashi Dvadashi Trayodashi Chaturdashi Amavasya Purnima Months Lunar Chaitra Vaishakha Jyeshtha Ashadha Shravana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartika Margashirsha (Agrahayana) Pausha Magha Phalguna Adhika-masa Solar Meṣa Vṛṣabha Mithuna Karkaṭa Siṃha Kanya Tulā Vṛścika Dhanu Makara Kumbha Mīna v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna This article about Hindu religious studies , scripture or ceremony is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ashadha&oldid=1305592729 " Categories : Months of the Hindu calendar Hindu theology stubs Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from July 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Tamil-language text Articles containing Nepali (macrolanguage)-language text Articles containing Kannada-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 00:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ashadha 22 languages Add topic

