Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Studies in astronomy and mathematics 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Richard of Wallingford 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Kreyòl ayisyen Nederlands Polski Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English mathematician and astrologer For the Constable of Wallingford Castle, see Richard of Wallingford (constable) .

Richard of Wallingford Richard of Wallingford measuring with a pair of compasses in this 14th-century miniature.

Born 1292 Wallingford , England Died 1336 St Albans Occupation(s) Astronomer, horologist, cleric, mathematician, astrologer Richard of Wallingford (1292–1336) was an English mathematician, astronomer, horologist, and cleric who made major contributions to astronomy and horology while serving as abbot of St Albans Abbey in Hertfordshire.

Biography [ edit ] Richard of Wallingford pointing to a clock, in reference to his gift to the abbey. His face is disfigured, possibly by leprosy.

Reconstructed clock of St. Alban's Abbey, originally built circa 1356.

Richard was born, the son of a blacksmith , at Wallingford in Berkshire (now Oxfordshire ) in England, in 1292. When he was orphaned he was taken to William de Kirkeby the Prior of Wallingford Priory and dedicated to the Holy Trinity. Wallingford was a dependant priory to St Albans Abbey. Richard subsequently spent six years studying at Oxford University before becoming a monk at St Albans . He later studied for nine more years at Oxford. In 1327 he became abbot of St Albans .

Richard is best known for the astronomical clock he designed, while he was abbot, which is described in the Tractatus Horologii Astronomici (1327). The clock was completed about 20 years after Richard's death by William of Walsham, but was apparently destroyed during Henry VIII 's reformation and the dissolution of St Albans Abbey in 1539. His clock almost certainly was the most complex clock mechanism in existence at the time in the British Isles , and one of the most sophisticated ones anywhere.

[ 1 ] The only other clocklike mechanism of comparable complexity that is documented in the 14th century is the astrarium by Giovanni de Dondi . Richard’s clock gave the mean time in equal and unequal hours, as well as the true solar time. It also displayed the phases of the moon and showed the positions of the lunar nodes and the height of the tide at London Bridge .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Based on the 14th-century literary evidence still surviving in the 20th century, scholars of horological history have tried to build recreations of Richard of Wallingford's clock.  The best known of these was built by Haward Horological and for many years was displayed at the Time Museum (now defunct) in Rockford, Illinois ; it is currently on display at the Halim Time and Glass Museum in Evanston, Illinois .

[ 4 ] One was built by Eric Watson and is now in the Wallingford Museum ; one built in 1988 is located at St Albans Cathedral; and one was built by Don Unwin for the Whipple Museum of the History of Science in Cambridge.

[ 5 ] Richard suffered from what was then thought to be leprosy (though it might have been scrofula or tuberculosis ) which he apparently contracted when he went to have his position, as abbot of St Albans Abbey, confirmed by the Pope at Avignon . He died at St Albans in 1336.

Studies in astronomy and mathematics [ edit ] Richard also designed and constructed calculation devices: a torquetum , the Rectangulus , and an equatorium , which he called Albion . The Albion could be used for astronomical calculations such as lunar , solar and planetary longitudes and could predict eclipses , and was capable of doing this without relying on a set of tables that had to be copied out.

[ 6 ] This is described in the Tractatus Albionis . He published other works on trigonometry , celestial coordinates, astrology, and various religious works.

See also [ edit ] Giovanni Dondi dall'Orologio Su Song Yi Xing References [ edit ] ^ Jr, Tom Woods (18 September 2012).

"How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization" . Regnery Publishing. p. 36 – via Google Books.

^ Falk 2020 , p. 60.

^ Durant, Will (1957).

The Reformation .

The Story of Civilization . Vol. 6. Simon and Schuster. p. 242.

^ Halim Time & Glass Museum.

"Richard of Wallingford" .

Facebook . Archived from the original on 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 September 2020 .

^ Falk 2020 , p. 61.

^ Hannam, James. God's philosophers: how the medieval world laid the foundations of modern science. Icon Books Ltd, 2009, 156 Sources [ edit ] Falk, Seb (2020).

The Light Ages: The Surprising Story of Medieval Science . New York: W.W. Norton.

ISBN 978-1-324-00293-2 .

North, J. (2004) God's Clockmaker: Richard of Wallingford and the Invention of Time . Oxbow Books.

ISBN 1-85285-451-0 North, J. (1976) Richard of Wallingford: An edition of his writings . Oxford Univ Press.

ISBN 0-19-858139-4 Watson, E (1979) "The St Albans Clock of Richard of Wallingford".

Antiquarian Horology , Number 4, Volume 11, Summer 1979, p. 372–384.

"Richard of Wallingford" . Retrieved 5 May 2008 .

"Astronomical Clock, Originally designed by Richard" . Archived from the original on 14 July 2018 . Retrieved 5 May 2008 .

"The Astronomical Clock of Richard of Wallingford, essay by Nicholas Whyte" . Retrieved 1 July 2008 .

"Richard of Wallingford and the Clock of St. Albans, by Deryl Bender" . Retrieved 1 July 2008 .

"Richard of Wallingford" at the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography ; Retrieved 26 February 2025 External links [ edit ] Wallingford History Gateway Images of Richard of Wallingford and the Astronomical Clock of Richard of Wallingford from the British Library v t e Astronomical clocks Czech Republic Olomouc Prague Žibřidice (Chaloupka's) France Beauvais Besançon Bourges Lyon Ploërmel Rouen Strasbourg Versailles (Passemant's) Germany Münster Rostock Stralsund Italy Brescia Clusone (Fanzago's) Cremona Mantua Messina Padua Venice (St Mark's) Switzerland Bern (Zytglogge) Sion Zug (Zytturm) United Kingdom Durham (Prior Castell's) Exeter Hampton Court Leicester Ottery St Mary Wells Wimborne Minster York Other countries Copenhagen (Jens Olsen's) Dubrovnik (Bell Tower) Gdańsk Lier (Zimmer tower) Lund Clockmakers and designers Paul Behrens Kaspar Brunner Giovanni Dondi dell'Orologio Hans Düringer Nikolaus Lilienfeld Jens Olsen Richard of Wallingford Jean-Baptiste Schwilgué Rasmus Sørnes Auguste-Lucien Vérité Louis Zimmer Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Sweden Israel Academics CiNii zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_of_Wallingford&oldid=1296114094 " Categories : 1292 births 1336 deaths 14th-century astrologers 14th-century English astronomers 14th-century English mathematicians 14th-century English Roman Catholic priests 14th-century writers in Latin Abbots of St Albans Astronomical instrument makers Catholic clergy scientists English clockmakers Horology Medieval English astrologers People from Wallingford, Oxfordshire 14th-century Christian abbots Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from June 2017 Use dmy dates from June 2017 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 22:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Richard of Wallingford 11 languages Add topic

