Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Individual Toggle Individual subsection 2.1 Individuation principle 3 Individualism and society Toggle Individualism and society subsection 3.1 Competitive individualism 3.2 Methodological individualism 4 Political individualism Toggle Political individualism subsection 4.1 Anarchism 4.2 Autarchism 4.3 Liberalism 5 Philosophical individualism Toggle Philosophical individualism subsection 5.1 Egoist anarchism 5.2 Ethical egoism 5.3 Existentialism 5.4 Freethought 5.5 Humanism 5.6 Hedonism 5.7 Libertinism 5.8 Objectivism 5.9 Philosophical anarchism 5.10 Subjectivism 5.10.1 Solipsism 6 Economic individualism Toggle Economic individualism subsection 6.1 Classical liberalism 6.2 Libertarianism 6.2.1 Left-libertarianism 6.2.2 Right-libertarianism 6.3 Socialism 6.3.1 Libertarian socialism 6.3.2 Mutualism 7 Criticisms 8 Other views Toggle Other views subsection 8.1 As creative independent lifestyle 8.2 Religion 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Individualism 72 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Malagasy मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept regarding the moral worth of the individual "Individual freedom" redirects here. For other uses, see Civil liberties .

Part of a series on Individualism Principles Autonomy Civil liberties Do it yourself Eremitism Free love Freethought Human rights Individual Individual rights Individual reclamation Individuation Laissez-faire Libertine Liberty Methodological individualism Negative liberty Personal property Positive liberty Private property Rugged individualism Self-actualization Self-ownership Self-sufficiency Subjectivity Philosophers Antiphon Aristippus Camus Diogenes Emerson Godwin Goldman Hayek Hess Hipparchia Igualada Ingersoll Jefferson Jung Laozi Locke Mandeville Marsden Mencken Mill Mises Montaigne Nietzsche Nozick Onfray Paine Popper Quelle Rand Rothbard Sade Schopenhauer Smith Spencer Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tucker Voltaire Warren Wilde Yang Ideologies Autarchism Anarchism Individualist anarchism Egoist anarchism Market anarchism Social anarchism Anarcho-capitalism Egoism Ethical egoism Rational egoism Existentialism Hedonism Humanism Individualist feminism Equity feminism Liberal feminism Liberalism Classical liberalism Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Right-libertarianism Minarchism Mutualism Objectivism Subjectivism Voluntaryism Principal concerns Anti-individualism Authoritarianism Collectivism Conformity Dogmatism Group rights Herd mentality Indoctrination Mass society Mobbing Social engineering Statism Tyranny Tyranny of the majority Theocracy Totalitarianism v t e Individualism is the moral stance, political philosophy , ideology , and social outlook that emphasizes the intrinsic worth of the individual .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Individualists promote realizing one's goals and desires, valuing independence and self-reliance, and advocating that the interests of the individual should gain precedence over the state or a social group, while opposing external interference upon one's own interests by society or institutions such as the government.

[ 5 ] Individualism makes the individual its focus, [ 3 ] and so starts "with the fundamental premise that the human individual is of primary importance in the struggle for liberation".

[ 6 ] Individualism represents one kind of sociocultural perspective and is often defined in contrast to other perspectives, such as communitarianism , collectivism and corporatism .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Individualism is also associated with artistic and bohemian interests and lifestyles, where there is a tendency towards self-creation and experimentation as opposed to tradition or popular mass opinions and behaviors, [ 5 ] [ 9 ] and it is associated with humanist philosophical positions and ethics.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] "Individualism" has also been used as a term denoting "[t]he quality of being an individual; individuality", related to possessing "[a]n individual characteristic; a quirk ".

[ 5 ] Etymology [ edit ] In the English language , the word individualism was first introduced as a pejorative by utopian socialists such as the Owenites in the late 1830s, although it is unclear if they were influenced by Saint-Simonianism or came up with it independently.

[ 12 ] A more positive use of the term in Britain came to be used with the writings of James Elishama Smith , a millenarian -turned-socialist and Christian Israelite . Although an early follower of Robert Owen , he eventually rejected Owen's collective idea of property and found in individualism a " universalism " that allowed for the development of the "original genius". Without individualism, Smith argued that individuals cannot amass property to increase one's happiness.

[ 12 ] William Maccall , another Unitarian preacher and probably an acquaintance of Smith, came somewhat later, although influenced by John Stuart Mill , Thomas Carlyle and German Romanticism , to the same positive conclusions in his 1847 work Elements of Individualism .

[ 13 ] Individual [ edit ] Main article: Individual An individual is a person or any specific object in a collection. In the 15th century and earlier, and also today within the fields of statistics and metaphysics , individual means "indivisible", typically describing any numerically singular thing, but sometimes meaning "a person" as in "the problem of proper names ". From the 17th century on, individual indicates separateness, as in individualism.

[ 14 ] Individuality is the state or quality of being an individuated being; a person separated from everything with unique character by possessing their own needs, goals, and desires in comparison to other people.

[ 15 ] Individuation principle [ edit ] Main article: Individuation The principle of individuation, or principium individuationis , [ 16 ] describes the manner in which a thing is identified as distinguished from other things.

[ 17 ] For Carl Jung , individuation is a process of transformation, whereby the personal and collective unconscious is brought into consciousness (by means of dreams, active imagination or free association to take examples) to be assimilated into the whole personality. It is a completely natural process necessary for the integration of the psyche to take place.

[ 18 ] Jung considered individuation to be the central process of human development.

[ 19 ] In L'individuation psychique et collective , Gilbert Simondon developed a theory of individual and collective individuation in which the individual subject is considered as an effect of individuation rather than a cause. Thus, the individual atom is replaced by a never-ending ontological process of individuation. Individuation is an always incomplete process, always leaving a "pre-individual" left-over, itself making possible future individuations.

[ 20 ] The philosophy of Bernard Stiegler draws upon and modifies the work of Gilbert Simondon on individuation and also upon similar ideas in Friedrich Nietzsche and Sigmund Freud . For Stiegler, "the I , as a psychic individual, can only be thought in relationship to we , which is a collective individual. The I is constituted in adopting a collective tradition, which it inherits and in which a plurality of I ' s acknowledge each other's existence." [ 21 ] Individualism and society [ edit ] Individualism holds that a person taking part in society attempts to learn and discover what their own interests are on a personal basis, without a presumed following of the interests of a societal structure (an individualist need not be an egoist ). The individualist does not necessarily follow one particular philosophy. They may create an amalgamation of elements of many philosophies, based on personal interests in particular aspects that they find of use. On a societal level, the individualist participates on a personally structured political and moral ground. Independent thinking and opinion is a necessary trait of an individualist.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau , claims that his concept of general will in The Social Contract is not the simple collection of individual wills and that it furthers the interests of the individual (the constraint of law itself would be beneficial for the individual, as the lack of respect for the law necessarily entails, in Rousseau's eyes, a form of ignorance and submission to one's passions instead of the preferred autonomy of reason ).

Individualism versus collectivism is a common dichotomy in cross-cultural research . Global comparative studies have found that the world's cultures vary in the degree to which they emphasize individual autonomy, freedom and initiative (individualistic traits), respectively conformity to group norms, maintaining traditions and obedience to in-group authority (collectivistic traits).

[ 22 ] Cultural differences between individualism and collectivism are differences in degrees, not in kind.

[ 23 ] Cultural individualism is strongly correlated with GDP per capita [ 24 ] and venture capital investments.

[ 25 ] The cultures of economically developed regions such as Australia, New Zealand, Japan, South Korea, [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] North America and Western Europe are the most individualistic in the world. Middle income regions such as Eastern Europe, South America and mainland East Asia have cultures which are neither very individualistic nor very collectivistic. The most collectivistic cultures in the world are from economically developing regions such as the Middle East and Northern Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, South and South-East Asia, Central Asia and Central America.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Against this background, a number of prominent authors from various disciplines (e.g., Louis Dumont, Geert Hofstede, Anthony Giddens, Zygmunt Bauman, Ronald Inglehart) have supported the influential thesis that the modernization of a society goes hand in hand with an increasing degree of individualization. However, this thesis has also found its critics, who point out, among other things, that the cultural-historical development of individualism from antiquity to the present has not proceeded in a straight line, that some societies with a more collectivist orientation are nevertheless highly modernized and that the concepts of individualism, collectivism and modernity lack conceptual clarity so that an appropriately differentiated analysis of the alleged connection is still lacking.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] An earlier analysis by Ruth Benedict in her book The Chrysanthemum and the Sword states that societies and groups can differ in the extent to which they are based upon predominantly "self-regarding" (individualistic, and/or self-interested) behaviors, rather than "other-regarding" (group-oriented, and group, or society-minded) behaviors.

Ruth Benedict made a distinction, relevant in this context, between guilt societies (e.g.

medieval Europe ) with an "internal reference standard" and shame societies (e.g. Japan, "bringing shame upon one's ancestors") with an "external reference standard", where people look to their peers for feedback on whether an action is acceptable or not.

[ 34 ] Individualism is often contrasted either with totalitarianism or with collectivism , [ 8 ] but there is a spectrum of behaviors at the societal level ranging from highly individualistic societies through mixed societies to collectivist.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] A 2022 study published by the Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization indicates that the individualistic societies have higher levels of charitable giving , providing a response to critics of individualism and capitalism . The authors propose that individualism increases charity through direct mechanisms ( self-interested giving) and indirect mechanisms (reinforcing economic freedom ).

[ 37 ] The findings support classical liberal arguments that individualism has virtues, aligning with the views of thinkers like Adam Smith and David Hume .

Competitive individualism [ edit ] According to an Oxford Dictionary , "competitive individualism" in sociology is "the view that achievement and non-achievement should depend on merit. Effort and ability are regarded as prerequisites of success. Competition is seen as an acceptable means of distributing limited resources and rewards.

Methodological individualism [ edit ] Methodological individualism is the view that phenomena can only be understood by examining how they result from the motivations and actions of individual agents.

[ 38 ] In economics, people's behavior is explained in terms of rational choices , as constrained by prices and incomes. The economist accepts individuals' preferences as givens.

Becker and Stigler provide a forceful statement of this view: On the traditional view, an explanation of economic phenomena that reaches a difference in tastes between people or times is the terminus of the argument: the problem is abandoned at this point to whoever studies and explains tastes (psychologists? anthropologists? phrenologists? sociobiologists?). On our preferred interpretation, one never reaches this impasse: the economist continues to search for differences in prices or incomes to explain any differences or changes in behavior.

[ 39 ] Political individualism [ edit ] "With the abolition of private property, then, we shall have true, beautiful, healthy Individualism. Nobody will waste his life in accumulating things, and the symbols for things. One will live. To live is the rarest thing in the world. Most people exist, that is all." — Oscar Wilde , The Soul of Man under Socialism , 1891 Individualists are chiefly concerned with protecting individual autonomy against obligations imposed by social institutions (such as the state or religious morality). For L. Susan Brown , "Liberalism and anarchism are two political philosophies that are fundamentally concerned with individual freedom yet differ from one another in very distinct ways. Anarchism shares with liberalism a radical commitment to individual freedom while rejecting liberalism's competitive property relations." [ 6 ] Civil libertarianism is a strain of political thought that supports civil liberties, or which emphasizes the supremacy of individual rights and personal freedoms over and against any kind of authority (such as a state , a corporation and social norms imposed through peer pressure , among others).

[ 40 ] Civil libertarianism is not a complete ideology ; rather, it is a collection of views on the specific issues of civil liberties and civil rights . Because of this, a civil libertarian outlook is compatible with many other political philosophies, and civil libertarianism is found on both the right and left in modern politics.

[ 41 ] For scholar Ellen Meiksins Wood , "there are doctrines of individualism that are opposed to Lockean individualism [...] and non-Lockean individualism may encompass socialism ".

[ 42 ] British historians such as Emily Robinson, Camilla Schofield, Florence Sutcliffe-Braithwaite and Natalie Thomlinson have argued that Britons were keen about defining and claiming their individual rights, identities and perspectives by the 1970s, demanding greater personal autonomy and self-determination and less outside control, angrily complaining that the establishment was withholding it. Historians argue that this shift in concerns helped cause Thatcherism and was incorporated into Thatcherism's appeal.

[ 43 ] Anarchism [ edit ] Main article: Anarchism Part of a series on Anarchism Glossary History Outline Schools of thought Black Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Total liberation Individualist Egoist Market Philosophical Mutualist Queer Religious Christian Jewish Social Collectivist Parecon Communist Magonism Without adjectives Methodology Counter-economics Illegalism Insurrectionary Pacifist Platformism Relationship Syndicalist Synthesis Theory and practice Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Within anarchism, individualist anarchism represents several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasize the individual and their will over any kinds of external determinants such as groups, society, traditions and ideological systems.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Individualist anarchism is not a single philosophy but refers to a group of individualistic philosophies that sometimes are in conflict.

In 1793, William Godwin , who has often [ 46 ] been cited as the first anarchist, wrote Political Justice , which some consider to be the first expression of anarchism.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Godwin, a philosophical anarchist, from a rationalist and utilitarian basis opposed revolutionary action and saw a minimal state as a present "necessary evil" that would become increasingly irrelevant and powerless by the gradual spread of knowledge.

[ 47 ] [ 49 ] Godwin advocated individualism, proposing that all cooperation in labour be eliminated on the premise that this would be most conducive with the general good.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] An influential form of individualist anarchism called egoism , [ 52 ] or egoist anarchism, was expounded by one of the earliest and best-known proponents of individualist anarchism, the German Max Stirner .

[ 53 ] Stirner's The Ego and Its Own , published in 1844, is a founding text of the philosophy.

[ 53 ] According to Stirner, the only limitation on the rights of the individual is their power to obtain what they desire, [ 54 ] without regard for God, state, or morality.

[ 55 ] To Stirner, rights were spooks in the mind, and he held that society does not exist but "the individuals are its reality".

[ 56 ] Stirner advocated self-assertion and foresaw unions of egoists , non-systematic associations continually renewed by all parties' support through an act of will, [ 57 ] which Stirner proposed as a form of organization in place of the state.

[ 58 ] Egoist anarchists claim that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals.

[ 59 ] Egoist anarchism has inspired many interpretations of Stirner's philosophy. It was re-discovered and promoted by German philosophical anarchist and LGBT activist John Henry Mackay .

Josiah Warren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist [ 60 ] and The Peaceful Revolutionist , the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, was the first anarchist periodical published.

[ 61 ] For American anarchist historian Eunice Minette Schuster, "[i]t is apparent [...] that Proudhonian Anarchism was to be found in the United States at least as early as 1848 and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the Individualist Anarchism of Josiah Warren and Stephen Pearl Andrews . [...] William B. Greene presented this Proudhonian Mutualism in its purest and most systematic form".

[ 62 ] Henry David Thoreau was an important early influence in individualist anarchist thought in the United States and Europe.

[ 63 ] Thoreau was an American author, poet, naturalist, tax resister, development critic , surveyor, historian, philosopher and leading transcendentalist , who is best known for his book Walden , a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings, and his essay Civil Disobedience , an argument for individual resistance to civil government in moral opposition to an unjust state. Later, Benjamin Tucker fused Stirner's egoism with the economics of Warren and Proudhon in his eclectic influential publication Liberty .

From these early influences, anarchism and especially individualist anarchism was related to the issues of love and sex . In different countries, this attracted a small but diverse following of bohemian artists and intellectuals, [ 64 ] free love and birth control advocates, [ 65 ] [ 66 ] individualist naturists nudists as in anarcho-naturism , [ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] freethought and anti-clerical activists [ 70 ] as well as young anarchist outlaws in what came to be known as illegalism and individual reclamation , [ 71 ] [ 72 ] especially within European individualist anarchism and individualist anarchism in France . These authors and activists included Oscar Wilde , Émile Armand , Han Ryner , Henri Zisly , Renzo Novatore , Miguel Giménez Igualada , Adolf Brand and Lev Chernyi among others. In his important essay The Soul of Man Under Socialism from 1891, Wilde defended socialism as the way to guarantee individualism and so he saw that "[w]ith the abolition of private property, then, we shall have true, beautiful, healthy Individualism. Nobody will waste his life in accumulating things, and the symbols for things. One will live. To live is the rarest thing in the world. Most people exist, that is all".

[ 73 ] For anarchist historian George Woodcock , "Wilde's aim in The Soul of Man Under Socialism is to seek the society most favorable to the artist. [...] for Wilde art is the supreme end, containing within itself enlightenment and regeneration, to which all else in society must be subordinated. [...] Wilde represents the anarchist as aesthete ".

[ 74 ] Woodcock finds that "[t]he most ambitious contribution to literary anarchism during the 1890s was undoubtedly Oscar Wilde The Soul of Man Under Socialism " and finds that it is influenced mainly by the thought of William Godwin .

[ 74 ] Autarchism [ edit ] Main article: Autarchism Autarchism promotes the principles of individualism, the moral ideology of individual liberty and self-reliance whilst rejecting compulsory government and supporting the elimination of government in favor of ruling oneself to the exclusion of rule by others.

Robert LeFevre , recognized as an autarchist by anarcho-capitalist Murray Rothbard , [ 75 ] distinguished autarchism from anarchy , whose economics he felt entailed interventions contrary to freedom in contrast to his own laissez-faire economics of the Austrian School .

[ 76 ] Liberalism [ edit ] Main article: Liberalism Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Liberalism is the belief in the importance of individual freedom. This belief is widely accepted in the United States, Europe, Australia and other Western nations, and was recognized as an important value by many Western philosophers throughout history, in particular since the Enlightenment . It is often rejected by collectivist ideas such as in Abrahamic or Confucian societies, although Taoists were and are known to be individualists.

[ 77 ] The Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote praising "the idea of a polity administered with regard to equal rights and equal freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly government which respects most of all the freedom of the governed".

[ 78 ] Liberalism has its roots in the Age of Enlightenment and rejects many foundational assumptions that dominated most earlier theories of government, such as the Divine Right of Kings , hereditary status, and established religion .

John Locke and Montesquieu are often credited with the philosophical foundations of classical liberalism , a political ideology inspired by the broader liberal movement. Locke wrote that "no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty, or possessions." [ 79 ] In the 17th century, liberal ideas began to influence European governments in nations such as the Netherlands, Switzerland, England and Poland, but they were strongly opposed, often by armed might, by those who favored absolute monarchy and established religion. In the 18th century, the first modern liberal state was founded without a monarch or a hereditary aristocracy in the United States of America.

[ 80 ] The US Declaration of Independence includes the words which echo Locke that "all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness ; that to insure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed ." [ 81 ] Liberalism comes in many forms. According to John N. Gray , the essence of liberalism is toleration of different beliefs and of different ideas as to what constitutes a good life.

[ 82 ] Philosophical individualism [ edit ] Egoist anarchism [ edit ] Main article: Egoist anarchism Egoist philosopher Max Stirner has been called a proto- existentialist philosopher while at the same time is a central theorist of individualist anarchism.

Egoist anarchism is a school of anarchist thought that originated in the philosophy of Max Stirner , a 19th-century Hegelian philosopher whose "name appears with familiar regularity in historically orientated surveys of anarchist thought as one of the earliest and best-known exponents of individualist anarchism ." [ 53 ] According to Stirner, the only limitation on the rights of the individual is their power to obtain what they desire, [ 54 ] without regard for God, state, or morality.

[ 55 ] Stirner advocated self-assertion and foresaw unions of egoists , non-systematic associations continually renewed by all parties' support through an act of will [ 57 ] which Stirner proposed as a form of organisation in place of the state .

[ 58 ] Egoist anarchists argue that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals.

[ 59 ] Egoism has inspired many interpretations of Stirner's philosophy, but it has also gone beyond Stirner within anarchism. It was re-discovered and promoted by German philosophical anarchist and LGBT activist John Henry Mackay . John Beverley Robinson wrote an essay called "Egoism" in which he states that "Modern egoism, as propounded by Stirner and Nietzsche , and expounded by Ibsen , Shaw and others, is all these; but it is more. It is the realization by the individual that they are an individual; that, as far as they are concerned, they are the only individual." [ 83 ] Stirner and Nietzsche , who exerted influence on anarchism despite its opposition, were frequently compared by French "literary anarchists" and anarchist interpretations of Nietzschean ideas appear to have also been influential in the United States.

[ 84 ] Ethical egoism [ edit ] Main article: Ethical egoism Ethical egoism, also called simply egoism, [ 85 ] is the normative ethical position that moral agents ought to do what is in their own self-interest . It differs from psychological egoism , which claims that people do only act in their self-interest. Ethical egoism also differs from rational egoism which holds merely that it is rational to act in one's self-interest. However, these doctrines may occasionally be combined with ethical egoism.

Ethical egoism contrasts with ethical altruism , which holds that moral agents have an obligation to help and serve others. Egoism and altruism both contrast with ethical utilitarianism, which holds that a moral agent should treat one's self (also known as the subject ) with no higher regard than one has for others (as egoism does, by elevating self-interests and "the self" to a status not granted to others), but that one also should not (as altruism does) sacrifice one's own interests to help others' interests, so long as one's own interests (i.e. one's own desires or well-being ) are substantially-equivalent to the others' interests and well-being. Egoism, utilitarianism, and altruism are all forms of consequentialism , but egoism and altruism contrast with utilitarianism, in that egoism and altruism are both agent-focused forms of consequentialism (i.e. subject-focused or subjective ), but utilitarianism is called agent-neutral (i.e.

objective and impartial ) as it does not treat the subject's (i.e. the self's, i.e. the moral "agent's") own interests as being more or less important than if the same interests, desires, or well-being were anyone else's.

Ethical egoism does not require moral agents to harm the interests and well-being of others when making moral deliberation, e.g. what is in an agent's self-interest may be incidentally detrimental, beneficial, or neutral in its effect on others. Individualism allows for others' interest and well-being to be disregarded or not as long as what is chosen is efficacious in satisfying the self-interest of the agent. Nor does ethical egoism necessarily entail that in pursuing self-interest one ought always to do what one wants to do, e.g. in the long term the fulfilment of short-term desires may prove detrimental to the self. Fleeting pleasance then takes a back seat to protracted eudaemonia . In the words of James Rachels , "[e]thical egoism [...] endorses selfishness, but it doesn't endorse foolishness." [ 86 ] Ethical egoism is sometimes the philosophical basis for support of libertarianism or individualist anarchism as in Max Stirner , although these can also be based on altruistic motivations.

[ 87 ] These are political positions based partly on a belief that individuals should not coercively prevent others from exercising freedom of action.

Existentialism [ edit ] Main article: Existentialism Existentialism is a term applied to the work of a number of 19th- and 20th-century philosophers who generally held, despite profound doctrinal differences, [ 88 ] [ 89 ] that the focus of philosophical thought should be to deal with the conditions of existence of the individual person and their emotions, actions, responsibilities, and thoughts.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] The early 19th century philosopher Søren Kierkegaard , posthumously regarded as the father of existentialism, [ 92 ] [ 93 ] maintained that the individual solely has the responsibilities of giving one's own life meaning and living that life passionately and sincerely , [ 94 ] [ 95 ] in spite of many existential obstacles and distractions including despair , angst , absurdity , alienation and boredom .

[ 96 ] Subsequent existential philosophers retain the emphasis on the individual, but differ in varying degrees on how one achieves and what constitutes a fulfilling life, what obstacles must be overcome, and what external and internal factors are involved, including the potential consequences of the existence [ 97 ] [ 98 ] or non-existence of God.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Many existentialists have also regarded traditional systematic or academic philosophy in both style and content as too abstract and remote from concrete human experience.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Existentialism became fashionable after World War II as a way to reassert the importance of human individuality and freedom.

[ 103 ] Nietzsche's concept of the superman is closely related to the idea of individualism and the pursuit of one's own unique path and potential.

[ 104 ] Freethought [ edit ] Main article: Freethought Freethought holds that individuals should not accept ideas proposed as truth without recourse to knowledge and reason . Thus, freethinkers strive to build their opinions on the basis of facts , scientific inquiry and logical principles, independent of any logical fallacies or intellectually limiting effects of authority, confirmation bias , cognitive bias , conventional wisdom , popular culture , prejudice , sectarianism , tradition , urban legend and all other dogmas . Regarding religion , freethinkers hold that there is insufficient evidence to scientifically validate the existence of supernatural phenomena.

[ 105 ] Humanism [ edit ] Main article: Humanism Humanism is a perspective common to a wide range of ethical stances that attaches importance to human dignity, concerns, and capabilities, particularly rationality. Although the word has many senses, its meaning comes into focus when contrasted to the supernatural or to appeals to authority.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] Since the 19th century, humanism has been associated with an anti-clericalism inherited from the 18th-century Enlightenment philosophes . 21st century Humanism tends to strongly endorse human rights , including reproductive rights , gender equality , [ 108 ] social justice , and the separation of church and state . The term covers organized non-theistic religions , secular humanism , and a humanistic life stance.

[ 109 ] Hedonism [ edit ] Main article: Hedonism Philosophical hedonism is a meta-ethical theory of value which argues that pleasure is the only intrinsic good and pain is the only intrinsic bad.

[ 110 ] The basic idea behind hedonistic thought is that pleasure (an umbrella term for all inherently likable emotions) is the only thing that is good in and of itself or by its very nature. This implies evaluating the moral worth of character or behavior according to the extent that the pleasure it produces exceeds the pain it entails.

Libertinism [ edit ] Main article: Libertine A libertine is one devoid of most moral restraints, which are seen as unnecessary or undesirable, especially one who ignores or even spurns accepted morals and forms of behaviour sanctified by the larger society.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] Libertines place value on physical pleasures, meaning those experienced through the senses. As a philosophy, libertinism gained new-found adherents in the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries, particularly in France and Great Britain . Notable among these were John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester and the Marquis de Sade . During the Baroque era in France, there existed a freethinking circle of philosophers and intellectuals who were collectively known as libertinage érudit and which included Gabriel Naudé , Élie Diodati and François de La Mothe Le Vayer .

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] The critic Vivian de Sola Pinto linked John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester 's libertinism to Hobbesian materialism .

[ 115 ] Objectivism [ edit ] Main article: Objectivism Objectivism is a system of philosophy created by philosopher and novelist Ayn Rand which holds that reality exists independent of consciousness; human beings gain knowledge rationally from perception through the process of concept formation and inductive and deductive logic; the moral purpose of one's life is the pursuit of one's own happiness or rational self-interest.

[ 116 ] Rand thinks the only social system consistent with this morality is full respect for individual rights, embodied in pure laissez-faire capitalism ; and the role of art in human life is to transform man's widest metaphysical ideas, by selective reproduction of reality, into a physical form – a work of art – that he can comprehend and to which he can respond emotionally. Objectivism celebrates man as his own hero, "with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life, with productive achievement as his noblest activity, and reason as his only absolute." [ 117 ] Philosophical anarchism [ edit ] Main article: Philosophical anarchism Benjamin Tucker , American individualist anarchist who focused on economics calling them anarchistic-socialism [ 118 ] and adhering to the mutualist economics of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and Josiah Warren Philosophical anarchism is an anarchist school of thought [ 119 ] which contends that the state lacks moral legitimacy . In contrast to revolutionary anarchism, philosophical anarchism does not advocate violent revolution to eliminate it but advocates peaceful evolution to superate it.

[ 120 ] Although philosophical anarchism does not necessarily imply any action or desire for the elimination of the state, philosophical anarchists do not believe that they have an obligation or duty to obey the state, or conversely that the state has a right to command.

Philosophical anarchism is a component especially of individualist anarchism.

[ 121 ] Philosophical anarchists of historical note include Mohandas Gandhi , William Godwin , Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , Max Stirner , [ 122 ] Benjamin Tucker [ 123 ] and Henry David Thoreau .

[ 124 ] Contemporary philosophical anarchists include A. John Simmons and Robert Paul Wolff .

Subjectivism [ edit ] Main article: Subjectivism Subjectivism is a philosophical tenet that accords primacy to subjective experience as fundamental of all measure and law. In extreme forms such as solipsism, it may hold that the nature and existence of every object depends solely on someone's subjective awareness of it. In the proposition 5.632 of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , Ludwig Wittgenstein wrote: "The subject doesn't belong to the world, but it is a limit of the world". Metaphysical subjectivism is the theory that reality is what we perceive to be real, and that there is no underlying true reality that exists independently of perception. One can also hold that it is consciousness rather than perception that is reality ( subjective idealism ). In probability , a subjectivism stands for the belief that probabilities are simply degrees-of-belief by rational agents in a certain proposition and which have no objective reality in and of themselves.

Ethical subjectivism stands in opposition to moral realism , which claims that moral propositions refer to objective facts, independent of human opinion; to error theory , which denies that any moral propositions are true in any sense; and to non-cognitivism , which denies that moral sentences express propositions at all. The most common forms of ethical subjectivism are also forms of moral relativism , with moral standards held to be relative to each culture or society, i.e.

cultural relativism , or even to every individual. The latter view, as put forward by Protagoras , holds that there are as many distinct scales of good and evil as there are subjects in the world. Moral subjectivism is that species of moral relativism that relativizes moral value to the individual subject.

Horst Matthai Quelle was a Spanish-language German anarchist philosopher influenced by Max Stirner .

[ 125 ] Quelle argued that since the individual gives form to the world, he is those objects, the others and the whole universe.

[ 125 ] One of his main views was a "theory of infinite worlds" which for him was developed by pre-socratic philosophers .

[ 125 ] Solipsism [ edit ] Main article: Solipsism Solipsism is the philosophical idea that only one's own mind is sure to exist. The term comes from Latin solus ("alone") and ipse ("self"). Solipsism as an epistemological position holds that knowledge of anything outside one's own mind is unsure.

The external world and other minds cannot be known, and might not exist outside the mind. As a metaphysical position, solipsism goes further to the conclusion that the world and other minds do not exist. Solipsism is the only epistemological position that, by its own postulate , is both irrefutable and yet indefensible in the same manner. Although the number of individuals sincerely espousing solipsism has been small, it is not uncommon for one philosopher to accuse another's arguments of entailing solipsism as an unwanted consequence, in a kind of reductio ad absurdum . In the history of philosophy, solipsism has served as a skeptical hypothesis .

Economic individualism [ edit ] The doctrine of economic individualism holds that each individual should be allowed autonomy in making their own economic decisions as opposed to those decisions being made by the community, the corporation or the state for him or her.

Classical liberalism [ edit ] Main article: Classical liberalism Liberalism is a political ideology that developed in the 19th century in the Americas, England, France and Western Europe. It followed earlier forms of liberalism in its commitment to personal freedom and popular government, but differed from earlier forms of liberalism in its commitment to classical economics and free markets .

[ 126 ] Notable liberals in the 19th century include Jean-Baptiste Say , Thomas Malthus and David Ricardo . Classical liberalism, sometimes also used as a label to refer to all forms of liberalism before the 20th century, was revived in the 20th century by Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek and further developed by Milton Friedman , Robert Nozick , Loren Lomasky and Jan Narveson .

[ 127 ] Libertarianism [ edit ] Main article: Libertarianism Part of a series on Libertarianism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Philosophers La Boétie Locke Franklin Burke Paine Jefferson Bentham Godwin Hodgskin Warren Emerson Stirner Spooner Proudhon Andrews Bakunin Thoreau Spencer Herbert George De Cleyre Goldman Gandhi Mises Paterson Hayek Rand Friedman (Milton) Bookchin Hess Rothbard Chomsky Nozick Machan Block Friedman (David) Van Dun Konkin Hoppe Lottieri Martín Huemer Brennan Politicians Bastiat Gladstone Acton Cleveland Coolidge Goldwater Paul Korwin-Mikke Johnson Milei Hannan Polis National variants Spain United Kingdom England United States Historical background Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Related topics Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Politics portal v t e Libertarianism upholds liberty as a core principle.

[ 128 ] Libertarians seek to maximize autonomy and political freedom , emphasizing free association , freedom of choice , individualism and voluntary association .

[ 129 ] Libertarianism shares a skepticism of authority and state power, but libertarians diverge on the scope of their opposition to existing economic and political systems . Various schools of libertarian thought offer a range of views regarding the legitimate functions of state and private power , often calling for the restriction or dissolution of coercive social institutions . Different categorizations have been used to distinguish various forms of libertarianism.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] This is done to distinguish libertarian views on the nature of property and capital , usually along left – right or socialist – capitalist lines.

[ 132 ] Left-libertarianism [ edit ] Main article: Left-libertarianism Left-libertarianism represents several related yet distinct approaches to politics, society, culture and political and social theory which stress both individual and political freedom alongside social justice . Unlike right-libertarians, left-libertarians believe that neither claiming nor mixing one's labor with natural resources is enough to generate full private property rights, [ 133 ] [ 134 ] and maintain that natural resources (land, oil, gold, trees) ought to be held in some egalitarian manner, either unowned or owned collectively .

[ 134 ] Those left-libertarians who support property do so under different property norms [ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] [ 138 ] and theories, [ 139 ] [ 140 ] [ 141 ] or under the condition that recompense is offered to the local or global community .

[ 134 ] Related terms include egalitarian libertarianism , [ 142 ] [ 143 ] left-wing libertarianism , [ 144 ] libertarianism , [ 145 ] libertarian socialism , [ 146 ] [ 147 ] social libertarianism [ 148 ] and socialist libertarianism .

[ 149 ] Left-libertarianism can refer generally to these related and overlapping schools of thought: Anti-authoritarian varieties of left-wing politics , in particular within the socialist movement , usually known as libertarian socialism.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] Geolibertarianism , an American synthesis of libertarianism and Georgism .

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Market anarchism , stressing the socially transformative potential of non-aggression and anti-capitalist freed markets.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] Steiner–Vallentyne school , named after Hillel Steiner and Peter Vallentyne , whose proponents draw conclusions from classical liberal or market liberal premises.

[ 154 ] Right-libertarianism [ edit ] Main article: Right-libertarianism Right-libertarianism represents either non- collectivist forms of libertarianism [ 155 ] or a variety of different libertarian views that scholars label to the right of libertarianism [ 156 ] [ 157 ] such as libertarian conservatism .

[ 158 ] Related terms include conservative libertarianism , [ 159 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] libertarian capitalism [ 162 ] and right-wing libertarianism .

[ 149 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] In the mid-20th century, right-libertarian ideologies such as anarcho-capitalism and minarchism co-opted [ 165 ] [ 166 ] the term libertarian to advocate laissez-faire capitalism and strong private property rights such as in land, infrastructure and natural resources.

[ 167 ] The latter is the dominant form of libertarianism in the United States , [ 149 ] where it advocates civil liberties , [ 168 ] natural law , [ 169 ] free-market capitalism [ 170 ] [ 171 ] and a major reversal of the modern welfare state .

[ 172 ] Socialism [ edit ] Influential French individualist anarchist Émile Armand With regard to economic questions within individualist socialist schools such as individualist anarchism , there are adherents to mutualism ( Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , Émile Armand and early Benjamin Tucker ); natural rights positions (early Benjamin Tucker, Lysander Spooner and Josiah Warren ); and egoistic disrespect for "ghosts" such as private property and markets (Max Stirner, John Henry Mackay , Lev Chernyi , later Benjamin Tucker, Renzo Novatore and illegalism ). Contemporary individualist anarchist Kevin Carson characterizes American individualist anarchism saying that "[u]nlike the rest of the socialist movement, the individualist anarchists believed that the natural wage of labor in a free market was its product, and that economic exploitation could only take place when capitalists and landlords harnessed the power of the state in their interests. Thus, individualist anarchism was an alternative both to the increasing statism of the mainstream socialist movement, and to a classical liberal movement that was moving toward a mere apologetic for the power of big business." [ 173 ] Libertarian socialism [ edit ] Main article: Libertarian socialism Part of a series on Libertarian socialism Concepts Anti-authoritarianism Class conflict Decentralization Egalitarian community Free association Mutual aid Revolutionary spontaneity Workers' control Economics Anti-capitalism Co-operative economics Decentralized planning Economic democracy Industrial democracy Participatory economics Socialization Socialist economics Worker cooperative Workers' self-management People Albert Andrews Bakunin Berkman Bookchin Boric Camus Castoriadis Chomsky Cole Déjacque Foot Fotopoulos Fourier Guérin Kropotkin Lefort Luxemburg Makhno Marcos Morris Marcuse Negri Öcalan Pallis Pankhurst Pannekoek Pi i Margall Proudhon Rocker Russell Rühle Variants Anarchist tendencies Social anarchism Communist Collectivist Individualist anarchism Market Mutualism Anarcho-syndicalism Marxist tendencies Autonomism Chaulieu–Montal tendency Communization Council communism Situationism Western Marxism Other tendencies Democratic confederalism Guild socialism Libertarian municipalism Utopian socialism Neozapatismo History International Workingmen's Association Revolutions of 1917–1923 Makhnovshchina Korean People's Association in Manchuria Spanish Revolution of 1936 New Left New social movements Zapatista uprising MAREZ Rojava Revolution AANES Related topics Communism Libertarianism Social democracy Socialism Democratic socialism Eco-socialism Syndicalism Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Libertarian socialism, sometimes dubbed left-libertarianism [ 174 ] [ 175 ] and socialist libertarianism, [ 176 ] is an anti-authoritarian , anti-statist and libertarian [ 177 ] tradition within the socialist movement that rejects the state socialist conception of socialism as a statist form where the state retains centralized control of the economy .

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] Libertarian socialists criticize wage slavery relationships within the workplace , [ 180 ] emphasizing workers' self-management of the workplace [ 179 ] and decentralized structures of political organization.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] [ 183 ] Libertarian socialism asserts that a society based on freedom and justice can be achieved through abolishing authoritarian institutions that control certain means of production and subordinate the majority to an owning class or political and economic elite .

[ 184 ] Libertarian socialists advocate for decentralized structures based on direct democracy and federal or confederal associations such as libertarian municipalism , citizens' assemblies , trade unions and workers' councils .

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] All of this is generally done within a general call for liberty [ 187 ] [ 188 ] and free association [ 189 ] through the identification, criticism and practical dismantling of illegitimate authority in all aspects of human life.

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] [ 192 ] [ 193 ] [ 194 ] [ 195 ] [ 196 ] [ 197 ] Within the larger socialist movement, libertarian socialism seeks to distinguish itself from Leninism and social democracy .

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] Past and present currents and movements commonly described as libertarian socialist include anarchism (especially anarchist schools of thought such as anarcho-communism , anarcho-syndicalism , [ 200 ] collectivist anarchism , green anarchism , individualist anarchism , [ 201 ] [ 202 ] [ 203 ] [ 204 ] mutualism , [ 205 ] and social anarchism ) as well as communalism , some forms of democratic socialism , guild socialism , [ 206 ] libertarian Marxism [ 207 ] ( autonomism , council communism , [ 208 ] left communism , and Luxemburgism , among others), [ 209 ] [ 210 ] participism, revolutionary syndicalism and some versions of utopian socialism .

[ 211 ] Mutualism [ edit ] Main article: Mutualism (economic theory) Mutualism is an anarchist school of thought which can be traced to the writings of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , who envisioned a socialist society where each person possess a means of production , either individually or collectively, with trade representing equivalent amounts of labor in the free market .

[ 212 ] Integral to the scheme was the establishment of a mutual-credit bank which would lend to producers at a minimal interest rate only high enough to cover the costs of administration.

[ 213 ] Mutualism is based on a labor theory of value which holds that when labor or its product is sold, it ought to receive goods or services in exchange embodying "the amount of labor necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and equal utility" and that receiving anything less would be considered exploitation, theft of labor, or usury .

[ 214 ] Criticisms [ edit ] The Greek philosopher Plato emphasized that individuals must adhere to laws and perform duties while declining to grant individuals rights to limit or reject state interference in their lives.

[ 215 ] German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel criticized individualism by claiming that human self-consciousness relies on recognition from others, therefore embracing a holistic view and rejecting the idea of the world as a collection of atomized individuals.

[ 216 ] [ 217 ] Fascists believe that the liberal emphasis on individual freedom produces national divisiveness.

[ 218 ] Pope Francis criticised a "me"-centred form of individualism in his 2015 encyclical letter Laudato si' : Men and women of our postmodern world run the risk of rampant individualism, and many problems of society are connected with today's self-centred culture of instant gratification.

[ 219 ] As an example he comments on parents who "can be prone to impulsive and wasteful consumption, which then affects their children who find it increasingly difficult to acquire a home of their own and build a family." [ 219 ] Other views [ edit ] As creative independent lifestyle [ edit ] Oscar Wilde , famous Irish socialist writer of the decadent movement and famous dandy The anarchist [ 220 ] writer and bohemian Oscar Wilde wrote in his famous essay The Soul of Man under Socialism that "Art is individualism, and individualism is a disturbing and disintegrating force. There lies its immense value. For what it seeks is to disturb monotony of type, slavery of custom, tyranny of habit, and the reduction of man to the level of a machine." [ 73 ] For anarchist historian George Woodcock , "Wilde's aim in The Soul of Man under Socialism is to seek the society most favorable to the artist, [...] for Wilde art is the supreme end, containing within itself enlightenment and regeneration, to which all else in society must be subordinated. [...] Wilde represents the anarchist as aesthete ." [ 74 ] In this way, individualism has been used to denote a personality with a strong tendency towards self-creation and experimentation as opposed to tradition or popular mass opinions and behaviors.

[ 5 ] [ 9 ] Anarchist writer Murray Bookchin describes a lot of individualist anarchists as people who "expressed their opposition in uniquely personal forms, especially in fiery tracts, outrageous behavior, and aberrant lifestyles in the cultural ghettos of fin de siècle New York, Paris, and London. As a credo, individualist anarchism remained largely a bohemian lifestyle, most conspicuous in its demands for sexual freedom (' free love ') and enamored of innovations in art, behavior, and clothing." [ 64 ] In relation to this view of individuality, French individualist anarchist Émile Armand advocated egoistical denial of social conventions and dogmas to live in accord to one's own ways and desires in daily life since he emphasized anarchism as a way of life and practice. In this way, he opined that "the anarchist individualist tends to reproduce himself, to perpetuate his spirit in other individuals who will share his views and who will make it possible for a state of affairs to be established from which authoritarianism has been banished. It is this desire, this will, not only to live, but also to reproduce oneself, which we shall call 'activity.

' " [ 221 ] In the book Imperfect Garden: The Legacy of Humanism , humanist philosopher Tzvetan Todorov identifies individualism as an important current of socio-political thought within modernity and as examples of it he mentions Michel de Montaigne , François de La Rochefoucauld , Marquis de Sade , and Charles Baudelaire .

[ 222 ] In La Rochefoucauld, he identifies a tendency similar to stoicism in which "the honest person works his being in the manner of a sculptor who searches the liberation of the forms which are inside a block of marble, to extract the truth of that matter." [ 222 ] In Baudelaire, he finds the dandy trait in which one searches to cultivate "the idea of beauty within oneself, of satisfying one's passions of feeling and thinking." [ 222 ] The Russian-American poet Joseph Brodsky once wrote that "[t]he surest defense against Evil is extreme individualism, originality of thinking, whimsicality, even – if you will – eccentricity. That is, something that can't be feigned, faked, imitated; something even a seasoned imposter couldn't be happy with." [ 223 ] Ralph Waldo Emerson famously declared that "[w]hoso would be a man must be a nonconformist" – a point of view developed at length in both the life and work of Henry David Thoreau . Equally memorable and influential on Walt Whitman is Emerson's idea that "a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of small minds, adored by little statesmen and philosophers and divines". Emerson opposed on principle the reliance on civil and religious social structures precisely because through them the individual approaches the divine second-hand, mediated by the once original experience of a genius from another age. According to Emerson, "[an institution is the lengthened shadow of one man." To achieve this original relation, Emerson stated that one must "[i]nsist on one's self; never imitate", for if the relationship is secondary the connection is lost.

[ 224 ] Religion [ edit ] People in Western countries tend to be more individualistic than communitarian. The authors of one study [ 225 ] proposed that this difference is due in part to the influence of the Catholic Church in the Middle Ages. They pointed specifically to its bans on incest , cousin marriage , adoption , and remarriage , and its promotion of the nuclear family over the extended family .

[ 226 ] The Catholic Church teaches "if we pray the Our Father sincerely, we leave individualism behind, because the love that we receive frees us ... our divisions and oppositions have to be overcome".

[ 227 ] Many Catholics have believed Martin Luther and the Protestant Reformation were sources of individualism.

[ 228 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Anti-individualism Individualist feminism Individualistic culture Market fundamentalism Muhammad Iqbal's concept of Khudi Natural and legal rights Negative and positive rights Non-aggression principle Personalism Self-help Self-interest Self-sustainability Social issue Voluntaryism References [ edit ] ^ "s.v. individualism".

The Oxford English Dictionary: Being a Corrected Re-Issue of with An Introduction, Supplement and Bibliography of a New English Dictionary on Historical Principles . Vol. 5 H-K. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1913. p.

224 . Retrieved 17 July 2025 – via Internet Archive .

^ "individualism" .

Merriam Webster Dictionary (11th ed.). 2003 . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ a b "individualism | Definition, History, Philosophy, Examples, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2021-12-25 .

^ Ellen Meiksins Wood .

Mind and Politics: An Approach to the Meaning of Liberal and Socialist Individualism .

University of California Press . 1972.

ISBN 0-520-02029-4 . p. 6 ^ a b c d " "individualism" on The Free Dictionary" . Archived from the original on 2019-05-17 . Retrieved 2009-12-21 .

^ a b L. Susan Brown .

The Politics of Individualism: Liberalism, Liberal Feminism, and Anarchism . Black Rose Books Ltd. 1993 ^ Biddle, Craig (20 February 2012).

"Individualism vs. Collectivism: Our Future, Our Choice" .

The Objective Standard .

7 (1).

^ a b Hayek, F.A. (1994).

The Road to Serfdom . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. pp. 17, 37– 48.

ISBN 0-226-32061-8 .

^ a b Snyderman, George S.; Josephs, William (1939). "Bohemia: The Underworld of Art".

Social Forces .

18 (2): 187– 199.

doi : 10.2307/2570771 .

ISSN 0037-7732 .

JSTOR 2570771 .

^ "The leading intellectual trait of the era was the recovery, to a certain degree, of the secular and humane philosophy of Greece and Rome. Another humanist trend which cannot be ignored was the rebirth of individualism, which, developed by Greece and Rome to a remarkable degree, had been suppressed by the rise of a caste system in the later Roman Empire, by the Church and by feudalism in the Middle Ages.

"The history guide: Lectures on Modern European Intellectual History" ^ "Anthropocentricity and individualism...Humanism and Italian art were similar in giving paramount attention to human experience, both in its everyday immediacy and in its positive or negative extremes...The human-centredness of Renaissance art, moreover, was not just a generalized endorsement of earthly experience. Like the humanists, Italian artists stressed the autonomy and dignity of the individual." "Humanism" on Encyclopædia Britannica ^ a b Claeys, Gregory (1986). " "Individualism," "Socialism," and "Social Science": Further Notes on a Process of Conceptual Formation, 1800–1850".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

47 (1). University of Pennsylvania Press: 81– 93.

doi : 10.2307/2709596 .

JSTOR 2709596 .

^ Swart, Koenraad W.

(1962). " "Individualism" in the Mid-Nineteenth Century (1826–1860)".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

23 (1). University of Pennsylvania Press: 77– 90.

doi : 10.2307/2708058 .

JSTOR 2708058 .

^ Abbs 1986, cited in Klein 2005, pp. 26–27 ^ Gerald N. Izenberg (1992).

Impossible Individuality: Romanticism, Revolution, and the Origins of Modern Selfhood, 1787–1802 . Princeton University Press. pp. 18+.

ISBN 1-4008-2066-9 .

^ Reese, William L. (1980).

Dictionary of Philosophy and Religion (1st ed.). Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press. p.

251 .

ISBN 0-391-00688-6 .

^ Audi, Robert, ed. (1999).

The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 424.

ISBN 0-521-63136-X .

^ Jung, C. G. (1962). Symbols of Transformation: An analysis of the prelude to a case of schizophrenia (Vol. 2, R. F. C. Hull, Trans.). New York: Harper & Brothers.

^ Jung's Individuation process Archived 2018-02-23 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 2009-2-20 ^ Gilbert Simondon .

L'individuation psychique et collective (Paris, Aubier, 1989; reprinted in 2007 with a preface by Bernard Stiegler) ^ Stiegler, Bernard (13 May 2004).

"Bernard Stiegler: Culture and Technology" . Tate Modern.

Archived 15 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 26 September 2020.

^ Santos, Henri C.; Varnum, Michael E. W.; Grossmann, Igor (2017).

"Global Increases in Individualism" .

Psychological Science .

28 (9): 1228– 1239.

doi : 10.1177/0956797617700622 .

PMID 28703638 .

S2CID 206588771 .

^ Minkov, Michael; Dutt, Pinaki; Schachner, Michael; Morales, Oswaldo; Sanchez, Carlos; Jandosova, Janar; Khassenbekov, Yerlan; Mudd, Ben (2017). "A revision of Hofstede's individualism-collectivism dimension".

Cross Cultural & Strategic Management .

24 (3): 3.

doi : 10.1108/ccsm-11-2016-0197 .

ISSN 2059-5794 .

^ Inglehart, Ronald F. (2018). "Chapter 3. Global Cultural Patterns".

Cultural Evolution . Cambridge University Press. p. 40.

doi : 10.1017/9781108613880 .

ISBN 978-1-108-61388-0 .

^ Gantenbein, Pascal; Kind, Axel; Volonte, Christophe (2019).

"Individualism and Venture Capital: A Cross-Country Study" .

Management International Review .

59 (5): 741– 777.

doi : 10.1007/s11575-019-00394-7 .

^ Takano, Yohtaro; Osaka, Eiko (1999). "An unsupported common view: Comparing Japan and the U.S. on individualism/collectivism".

Asian Journal of Social Psychology .

2 (3): 311– 341.

doi : 10.1111/1467-839x.00043 .

ISSN 1367-2223 .

^ Takano, Yohtaro; Sogon, Shunya (2008). "Are Japanese More Collectivistic Than Americans?".

Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology .

39 (3): 237– 250.

doi : 10.1177/0022022107313902 .

ISSN 0022-0221 .

S2CID 145125365 .

^ Takano, Yohtaro; Osaka, Eiko (2018).

"Comparing Japan and the United States on individualism/collectivism: A follow-up review" .

Asian Journal of Social Psychology .

21 (4): 301– 316.

doi : 10.1111/ajsp.12322 .

ISSN 1367-2223 .

S2CID 149676839 .

^ Minkov, Michael; Dutt, Pinaki; Schachner, Michael; Morales, Oswaldo; Sanchez, Carlos; Jandosova, Janar; Khassenbekov, Yerlan; Mudd, Ben (2017). "A revision of Hofstede's individualism-collectivism dimension".

Cross Cultural & Strategic Management .

24 (3): 29.

doi : 10.1108/ccsm-11-2016-0197 .

ISSN 2059-5794 .

^ Welzel, Christian (2013). "Chapter 2. Mapping Differences".

Freedom Rising . New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 87.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9781139540919 .

ISBN 978-1-139-54091-9 .

^ Beugelsdijk, Sjoerd; Welzel, Chris (2018).

"Dimensions and Dynamics of National Culture: Synthesizing Hofstede With Inglehart" .

Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology .

49 (10): 1485.

doi : 10.1177/0022022118798505 .

ISSN 0022-0221 .

PMC 6191680 .

PMID 30369633 .

^ Kagitcibasi, C. (2005). Modernization does not mean westernization: Emergence of a different pattern. In W. Friedlmeier, P. Chakkarath, and B. Schwarz (Eds.), Culture and human development ( pp. 255-272). Psychology Press.

^ Chakkarath, P. (2024). Is the individual an enlightened westerner? Some skeptical remarks on Eurocentric notions of self and the development of individualism. In A. Dueck & L. Sundararajan (Eds.), Values and indigenous psychology in the age of the machine and market: When the gods have fled (pp. 131-156). Springer International Publishing.

^ Benedict, Ruth; "The Chrysanthemum and the Sword: Patterns of Japanese Culture." Rutland, VT and Tokyo, Japan: Charles E. Tuttle Co. 1954 orig. 1946.

^ AFS-USA (2019-10-30).

"Individualism & Collectivism" .

AFS-USA . Archived from the original on 2021-07-09 . Retrieved 2021-07-08 .

^ "Individualism vs. Collectivism: Our Future, Our Choice – The Objective Standard" .

The Objective Standard . 2012-02-20 . Retrieved 2021-07-08 .

^ Cai, Meina; Caskey, Gregory W.; Cowen, Nick; Murtazashvili, Ilia; Murtazashvili, Jennifer Brick; Salahodjaev, Raufhon (2022).

"Individualism, economic freedom, and charitable giving" .

Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization .

200 : 868– 884.

doi : 10.1016/j.jebo.2022.06.037 .

^ Heath, Joseph (1 January 2015). "Methodological Individualism". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Stigler, George; Gary Becker (Mar 1977). "De gustibus non est disputandum".

American Economic Review .

67 (2): 76.

JSTOR 1807222 .

^ "Civil libertarian Definition & Meaning | Dictionary.com" .

^ Compass, The Political.

"The Political Compass" .

^ Ellen Meiksins Wood .

Mind and Politics: An Approach to the Meaning of Liberal and Socialist Individualism .

University of California Press . 1972.

ISBN 0-520-02029-4 . p. 7 ^ Emily Robinson, et al. "Telling stories about post-war Britain: popular individualism and the 'crisis' of the 1970s." Twentieth Century British History 28.2 (2017): 268–304.

^ "What do I mean by individualism? I mean by individualism the moral doctrine which, relying on no dogma, no tradition, no external determination, appeals only to the individual conscience." Mini-Manual of Individualism by Han Ryner ^ "I do not admit anything except the existence of the individual, as a condition of his sovereignty. To say that the sovereignty of the individual is conditioned by Liberty is simply another way of saying that it is conditioned by itself." "Anarchism and the State" in Individual Liberty ^ Everhart, Robert B. The Public School Monopoly: A Critical Analysis of Education and the State in American Society. Pacific Institute for Public Policy Research, 1982. p. 115.

^ a b Philip, Mark (2006-05-20).

"William Godwin" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Adams, Ian. Political Ideology Today. Manchester University Press, 2001. p. 116.

^ Godwin, William (1796) [1793].

Enquiry Concerning Political Justice and its Influence on Modern Morals and Manners . G.G. and J. Robinson.

OCLC 2340417 .

^ Britannica Concise Encyclopedia . Retrieved 7 December 2006, from Encyclopædia Britannica Online .

^ Paul McLaughlin. Anarchism and Authority: A Philosophical Introduction to Classical Anarchism. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2007. p. 119.

^ Goodway, David.

Anarchist Seeds Beneath the Snow . Liverpool University Press, 2006, p. 99.

^ a b c Leopold, David (2006-08-04).

"Max Stirner" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ a b The Encyclopedia Americana: A Library of Universal Knowledge. Encyclopedia Corporation. p. 176.

^ a b Miller, David. "Anarchism." 1987.

The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Political Thought . Blackwell Publishing. p. 11.

^ "What my might reaches is my property; and let me claim as property everything I feel myself strong enough to attain, and let me extend my actual property as fas as I entitle, that is, empower myself to take..." In Ossar, Michael. 1980.

Anarchism in the Dramas of Ernst Toller . SUNY Press. p. 27.

^ a b Nyberg, Svein Olav.

"The union of egoists" (PDF) .

Non Serviam .

1 . Oslo, Norway: Svein Olav Nyberg: 13– 14.

OCLC 47758413 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 December 2010 . Retrieved 1 September 2012 .

^ a b Thomas, Paul (1985).

Karl Marx and the Anarchists . London: Routledge / Kegan Paul . p. 142.

ISBN 0-7102-0685-2 .

^ a b Carlson, Andrew (1972).

"Philosophical Egoism: German Antecedents" .

Anarchism in Germany . Metuchen: Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 0-8108-0484-0 . Archived from the original on 2008-12-10 . Retrieved 2008-12-04 .

^ Palmer, Brian (2010-12-29) What do anarchists want from us?

, Slate.com ^ William Bailie, "Josiah Warren: The First American Anarchist" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 4, 2012 . Retrieved June 17, 2013 .

Josiah Warren: The First American Anarchist – A Sociological Study , Boston: Small, Maynard & Co., 1906, p. 20 ^ " Native American Anarchism: A Study of Left-Wing American Individualism by Eunice Minette Schuster" . Archived from the original on February 13, 2016.

^ "Paralelamente, al otro lado del atlántico, en el diferente contexto de una nación a medio hacer, los Estados Unidos, otros filósofos elaboraron un pensamiento individualista similar, aunque con sus propias especificidades. Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862), uno de los escritores próximos al movimiento de la filosofía trascendentalista, es uno de los más conocidos. Su obra más representativa es Walden, aparecida en 1854, aunque redactada entre 1845 y 1847, cuando Thoreau decide instalarse en el aislamiento de una cabaña en el bosque, y vivir en íntimo contacto con la naturaleza, en una vida de soledad y sobriedad. De esta experiencia, su filosofía trata de transmitirnos la idea que resulta necesario un retorno respetuoso a la naturaleza, y que la felicidad es sobre todo fruto de la riqueza interior y de la armonía de los individuos con el entorno natural. Muchos han visto en Thoreau a uno de los precursores del ecologismo y del anarquismo primitivista representado en la actualidad por Jonh Zerzan. Para George Woodcock, esta actitud puede estar también motivada por una cierta idea de resistencia al progreso y de rechazo al materialismo creciente que caracteriza la sociedad norteamericana de mediados de siglo XIX." "Voluntary non-submission. Spanish individualist anarchism during dictatorship and the second republic (1923–1938)" Archived July 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b "2. Individualist Anarchism and Reaction" .

libcom.org .

^ "The Free Love Movement and Radical Individualism, By Wendy McElroy" .

ncc-1776.org . Archived from the original on 2021-02-18 . Retrieved 2022-03-17 .

^ " "La insumisión voluntaria: El anarquismo individualista español durante la Dictadura y la Segunda República (1923–1938)" by Xavier Díez" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 23, 2011.

^ "Los anarco-individualistas, G.I.A...Una escisión de la FAI producida en el IX Congreso (Carrara, 1965) se pr odujo cuando un sector de anarquistas de tendencia humanista rechazan la interpretación que ellos juzgan disciplinaria del pacto asociativo" clásico, y crean los GIA (Gruppi di Iniziativa Anarchica) . Esta pequeña federación de grupos, hoy nutrida sobre todo de veteranos anarco-individualistas de orientación pacifista, naturista, etcétera defiende la autonomía personal y rechaza a rajatabla toda forma de intervención en los procesos del sistema, como sería por ejemplo el sindicalismo. Su portavoz es L'Internazionale con sede en Ancona. La escisión de los GIA prefiguraba, en sentido contrario, el gran debate que pronto había de comenzar en el seno del movimiento" "El movimiento libertario en Italia" by Bicicleta. REVISTA DE COMUNICACIONES LIBERTARIAS Year 1 No. Noviembre, 1 1977 Archived October 12, 2013, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Proliferarán así diversos grupos que practicarán el excursionismo, el naturismo, el nudismo, la emancipación sexual o el esperantismo, alrededor de asociaciones informales vinculadas de una manera o de otra al anarquismo. Precisamente las limitaciones a las asociaciones obreras impuestas desde la legislación especial de la Dictadura potenciarán indirectamente esta especie de asociacionismo informal en que confluirá el movimiento anarquista con esta heterogeneidad de prácticas y tendencias. Uno de los grupos más destacados, que será el impulsor de la revista individualista Ética será el Ateneo Naturista Ecléctico, con sede en Barcelona, con sus diferentes secciones la más destacada de las cuales será el grupo excursionista Sol y Vida." "La insumisión voluntaria: El anarquismo individualista español durante la Dictadura y la Segunda República (1923–1938)" by Xavier Díez Archived July 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Les anarchistes individualistes du début du siècle l'avaient bien compris, et intégraient le naturisme dans leurs préoccupations. Il est vraiment dommage que ce discours se soit peu à peu effacé, d'antan plus que nous assistons, en ce moment, à un retour en force du puritanisme (conservateur par essence)." "Anarchisme et naturisme, aujourd'hui." by Cathy Ytak Archived February 25, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ anne (30 July 2014).

"Culture of Individualist Anarchism in Late 19th Century America" (PDF) .

^ The "Illegalists" Archived September 8, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , by Doug Imrie (published by Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed ) ^ Parry, Richard.

The Bonnot Gang . Rebel Press, 1987. p. 15 ^ a b "Oscar Wilde essay The soul of man under Socialism" . Archived from the original on 2013-09-14.

^ a b c George Woodcock .

Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements.

1962. (p. 447) ^ Rothbard, Murray N. (2007).

The Betrayal of the American Right , Ludwig von Mises Institute , p. 187.

ISBN 978-1-933550-13-8 ^ "Autarchy vs Anarchy" by Robert LeFevre .

Rampart Journal of Individualist Thought Vol. 1, No. 4 (Winter, 1965): 30–49 ^ The Ancient Chinese Super State of Primary Societies: Taoist Philosophy for the 21st Century, You-Sheng Li, June 2010, p. 300 ^ Marcus Aurelius, Meditations , Oxford University Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-19-954059-4 .

^ Locke, John (1690).

Two Treatises of Government (10th ed.).

Project Gutenberg . Retrieved January 21, 2009 .

^ Paul E. Sigmund, editor, The Selected Political Writings of John Locke , Norton, 2003, ISBN 0-393-96451-5 p. iv "(Locke's thoughts) underlie many of the fundamental political ideas of US liberal constitutional democracy...", "At the time Locke wrote, his principles were accepted in theory by a few and in practice by none." ^ Thomas Jefferson, Declaration of Independence , July 4, 1776.

^ John Gray, Two Faces of Liberalism , The New Press, 2008, ISBN 978-1-56584-678-4 ^ "Egoism – The Anarchist Library" .

^ O. Ewald, "German Philosophy in 1907", in The Philosophical Review, Vol. 17, No. 4, Jul., 1908, pp. 400–426; T. A. Riley, "Anti-Statism in German Literature, as Exemplified by the Work of John Henry Mackay", in PMLA, Vol. 62, No. 3, Sep. 1947, pp. 828–843; C. E. Forth, "Nietzsche, Decadence, and Regeneration in France, 1891–95", in Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 54, No. 1, Jan., 1993, pp. 97–117; see also Robert C. Holub's Nietzsche: Socialist, Anarchist, Feminist , an essay available online at the University of California, Berkeley website.

^ Sanders, Steven M. Is egoism morally defensible? Philosophia. Springer Netherlands. Volume 18, Numbers 2–3 / July 1988 ^ Rachels 2008, p. 534.

^ Ridgely, D. A. (August 24, 2008).

"Selfishness, Egoism and Altruistic Libertarianism" . Archived from the original on December 2, 2008 . Retrieved August 24, 2008 .

^ Macquarrie, John.

Existentialism , New York (1972), pp. 18–21.

^ Oxford Companion to Philosophy , ed. Ted Honderich, New York (1995), p. 259.

^ Macquarrie.

Existentialism , pp. 14–15.

^ Cooper, D. E.

Existentialism: A Reconstruction (Basil Blackwell, 1999, p. 8) ^ Marino, Gordon.

Basic Writings of Existentialism (Modern Library, 2004, pp. ix, 3).

^ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kierkegaard/ ^ Watts, Michael.

Kierkegaard (Oneworld, 2003, pp. 4–6).

^ Lowrie, Walter.

Kierkegaard's attack upon "Christendom" (Princeton, 1968, pp. 37–40) ^ Corrigan, John.

The Oxford handbook of religion and emotion (Oxford, 2008, pp. 387–388) ^ Livingston, James et al.

Modern Christian Thought: The Twentieth Century (Fortress Press, 2006, Chapter 5: Christian Existentialism).

^ Martin, Clancy.

Religious Existentialism in Companion to Phenomenology and Existentialism (Blackwell, 2006, pp. 188–205) ^ Robert C. Solomon, Existentialism (McGraw-Hill, 1974, pp. 1–2) ^ D.E. Cooper Existentialism: A Reconstruction (Basil Blackwell, 1999, p. 8).

^ Ernst Breisach, Introduction to Modern Existentialism , New York (1962), p. 5 ^ Walter Kaufmann, Existentialism: From Dostoevesky to Sartre , New York (1956), p. 12 ^ Guignon, Charles B. and Derk Pereboom.

Existentialism: basic writings (Hackett Publishing, 2001, p. xiii) ^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1999).

Thus Spake Zarathustra: A Book for All and None . The Gutenberg Project. p. 8.

^ Hastings, James.

Encyclopedia of Religion ^ Compact Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press. 2007.

humanism n.

1 a rationalistic system of thought attaching prime importance to human rather than divine or supernatural matters. 2 a Renaissance cultural movement that turned away from medieval scholasticism and revived interest in ancient Greek and Roman thought.

Typically, abridgments of this definition omit all senses except #1, such as in the Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary Archived 2003-12-30 at the Wayback Machine , Collins Essential English Dictionary , and Webster's Concise Dictionary . New York: RHR Press. 2001. p.

177 .

ISBN 978-0375425745 .

^ "Definitions of humanism (subsection)" . Institute for Humanist Studies. Archived from the original on 2007-01-18 . Retrieved 16 Jan 2007 .

^ Davis, Lewis S.; Williamson, Claudia R. (2019). "Does individualism promote gender equality?".

World Development .

123 : 104627.

doi : 10.1016/j.worlddev.2019.104627 .

^ Edwords, Fred (1989).

"What Is Humanism?" . American Humanist Association. Archived from the original on 30 January 2010 . Retrieved 19 August 2009 .

Secular and Religious Humanists both share the same worldview and the same basic principles... From the standpoint of philosophy alone, there is no difference between the two. It is only in the definition of religion and in the practice of the philosophy that Religious and Secular Humanists effectively disagree.

^ Moore, Andrew (1 January 2013). "Hedonism". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ "libertine" – via The Free Dictionary.

^ "WordNet Search – 3.1" .

wordnetweb.princeton.edu .

^ René Pintard (2000).

Le Libertinage érudit dans la première moitié du XVIIe siècle . Slatkine. p. 11.

ISBN 978-2-05-101818-0 . Retrieved 24 July 2012 .

^ Amesbury, Richard (1 January 2016). "Fideism". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ "A Martyr to Sin" .

archive.nytimes.com .

^ "What Is Objectivism? – The Objective Standard" .

theobjectivestandard.com . Retrieved 2021-07-08 .

^ "About the Author" in Rand, Ayn (1992) [1957].

Atlas Shrugged (35th anniversary ed.). New York: Dutton. pp.

1170– 1171.

ISBN 978-0-525-94892-6 .

^ Tucker said, "the fact that one class of men are dependent for their living upon the sale of their labour, while another class of men are relieved of the necessity of labour by being legally privileged to sell something that is not labour . . . And to such a state of things I am as much opposed as any one. But the minute you remove privilege . . . every man will be a labourer exchanging with fellow-labourers . . . What Anarchistic-Socialism aims to abolish is usury . . . it wants to deprive capital of its reward." Benjamin Tucker.

Instead of a Book , p. 404 ^ Wayne Gabardi, review of Anarchism by David Miller, published in American Political Science Review Vol. 80, No. 1. (Mar., 1986), pp. 300–302.

^ According to scholar Allan Antliff , Benjamin Tucker coined the term "philosophical anarchism," to distinguish peaceful evolutionary anarchism from revolutionary variants.

Antliff, Allan. 2001.

Anarchist Modernism: Art, Politics, and the First American Avant-Garde . University of Chicago Press. p. 4 ^ Outhwaite, William & Tourain, Alain (Eds.). (2003). Anarchism. The Blackwell Dictionary of Modern Social Thought (2nd Edition, p. 12). Blackwell Publishing ^ Michael Freeden identifies four broad types of individualist anarchism. He says the first is the type associated with William Godwin that advocates self-government with a "progressive rationalism that included benevolence to others." The second type is the amoral self-serving rationality of Egoism , as most associated with Max Stirner. The third type is "found in Herbert Spencer 's early predictions, and in that of some of his disciples such as Donisthorpe , foreseeing the redundancy of the state in the source of social evolution." The fourth type retains a moderated form of Egoism and accounts for social cooperation through the advocacy of market. Freeden, Michael.

Ideologies and Political Theory: A Conceptual Approach . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-829414-X . pp. 313–314.

^ Tucker, Benjamin R., Instead of a Book, by a Man too Busy to Write One: A Fragmentary Exposition of Philosophical Anarchism (1897, New York) ^ Broderick, John C. "Thoreau's Proposals for Legislation".

American Quarterly , Vol. 7, No. 3 (Autumn, 1955). p. 285 ^ a b c Quelle, Horst Matthai (2002).

Textos filosoficos (1989–1999) . UABC.

ISBN 978-9709051322 – via Google Books.

^ Hudelson, Richard (1999).

Modern Political Philosophy . M.E. Sharpe.

ISBN 978-0765600219 – via Google Books.

^ David Conway .

Classical Liberalism: The Unvanquished Ideal.

Palgrave Macmillan. 1998.

ISBN 978-0-312-21932-1 p. 8 ^ Boaz, David (30 January 2009).

"Libertarianism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 21 February 2017 .

[L]ibertarianism, political philosophy that takes individual liberty to be the primary political value.

^ Woodcock, George (2004) [1962].

Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements . Peterborough: Broadview Press. p. 16.

ISBN 978-1551116297 .

[F]or the very nature of the libertarian attitude – its rejection of dogma, its deliberate avoidance of rigidly systematic theory, and, above all, its stress on extreme freedom of choice and on the primacy of the individual judgement  [ sic ].

^ Long, Joseph. W (1996). "Toward a Libertarian Theory of Class".

Social Philosophy and Policy .

15 (2): 310. "When I speak of 'libertarianism' [...] I mean all three of these very different movements. It might be protested that LibCap [libertarian capitalism], LibSoc [libertarian socialism] and LibPop [libertarian populism] are too different from one another to be treated as aspects of a single point of view. But they do share a common – or at least an overlapping – intellectual ancestry." ^ Carlson, Jennifer D. (2012). "Libertarianism". In Miller, Wilburn R., ed.

The Social History of Crime and Punishment in America . London: Sage Publications. p. 1006.

ISBN 978-1412988766 . "There exist three major camps in libertarian thought: right-libertarianism, socialist libertariaism, and left-lbertarianism; the extent to which these represent distinct ideologies as opposed to variations on a theme is contrasted by scholars. Regardless, these factions differ most pronouncedly with respect to private property." ^ Francis, Mark (December 1983). "Human Rights and Libertarians".

Australian Journal of Politics & History .

29 (3): 462– 472.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8497.1983.tb00212.x .

ISSN 0004-9522 .

^ Vallentyne, Peter; Steiner, Hillel; Otsuka, Michael (2005).

"Why Left-Libertarianism Is Not Incoherent, Indeterminate, or Irrelevant: A Reply to Fried" (PDF) .

Philosophy and Public Affairs .

33 (2). Blackwell Publishing, Inc.: 201– 215.

doi : 10.1111/j.1088-4963.2005.00030.x . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-11-03 . Retrieved 2013-07-23 .

^ a b c Narveson, Jan ; Trenchard, David (2008).

"Left Libertarianism" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

288– 289.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n174 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

^ Schnack, William (13 November 2015).

"Panarchy Flourishes Under Geo-Mutualism" . Center for a Stateless Society.

Archived 10 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 10 August 2018.

^ Byas, Jason Lee (25 November 2015).

"The Moral Irrelevance of Rent" . Center for a Stateless Society. Retrieved 21 March 2020.

^ Carson, Kevin (8 November 2015).

"Are We All Mutualists?" Center for a Stateless Society. Retrieved 21 March 2020.

^ Gillis, William (29 November 2015).

"The Organic Emergence of Property from Reputation" . Center for a Stateless Society. Retrieved 8 April 2020.

^ Bylund, Per (2005).

Man and Matter: A Philosophical Inquiry into the Justification of Ownership in Land from the Basis of Self-Ownership (PDF) .

LUP Student Papers (master's thesis). Lund University . Retrieved 12 July 2020 .

^ Long, Roderick T.

(2006).

"Land-locked: A Critique of Carson on Property Rights" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies .

20 (1): 87– 95.

^ Verhaegh, Marcus (2006).

"Rothbard as a Political Philosopher" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies .

20 (4): 3.

^ Sundstrom, William A. (16 May 2002).

"An Egalitarian-Libertarian Manifesto" .

Archived 29 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Sullivan, Mark A. (July 2003). "Why the Georgist Movement Has Not Succeeded: A Personal Response to the Question Raised by Warren J. Samuels".

American Journal of Economics and Sociology .

62 (3): 612.

^ Spitz, Jean-Fabien (March 2006).

"Left-wing libertarianism: equality based on self-ownership" .

Raisons Politiques .

23 (3): 23– 46.

doi : 10.3917/rai.023.0023 . Retrieved 28 November 2019 .

^ Bookchin, Murray (January 1986).

"The Greening of Politics: Toward a New Kind of Political Practice" .

Green Perspectives: Newsletter of the Green Program Project (1).

^ a b Bookchin, Murray; Biehl, Janet (1997).

The Murray Bookchin Reader . New York: Cassell. p. 170.

^ a b Long, Roderick T. (2012). "The Rise of Social Anarchism". In Gaus, Gerald F.; D'Agostino, Fred, eds.

The Routledge Companion to Social and Political Philosophy . p. 223.

^ Grunberg, Gérard; Schweisguth, Etienne; Boy, Daniel; Mayer, Nonna , eds. (1993).

The French Voter Decides . "Social Libertarianism and Economic Liberalism". University of Michigan Press.

p. 45 .

ISBN 978-0-472-10438-3 ^ a b c Carlson, Jennifer D. (2012). "Libertarianism". In Miller, Wilbur R.

The Social History of Crime and Punishment in America: An Encyclopedia . Sage Publications. pp. 1006–1007.

^ Foldvart, Fred E.

"Geoism and Libertarianism" .

The Progress Report . Progress.org. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012 . Retrieved 26 March 2013 .

^ DeCoster, Karen (19 April 2006).

"Henry George and the Tariff Question" .

LewRockwell.com . Retrieved 23 September 2020.

^ Sheldon Richman (3 February 2011).

"Libertarian Left: Free-market anti-capitalism, the unknown ideal" .

The American Conservative .

Archived 10 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 5 March 2012.

^ Chartier, Gary; Johnson, Charles W. (2011).

Markets Not Capitalism: Individualist Anarchism Against Bosses, Inequality, Corporate Power, and Structural Poverty . Brooklyn: Minor Compositions/Autonomedia. pp. 1–11.

ISBN 978-1570272424 .

^ Will Kymlicka (2005). "libertarianism, left-". In Ted Honderich (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . New York: Oxford University Press .

^ Olsaretti, Serena (2004).

Liberty, Desert and the Market: A Philosophical Study . Cambridge University Press. pp. 14, 88, 100.

^ Graham, Paul; Hoffman, John (2003).

An Introduction to Political Theory . Routledge. p. 93.

ISBN 978-1-3178-6342-7 .

A distinction is made between right libertarianism and left libertarianism. Self-ownership is the starting point for all libertarians, but right and left libertarians divide over the implications for the ownership of external things from the self-ownership premise.

^ Vallentyne, Peter (2007). "Libertarianism and the State". In Frankel Paul, Ellen; Miller, Fred Jr.; Paul, Jeffrey (eds.).

Liberalism: Old and New . Vol. 24. Cambridge University Press. pp.

187– 205.

ISBN 978-0-521-70305-5 .

The best known form of libertarianism – right-libertarianism – is a version of classical liberalism, but there is also a form of libertarianism – left-libertarianism – that combines classical liberalism's concern for individual liberty with contemporary liberalism's robust concern for material equality.

^ Heywood, Andrew (2015).

Key Concepts in Politics and International Relations: Palgrave Key Concepts . Macmillan International Higher Education. p. 37.

ISBN 978-1-1374-9477-1 .

^ Graber, Mark A. (1991).

Transforming Free Speech: The Ambiguous Legacy of Civil Libertarianism . Berkeley, California: University of California Press. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0520913134 .

^ Narveson, Jan (2001).

The Libertarian Idea (revised ed.). Peterborough, Ontario: Broadview Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-1551114217 .

^ Passavent, Paul (2003).

No Escape: Freedom of Speech and the Paradox of Rights . New York: New York University Press. p. 49.

ISBN 978-0814766965 .

^ Reiman, Jeffrey H. (2005). "The Fallacy of Libertarian Capitalism".

Ethics .

10 (1): 85– 95.

doi : 10.1086/292300 .

JSTOR 2380706 .

S2CID 170927490 .

^ Goodway, David (2006).

Anarchist Seeds Beneath the Snow: Left-Libertarian Thought and British Writers from William Morris to Colin Ward . Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.

p. 4 . "'Libertarian' and 'libertarianism' are frequently employed by anarchists as synonyms for 'anarchist' and 'anarchism', largely as an attempt to distance themselves from the negative connotations of 'anarchy' and its derivatives. The situation has been vastly complicated in recent decades with the rise of anarcho-capitalism, 'minimal statism' and an extreme right-wing laissez-faire philosophy advocated by such theorists as Rothbard and Nozick and their adoption of the words 'libertarian' and 'libertarianism'. It has therefore now become necessary to distinguish between their right libertarianism and the left libertarianism of the anarchist tradition".

^ Marshall, Peter (2008).

Demanding the Impossible: A History of Anarchism . London: Harper Perennial. p. 565. "The problem with the term 'libertarian' is that it is now also used by the Right. [...] In its moderate form, right libertarianism embraces laissez-faire liberals like Robert Nozick who call for a minimal State, and in its extreme form, anarcho-capitalists like Murray Rothbard and David Friedman who entirely repudiate the role of the State and look to the market as a means of ensuring social order".

^ Fernandez, Frank (2001).

Cuban Anarchism. The History of a Movement . Sharp Press.

p. 9 . "Thus, in the United States, the once exceedingly useful term 'libertarian' has been hijacked by egotists who are in fact enemies of liberty in the full sense of the word." ^ Rothbard, Murray (2009) [2007].

The Betrayal of the American Right (PDF) . Mises Institute. p. 83.

ISBN 978-1610165013 .

One gratifying aspect of our rise to some prominence is that, for the first time in my memory, we, 'our side,' had captured a crucial word from the enemy. 'Libertarians' had long been simply a polite word for left-wing anarchists, that is for anti-private property anarchists, either of the communist or syndicalist variety. But now we had taken it over.

^ Hussain, Syed B. (2004).

Encyclopedia of Capitalism, Volume 2 . New York: Facts on File Inc. p. 492.

ISBN 0816052247 .

In the modern world, political ideologies are largely defined by their attitude towards capitalism. Marxists want to overthrow it, liberals to curtail it extensively, conservatives to curtail it moderately. Those who maintain that capitalism is an excellent economic system, unfairly maligned, with little or no need for corrective government policy, are generally known as libertarians.

^ Rothbard, Murray (1 March 1971).

"The Left and Right Within Libertarianism" .

WIN: Peace and Freedom Through Nonviolent Action .

7 (4): 6–10. Retrieved 14 January 2020.

^ Miller, Fred (15 August 2008).

"Natural Law" .

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Retrieved 31 July 2019 .

^ Boaz, David (12 April 2019).

"Key Concepts of Libertarianism" . Cato Institute . Retrieved 20 December 2019 .

^ "What Is Libertarian" . Institute for Humane Studies . Retrieved 20 December 2019 .

^ Baradat, Leon P. (2015).

Political Ideologies . Routledge. p. 31.

ISBN 978-1317345558 .

^ Kevin Carson.

Organization Theory: A Libertarian Perspective . Booksurge. 2008. p. 1 ^ Bookchin, Murray and Janet Biehl.

The Murray Bookchin Reader . Cassell, 1997. p. 170 ISBN 0-304-33873-7 ^ Hicks, Steven V. and Daniel E. Shannon.

The American journal of economics and sociology . Blackwell Pub, 2003. p. 612 ^ Miller, Wilbur R. (2012).

The social history of crime and punishment in America. An encyclopedia.

5 vols. London: Sage Publications. p. 1007.

ISBN 1412988764 . "There exist three major camps in libertarian thought: right-libertarianism, socialist libertarianism, and ..." ^ "It implies a classless and anti-authoritarian (i.e. libertarian) society in which people manage their own affairs" I.1 Isn't libertarian socialism an oxymoron?

Archived 2017-11-16 at the Wayback Machine at An Anarchist FAQ ^ "unlike other socialists, they tend to see (to various different degrees, depending on the thinker) to be skeptical of centralized state intervention as the solution to capitalist exploitation..." Roderick T. Long. "Toward a libertarian theory of class." Social Philosophy and Policy . Volume 15. Issue 02. Summer 1998. p. 305 ^ a b "So, libertarian socialism rejects the idea of state ownership and control of the economy, along with the state as such. Through workers' self-management it proposes to bring an end to authority, exploitation, and hierarchy in production." "I1. Isn't libertarian socialism an oxymoron" in Archived 2017-11-16 at the Wayback Machine An Anarchist FAQ ^ "Therefore, rather than being an oxymoron, "libertarian socialism" indicates that true socialism must be libertarian and that a libertarian who is not a socialist is a phoney. As true socialists oppose wage labour, they must also oppose the state for the same reasons. Similarly, libertarians must oppose wage labour for the same reasons they must oppose the state." "I1. Isn't libertarian socialism an oxymoron" in Archived 2017-11-16 at the Wayback Machine An Anarchist FAQ ^ "Their analysis treats libertarian socialism as a form of anti-parliamentary, democratic, antibureaucratic grass roots socialist organisation, strongly linked to working class activism." Alex Prichard, Ruth Kinna, Saku Pinta and Dave Berry (eds) Libertarian Socialism: Politics in Black and Red. Palgrave Macmillan, December 2012. p. 13 ^ " ...preferringa system of popular self governance via networks of decentralized, local voluntary, participatory, cooperative associations. Roderick T. Long. "Toward a libertarian theory of class." Social Philosophy and Policy . Volume 15. Issue 02. Summer 1998. p. 305 ^ "What is of particular interest here, however, is the appeal to a form of emancipation grounded in decentralized, cooperative and democratic forms of political and economic governance which most libertarian socialist visions, including Cole's, tend to share." Charles Masquelier.

Critical theory and libertarian socialism: Realizing the political potential of critical social theory.

Bloomsbury Publishing . New York and London. 2014. p. 189 ^ Mendes, Silva.

Socialismo Libertário ou Anarchismo Vol. 1 (1896): "Society should be free through mankind's spontaneous federative affiliation to life, based on the community of land and tools of the trade; meaning: Anarchy will be equality by abolition of private property (while retaining respect for personal property ) and liberty by abolition of authority ".

^ "...preferring a system of popular self governance via networks of decentralized, local, voluntary, participatory, cooperative associations-sometimes as a complement to and check on state power..." ^ Rocker, Rudolf (2004).

Anarcho-Syndicalism: Theory and Practice .

AK Press . p. 65.

ISBN 978-1-902593-92-0 .

^ "LibSoc share with LibCap an aversion to any interference to freedom of thought, expression or choice of lifestyle." Roderick T. Long. "Toward a libertarian theory of class." Social Philosophy and Policy . Volume 15. Issue 02. Summer 1998. pp 305 ^ "...what categorizes libertarian socialism is a focus on forms of social organization to further the freedom of the individual combined with an advocacy of non-state means for achieving this." Matt Dawson.

Late modernity, individualization and socialism: An Associational Critique of Neoliberalism.

Palgrave MacMillan. 2013. p. 64 ^ "What is implied by the term 'libertarian socialism'?: The idea that socialism is first and foremost about freedom and therefore about overcoming the domination, repression, and alienation that block the free flow of human creativity, thought, and action...An approach to socialism that incorporates cultural revolution, women's and children's liberation, and the critique and transformation of daily life, as well as the more traditional concerns of socialist politics. A politics that is completely revolutionary because it seeks to transform all of reality. We do not think that capturing the economy and the state lead automatically to the transformation of the rest of social being, nor do we equate liberation with changing our life-styles and our heads. Capitalism is a total system that invades all areas of life: socialism must be the overcoming of capitalist reality in its entirety, or it is nothing." "What is Libertarian Socialism?" by Ulli Diemer. Volume 2, Number 1 (Summer 1997 issue) of The Red Menace .

^ "The IAF–IFA fights for : the abolition of all forms of authority whether economical, political, social, religious, cultural or sexual." "Principles of The International of Anarchist Federations" Archived January 5, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Ward, Colin (1966).

"Anarchism as a Theory of Organization" . Archived from the original on 25 March 2010 . Retrieved 1 March 2010 .

^ "The Soviet Union Versus Socialism" .

chomsky.info . Retrieved 2015-11-22 .

Libertarian socialism, furthermore, does not limit its aims to democratic control by producers over production, but seeks to abolish all forms of domination and hierarchy in every aspect of social and personal life, an unending struggle, since progress in achieving a more just society will lead to new insight and understanding of forms of oppression that may be concealed in traditional practice and consciousness.

^ "Authority is defined in terms of the right to exercise social control (as explored in the "sociology of power") and the correlative duty to obey (as explred in the "philosophy of practical reason"). Anarchism is distinguished, philosophically, by its scepticism towards such moral relations – by its questioning of the claims made for such normative power – and, practically, by its challenge to those "authoritative" powers which cannot justify their claims and which are therefore deemed illegitimate or without moral foundation." Anarchism and Authority: A Philosophical Introduction to Classical Anarchism by Paul McLaughlin. AshGate. 2007. p. 1 ^ "Anarchism, then, really stands for the liberation of the human mind from the dominion of religion; the liberation of the human body from the dominion of property; liberation from the shackles and restraint of government. Anarchism stands for a social order based on the free grouping of individuals for the purpose of producing real social wealth; an order that will guarantee to every human being free access to the earth and full enjoyment of the necessities of life, according to individual desires, tastes, and inclinations." Emma Goldman . "What it Really Stands for Anarchy" in Anarchism and Other Essays .

^ Individualist anarchist Benjamin Tucker defined anarchism as opposition to authority as follows "They found that they must turn either to the right or to the left, – follow either the path of Authority or the path of Liberty. Marx went one way; Warren and Proudhon the other. Thus were born State Socialism and Anarchism...Authority, takes many shapes, but, broadly speaking, her enemies divide themselves into three classes: first, those who abhor her both as a means and as an end of progress, opposing her openly, avowedly, sincerely, consistently, universally; second, those who profess to believe in her as a means of progress, but who accept her only so far as they think she will subserve their own selfish interests, denying her and her blessings to the rest of the world; third, those who distrust her as a means of progress, believing in her only as an end to be obtained by first trampling upon, violating, and outraging her. These three phases of opposition to Liberty are met in almost every sphere of thought and human activity. Good representatives of the first are seen in the Catholic Church and the Russian autocracy; of the second, in the Protestant Church and the Manchester school of politics and political economy; of the third, in the atheism of Gambetta and the socialism of Karl Marx." Benjamin Tucker .

Individual Liberty.

^ Anarchist historian George Woodcock report of Mikhail Bakunin 's anti-authoritarianism and shows opposition to both state and non-state forms of authority as follows: "All anarchists deny authority; many of them fight against it." (p. 9)...Bakunin did not convert the League's central committee to his full program, but he did persuade them to accept a remarkably radical recommendation to the Berne Congress of September 1868, demanding economic equality and implicitly attacking authority in both Church and State." ^ Brown, L. Susan (2002). "Anarchism as a Political Philosophy of Existential Individualism: Implications for Feminism".

The Politics of Individualism: Liberalism, Liberal Feminism and Anarchism . Black Rose Books Ltd. Publishing. p. 106.

^ "It is forgotten that the early defenders of commercial society like (Adam) Smith were as much concerned with criticising the associational blocks to mobile labour represented by guilds as they were to the activities of the state. The history of socialist thought includes a long associational and anti-statist tradition prior to the political victory of the Bolshevism in the east and varieties of Fabianism in the west. John O'Neil." The Market: Ethics, knowledge and politics . Routledge. 1998. p. 3 ^ "In some ways, it is perhaps fair to say that if Left communism is an intellectual- political formation, it is so, first and foremost, negatively – as opposed to other socialist traditions. I have labelled this negative pole 'socialist orthodoxy', composed of both Leninists and social democrats...What I suggested was that these Left communist thinkers differentiated their own understandings of communism from a strand of socialism that came to follow a largely electoral road in the West, pursuing a kind of social capitalism, and a path to socialism that predominated in the peripheral and semi- peripheral countries, which sought revolutionary conquest of power and led to something like state capitalism. Generally, the Left communist thinkers were to find these paths locked within the horizons of capitalism (the law of value, money, private property, class, the state), and they were to characterize these solutions as statist, substitutionist and authoritarian." Chamsy el- Ojeili.

Beyond post-socialism. Dialogues with the far-left.

Palgrave Macmillan. 2015. p. 8 ^ Sims, Franwa (2006).

The Anacostia Diaries As It Is . Lulu Press. p. 160.

^ An Anarchist FAQ . " (Benjamin) Tucker referred to himself many times as a socialist and considered his philosophy to be "Anarchistic socialism." ^ Armand, Émile (1907).

"Anarchist Individualism as a Life and Activity" . French individualist anarchist Émile Armand shows clearly opposition to capitalism and centralized economies when he said that the individualist anarchist "inwardly he remains refractory – fatally refractory – morally, intellectually, economically (The capitalist economy and the directed economy, the speculators and the fabricators of single are equally repugnant to him.)" ^ Sabatini, Peter (1994–1995).

"Libertarianism: Bogus Anarchy" . Anarchist Peter Sabatini reports that in the United States "of early to mid-19th century, there appeared an array of communal and "utopian" counterculture groups (including the so-called free love movement). William Godwin's anarchism exerted an ideological influence on some of this, but more so the socialism of Robert Owen and Charles Fourier. After success of his British venture, Owen himself established a cooperative community within the United States at New Harmony, Indiana during 1825. One member of this commune was Josiah Warren (1798–1874), considered to be the first individualist anarchist." ^ Chartier, Gary; Johnson, Charles W. (2011).

Markets Not Capitalism: Individualist Anarchism Against Bosses, Inequality, Corporate Power, and Structural Poverty . Brooklyn: Minor Compositions/Autonomedia. Back cover. "It introduces an eye-opening approach to radical social thought, rooted equally in libertarian socialism and market anarchism." ^ "A Mutualist FAQ: A.4. Are Mutualists Socialists?" Archived 9 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Masquelier, Charles (2014).

Critical Theory and Libertarian Socialism: Realizing the Political Potential of Critical Social Theory . New York and London: Bloomsbury Publishing . p. 190. "It is by meeting such a twofold requirement that the libertarian socialism of G.D.H. Cole could be said to offer timely and sustainable avenues for the institutionalization of the liberal value of autonomy [...]." ^ Prichard, Alex; Kinna, Ruth; Pinta, Saku; Berry, Dave, eds. (December 2012).

Libertarian Socialism: Politics in Black and Red . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 13. "Locating libertarian socialism in a grey area between anarchist and Marxist extremes, they argue that the multiple experiences of historical convergence remain inspirational and that, through these examples, the hope of socialist transformation survives." ^ Boraman, Toby (December 2012). "Carnival and Class: Anarchism and Councilism in Australasia during the 1970s". In Prichard, Alex; Kinna, Ruth; Pinta, Saku; Berry, Dave, eds.

Libertarian Socialism: Politics in Black and Red . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 268. "Councilism and anarchism loosely merged into 'libertarian socialism', offering a non-dogmatic path by which both council communism and anarchism could be updated for the changed conditions of the time, and for the new forms of proletarian resistance to these new conditions." ^ Bookchin, Murray (1992).

"The Ghost of Anarcho-Syndicalism" .

^ Graham, Robert .

"The General Idea of Proudhon's Revolution" .

^ Bromley, Kent (1906). "Preface". In Kropotkin, Peter.

The Conquest of Bread . London and New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons.

^ "Mutualist.Org: Free Market Anti-Capitalism" .

www.mutualist.org .

^ Miller, David. 1987. "Mutualism." The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Political Thought. Blackwell Publishing. p. 11 ^ Tandy, Francis D., 1896, Voluntary Socialism , chapter 6, paragraph 15.

^ Sharma, R.N. (1991). Plato: An Inter-disciplinary Perspective. New Delhi, India: Atlantic Publishers and Distributors. pp. 131–132.

^ "Hegel" by Charles Taylor, Part II: Phenomenology: IV The Dialectic of Consciousness, V Self-Consciousness ^ "Social and Political Recognition" by Paddy McQueen ^ Marvin Perry, Myrna Chase, Margaret Jacob, James R. Jacob. Western Civilization: Ideas, Politics, and Society – From 1600, Volume 2. 9th ed. Boston, Massaschussetts: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company, 2009 pp. 760 ^ a b Pope Francis, Laudato si' , paragraph 162, published 24 May 2015, accessed 18 April 2024 ^ "The most ambitious contribution to literary anarchism during the 1890s was undoubtedly Oscar Wilde The Soul of Man under Socialism . Wilde, as we have seen, declared himself an anarchist on at least one occasion during the 1890s, and he greatly admired Peter Kropotkin , whom he had met. Later, in De Profundis , he described Kropotkin's life as one "of the most perfect lives I have come across in my own experience" and talked of him as "a man with a soul of that beautiful white Christ that seems coming out of Russia." But in The Soul of Man under Socialism , which appeared in 1890, it is Godwin rather than Kropotkin whose influence seems dominant." George Woodcock.

Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements.

1962. (p. 447).

^ _wlo:dek.

"Emil Armand "Anarchist Individualism as a Life and Activity" " .

^ a b c Imperfect garden : the legacy of humanism . Princeton University Press. 2002.

^ "Dictionary.com" . Archived from the original on 2010-11-19.

^ "Emerson, Ralph Waldo | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ "How the early Christian church gave birth to today's WEIRD Europeans" .

www.science.org .

^ Chatterjee, Rhitu (November 7, 2019).

"Western Individualism May Have Roots In The Medieval Church's Obsession With Incest" .

NPR .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church 2792" .

^ Chalamet, C.; Delikostantis, K.; Getcha, J.; Parmentier, E. (2021).

Theological Anthropology, 500 Years after Martin Luther: Orthodox and Protestant Perspectives . Studies in Systematic Theology. Brill. p. 187.

ISBN 978-90-04-46125-3 . Retrieved 2023-05-06 .

Further reading [ edit ] Albrecht, James M. (2012) Reconstructing Individualism : A Pragmatic Tradition from Emerson to Ellison . Fordham University Press.

Brown, L. Susan (1993).

The Politics of Individualism: Liberalism, Liberal Feminism, and Anarchism . Black Rose Books.

Dewey, John . (1930).

Individualism Old and New .

Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1847).

Self-Reliance . London: J.M. Dent & Sons Ltd.

Gagnier, Regenia. (2010).

Individualism, Decadence and Globalization: On the Relationship of Part to Whole, 1859–1920 .

Palgrave Macmillan .

Dumont, Louis (1986).

Essays on Individualism: Modern Ideology in Anthropological Perspective . Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 0-226-16958-8 .

Siedentop, Larry (2014).

Inventing the Individual: The Origins of Western Liberalism . Penguin Books.

ISBN 9780141009544 .

Lukes, Steven (1973).

Individualism . New York: Harper & Row .

ISBN 0-631-14750-0 .

Macpherson, C.B.

(2018). Individualism. In: The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics . Palgrave Macmillan, London Meiksins Wood, Ellen . (1972).

Mind and Politics: An Approach to the Meaning of Liberal and Socialist Individualism .

University of California Press .

ISBN 0-520-02029-4 Renaut, Alain (1999).

The Era of the Individual . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press .

ISBN 0-691-02938-5 .

Shanahan, Daniel. (1991) Toward a Genealogy of Individualism . Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press .

ISBN 0-87023-811-6 .

Watt, Ian . (1996) Myths of Modern Individualism.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-48011-6 .

Barzilai, Gad . (2003).

Communities and Law.

Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 0-472-11315-1 .

v t e Political spectrum Far-left Left Centre-left Centre Centre-right Right Far-right Political positions Post-leftism Ultra-leftism Anti-Stalinist left New Left Centrist Marxism Third Way Radical centrism New Right Political ideologies Anarchism Marxism Communism Socialism Social democracy Liberalism Christian democracy Conservatism Nationalism Fascism Nazism Religious politics Buddhist socialism Christian left Jewish left Islamic socialism Christian right Hindutva Islamism Religious Zionism Political pejoratives Baizuo Champagne socialist Hard left Liberal elite Limousine liberal Loony left Moonbat Red fascist Regressive left Social fascism Social imperialism Social justice warrior Soft left Wingnut Models Horseshoe theory Left–right political spectrum Nolan Chart Overton window Open–closed political spectrum Pournelle chart Right-wing authoritarianism See also Anti-authoritarianism Democratic transition Libertarianism Syndicalism Progressivism Green politics Identity politics Corporatism Authoritarianism Totalitarianism Revolutionary Reactionary Anti-establishment Collectivism Communitarianism The Establishment Individualism Hardline Populism Radical politics Triangulation v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐6zsq7
Cached time: 20250817011814
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.824 seconds
Real time usage: 2.207 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10883/1000000
Revision size: 129779/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 449336/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5616/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 33/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 595241/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.042/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18955374/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1662.532      1 -total
 50.13%  833.501      1 Template:Reflist
 16.93%  281.423     38 Template:Cite_book
 14.24%  236.795      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.53%  141.876     31 Template:Cite_web
  8.51%  141.413     22 Template:Cite_journal
  8.49%  141.173      5 Template:Excerpt
  8.22%  136.582     16 Template:Webarchive
  6.94%  115.301      1 Template:Libertarianism_sidebar
  5.98%   99.421      4 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15181:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817011814 and revision id 1306297110. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Individualism&oldid=1306297110 " Categories : Individualism Libertarian theory Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 01:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Individualism 72 languages Add topic

