Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gallery 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Splendor Solis 7 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 16th-century alchemical manuscript This article is about the alchemical work. For the album by The Tea Party, see Splendor Solis (album) .

The peacock in a crowned flask associated with Venus Splendor Solis (English: "The Splendour of the Sun") is a version of the illuminated alchemical text attributed to Salomon Trismosin . This version dates from around 1582.

The earliest version, written in Central German , is dated 1532–1535 and is part of the Kupferstichkabinett Berlin collection at the State Museums in Berlin . It is illuminated on vellum, with decorative borders like a book of hours , meticulously painted and highlighted with gold. The later copies in London , Kassel , Paris and Nuremberg are equally fine. Twenty versions exist worldwide.

The original of Splendor Solis , which contained seven chapters, appeared in Augsburg . In miniatures the works of Albrecht Dürer , Hans Holbein and Lucas Cranach were used. The author of the manuscript was considered to be the legendary Salomon Trismosin , allegedly the teacher of Paracelsus , though the name is believed to be a pseudonym. The work consists of a sequence of 22 elaborate images, set in ornamental borders and niches. The symbolic process shows the classical alchemical death and rebirth of the king, and incorporates a series of seven flasks , each associated with one of the then-known planets. Within the flasks a process is shown involving the transformation of bird and animal symbols into the Queen and King, the white and the red tincture . Although the style of the Splendor Solis illuminations suggest an earlier date, they are likely of the 16th century.

Gallery [ edit ] Weapons of the Art: Two golden suns with man-like faces, one displayed on a shield.

First Treatise: a philosopher holding an alchemical flask from the top of which ascends a black scroll, standing in a natural landscape. The scroll reads "Let us seek the natures of the four elements".

Second Treatise: knight with sword is crowned by gold and silver stars atop two fountains. His shield reads: "From two waters make one, you who seek to make the Sun and the Moon. And give it to drink to the unworthy. And where you must, with the dead. Then from the water remake [it] again, and you will have multiplied the Stone." "Particulars": king and queen hold scrolls; king stands surrounded by flames, queen atop full moon. King below a red sun, queen beneath a silver sun. Captioned "The universal way with the particulars. Enclosed" First Parable: alchemists quarry into a rock in nature.

Other Parable: man ascends ladder propped against a gold tree, around whose root a crown is entwined.

Third Parable: androgynous regal figure holds a sceptre and a golden orb, while in the background, an old king is drowning in a river.

Fourth Parable: queen offers a robe to a man with a jet black body except for his bright red head and right arm, as well as his white left arm. The man is rising from a dirty pond, his head partially enclosed by a glass globe.

Fifth Parable: winged figure with two heads, one male, one female, grasps an egg and a highly reflective shield. The male head radiates gold, the female head silver.

Sixth Parable: a tousled man holds a golden head, while the discombobulated body lies at his feet.

Seventh Parable: man with beard sits in a bath in a courtyard, while a manservant tends the fire beneath.

Fourth Treatise: small naked man within a glass vessel pours liquid down the throat of a dragon. Scene below a heavenly silver chariot driven by Mercury and drawn by dragons bearing the signs for Aries and Aquarius on its wheels.

Fourth Treatise: three birds engage in ground combat in glass vessel. Scene occurs below a silver heavenly chariot drawn by peacocks and driven by a man showing the signs for Sagittarius and Pieces on its wheels.

Fourth Treatise: white bird with three crowned heads in glass vessel. Scene below a silver heavenly chariot drawn by wolves, driven by a knight bearing the signs for Capricorn and Cancer on its wheels.

Fourth Treatise: dragon with three heads—one white, one black, one red— in glass vessel. Scene blow silver heavenly chariot turning gold, driven by a king bearing the sign for Leo on its wheel.

Fourth Treatise: queen in glass vessel. Scene below a silver heavenly cart driven by Mercury, with the signs for Virgo and Gemini on its wheels.

Fourth Treatise: peacock in a crowned alchemical flask, symbolizing the 'stage of the peacock's tail'—an alchemical sign preceding the attainment of the white elixir. The scene occurs below a golden heavenly chariot driven by a woman and drawn by birds bearing the image of Libra on one wheel and Taurus on the other.

Fourth Treatise: young king, holding golden orb and sceptre, stands upon a crescent moon within a glass vessel. He stands beneath a golden heavenly chariot drawn by maidens driven by a woman and bearing a scorpion sign on its wheels.

Fifth Treatise: the sun, bearing a human face, sets over a darkened, semitransparent landscape with a walled city visible in the distance. The foreground is dominated by felled trees.

Fifth Treatise: mostly naked tiny men shown chaotically playing in a room.

Fifth Treatise: women washing, hanging and sun drying laundry by a stream.

Fifth Treatise: red Sun, bearing a human face, rises over a shaded city and rural landscape. The foreground is dominated by felled trees. The borders are decorated with birds and flowers.

References [ edit ] External links [ edit ] Splendor Solis at The Alchemy Website , retrieved 2009-01-11 Splendor Solis at Rosicrucian Site (incl. text) , archived from the original on 2011-07-27 , retrieved 2010-08-11 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) High Resolution of illumination images from Splendor Solis at the bordel.haghn Site , archived from the original on 2014-05-04 , retrieved 2014-05-04 Images from Splendor Solis at occultusthesaurus.com , archived from the original on 2016-11-13 , retrieved 2016-11-11 Splendor solis cards (all 22 cards) for free download in print quality , retrieved 2020-02-17 v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐qxqnl
Cached time: 20250818143219
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.307 seconds
Real time usage: 0.380 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 540/1000000
Revision size: 7928/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 49341/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 504/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 43579/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.181/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4588864/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  317.944      1 -total
 35.29%  112.205      4 Template:Citation
 23.02%   73.184      3 Template:Navbox
 22.56%   71.734      1 Template:Alchemy
 14.97%   47.610      1 Template:Short_description
  8.63%   27.446      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.53%   14.411      1 Template:About
  4.19%   13.330      1 Template:Reflist
  3.65%   11.597      3 Template:Main_other
  3.11%    9.896      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2621069:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818143219 and revision id 1294093903. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Splendor_Solis&oldid=1294093903 " Categories : Alchemical documents 16th-century manuscripts German-language manuscripts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 14:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Splendor Solis 7 languages Add topic

