Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung Academic Foundation 3 Further activities 4 Controversy 5 Leadership 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Ebert Foundation 20 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն עברית Lietuvių 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Shqip Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German political foundation linked to the SDP This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Friedrich Ebert Foundation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung Abbreviation FES Named after Friedrich Ebert Founded 1925 ; 100 years ago ( 1925 ) Founder Konrad Ludwig [ de ] Focus Education Location Bonn , Germany Area served Germany President Martin Schulz Secretary general Sabine Fandrych [ de ] Affiliations Social Democratic Party Website fes .de The Friedrich Ebert Foundation ( German : Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung e.V.

; Abbreviation: FES ) is a German political party foundation associated with, but independent from, the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Established in 1925 as the political legacy of Friedrich Ebert , Germany's first president, it is the largest and oldest of the German party-associated foundations. It is headquartered in Bonn and Berlin , and has offices and projects in over 100 countries. It is Germany's oldest organisation to promote democracy, political education, and promote students of outstanding intellectual abilities and personality.

History [ edit ] The FES was named after Friedrich Ebert (1871–1925), the Social Democratic President of Germany , 1919–1925. In his will , he specified that the proceeds from donations at his funeral should be used to create a foundation.  The SPD chairman at the time, Konrad Ludwig [ de ] , was given the responsibility of building this foundation, which he did a few days after Ebert's death in 1925. The main concern of the foundation was to work against discrimination of workers in the area of education: "The Friedrich Ebert Foundation pursues the goal of giving young, empowered proletarians government aid to fund an education at state-accredited institutions. As a basic principle, only those people who have a recommendation from the party organisation will receive funding." (SPD Yearbook 1926) By the end of 1931, 295 students had been funded with over 52,000 marks . At this point the funding of the foundation fell through, as a result of the Great Depression . The FES was a section of the Social Democratic Education and Culture Organisation, and was banned along with the party itself in 1933 by the Nazis .

In 1946, the FES was reinstituted at the founding assembly of the Socialist German Student Federation. In 1954, the FES was restructured into a charitable organisation "for the advancement of democratic education". This established the FES as an independent, self-contained institute. In addition to education programmes, the FES has also worked in the area of development aid since the 1960s. In this effort, it has supported democracy and freedom movements, for instance in the African National Congress (ANC), and played an important role in overcoming dictatorial regimes in Greece , Spain , and Portugal .  As a case in point, the Socialist Party of Portugal was formed at an FES school in Bad Münstereifel , Germany.

The German state did subsidize the work of the foundation with 170 million Euros in 2018.

[ 3 ] Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung Academic Foundation [ edit ] The Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung Academic Foundation (FES) is one of thirteen state-funded organizations for the promotion of young talents ( Begabtenförderwerke ) in Germany. Less than 1% of German students achieve a scholarship at one of the thirteen organizations (i.e. FES, Studienstiftung , Konrad Adenauer Foundation , Friedrich Naumann Foundation , Hanns Seidel Foundation , Heinrich Böll Foundation , Rosa Luxemburg Foundation , Cusanuswerk , Ernst Ludwig Ehrlich Scholarship Fund ).

[ 4 ] Further activities [ edit ] Friedrich Ebert Foundation in Bonn Today, the Friedrich Ebert Foundation employs several hundred employees in their offices in Bonn and Berlin , as well as in 14 regional offices and an academy within Germany and in over 100 foreign agencies. It is financed mainly through grants from the federal budget and the budgets of the various Bundesländer .

The FES had its own conference center on the Venusberg in Bonn for these activities until its closure in 2009.

The historical research center of the foundation also contains the Archive of Social Democracy and its libraries in Bonn and at the Karl Marx House in Trier .  This is one of the largest collections of documents on social history and the history of the workers movement .

Since 1982, the foundation has awarded a prize of 10,000 euro called Das politische Buch ("The Political Book") to promote noteworthy political books. The prize serves to remind people of the Nazi book burnings of 10 May 1933.

Controversy [ edit ] In 2017, Friedrich Ebert Foundation was attacked by a group dubbed “Pawn Storm”, the same cyber spy group that targeted that year's campaign of French presidential candidate Emmanuel Macron ; the group used email phishing tricks and attempted to install malware at the foundation.

[ 5 ] In 2022, the Friedrich Ebert Foundation was barred from working in Russia.

[ 6 ] In March 2024, the Friedrich Ebert Foundation was declared an undesirable organization in Russia .

[ 7 ] Leadership [ edit ] 1953–1970: Gerhard Weisser 1970–1983: Alfred Nau [ de ] 1983–1987: Heinz Kühn 1987–2003: Holger Börner (chairman laureate from 2003 until his death in 2006) 2003–2010: Anke Fuchs 2010–2012: Peter Struck 2013–2020: Kurt Beck and Dieter Schulte (interim since Struck's death) 2020–present: Martin Schulz See also [ edit ] Desiderius Erasmus Foundation ( AfD ) Friedrich Naumann Foundation for Freedom ( FDP ) Hanns Seidel Foundation ( CSU ) Heinrich Böll Foundation ( Die Grünen ) Konrad Adenauer Foundation ( CDU ) Rosa Luxemburg Foundation ( Die Linke ) References [ edit ] ^ Freise M. (2010) Friedrich Ebert Stiftung. In: Anheier H.K., Toepler S. (eds) International Encyclopedia of Civil Society . Springer, New York, NY.

doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-93996-4_754 .

^ Braun, Bernd.

Wie alles begann: 80 Jahre Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung – eine Außenansicht (PDF) (in German). FES Publikation . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ "Spur des Geldes: Wie der Staat mit Millionen eine linke Anti-Hass-Industrie unterstützt" focus.de, 28 June 2020 ^ "Startseite" .

stipendiumplus.de . Retrieved 16 September 2019 .

^ Eric Auchard (25 April 2017), Cyber spies target German party think-tanks ahead of election Reuters .

^ Maria Sheahan (11 April 2022), German foundation expelled from Russia says will continue democracy work Reuters .

^ "Минюст внес в реестр «нежелательных» четыре новые организации" .

OVD-Info (in Russian). 4 March 2024. Archived from the original on 5 March 2024 . Retrieved 5 March 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung .

Official website (in German) FES OnlineAkademie Library of the Friedrich Ebert Foundation Archive of Social Democracy Website for Grantees of the Friedrich Ebert Foundation v t e Social Democratic Party of Germany President of Germany Weimar Republic (1918–1933) Friedrich Ebert Federal Republic (1949–present) Gustav Heinemann Johannes Rau Jens Böhrnsen ( Acting ) Frank-Walter Steinmeier Chancellor of Germany Weimar Republic (1918–1933) Friedrich Ebert ( de facto ) Philipp Scheidemann (as Reich Minister President) Gustav Bauer Hermann Müller Federal Republic (1949–present) Willy Brandt Helmut Schmidt Gerhard Schröder Olaf Scholz Federal chairmen (since 1946) Kurt Schumacher Erich Ollenhauer Willy Brandt Hans-Jochen Vogel Björn Engholm Rudolf Scharping Oskar Lafontaine Gerhard Schröder Franz Müntefering Matthias Platzeck Kurt Beck Franz Müntefering Sigmar Gabriel Martin Schulz Andrea Nahles Saskia Esken & Norbert Walter-Borjans Saskia Esken & Lars Klingbeil Leaders in the Bundestag Kurt Schumacher Erich Ollenhauer Fritz Erler Helmut Schmidt Herbert Wehner Hans-Jochen Vogel Hans-Ulrich Klose Rudolf Scharping Peter Struck Ludwig Stiegler Franz Müntefering Peter Struck Frank-Walter Steinmeier Thomas Oppermann Andrea Nahles Rolf Mützenich General Secretaries (since 1999) Franz Müntefering Olaf Scholz Klaus Uwe Benneter Hubertus Heil Andrea Nahles Yasmin Fahimi Katarina Barley Hubertus Heil Lars Klingbeil Kevin Kühnert Governments Scheidemann Bauer Müller ( I II ) Wirth ( I II ) Kiesinger Brandt ( I II ) Schmidt ( I II III ) Schröder ( I II ) Merkel ( I III IV ) Scholz Merz Affiliated organisations Friedrich Ebert Foundation Jusos German Trade Union Confederation Arbeiter-Samariter-Bund Parlamentarische Linke Seeheimer Kreis Related articles Grand coalition Social–liberal coalition Red–green coalition Red–red–green coalition Kenya coalition Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Latvia Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Ebert_Foundation&oldid=1287150055 " Categories : Foundations based in Germany Political organisations based in Germany Educational foundations Education in Germany Charities based in Germany Social democratic organizations Social Democratic Party of Germany Socialism in Germany Socialist education Political and economic research foundations Organisations based in Bonn Political and economic think tanks based in Germany Non-profit organisations based in North Rhine-Westphalia Organizations listed in Russia as undesirable Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2008 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from November 2024 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with German-language sources (de) Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 24 April 2025, at 09:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Ebert Foundation 20 languages Add topic

