Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Abstracting and indexing 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Nova Religio 3 languages Čeština Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal on religious studies Academic journal Nova Religio Discipline Religious studies Language English Edited by Marie Dallam, Joseph Laycock, Benjamin E. Zeller , Catherine Wessinger Publication details History 1997–present Publisher University of Pennsylvania Press (United States) Frequency Quarterly Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Nova Relig.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 1092-6690 (print) 1541-8480 (web) LCCN 98656716 JSTOR 10926690 OCLC no.

36349271 Links Journal homepage Nova Religio: The Journal of Alternative and Emergent Religions is a quarterly peer-reviewed [ 1 ] academic journal covering religious studies , focusing on the academic study of new religious movements . It was established in 1997 by Seven Bridges Press, initially published semi-annually, changing to tri-annually in 2003, and then quarterly in 2005.

History [ edit ] Previously research focusing on new religious movements (often referred to as cults ) was mainly published in sociology journals, which lessened the ability for researchers to engage in more qualitative methodologies. Researchers who were not sociologists wanted a publication with a broader view in which to publish; in the 1990s, more debate emerged on how to define the term "new religious movement" itself.

[ 2 ] The journal was founded to give a broader and inclusive look at this topic in a period approaching the end of the millennium. With several apocalyptic groups gaining prominence, interest in the field increased.

[ 2 ] The journal was established in 1997 by Seven Bridges Press, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] founded by Phillip Lucas and Catherine Wessinger .

[ 2 ] The journal came out of the American Academy of Religion (AAR)'s NRM program unit.

[ 5 ] The name was chosen to include both historical "new religions" and modern ones, given the controversial nature of naming in the field itself.

[ 2 ] The team founding the journal believed that "it was not their place to judge whose religion is sane, good, or otherwise".

[ 2 ] As of 2001 it was one of only two English-language academic journals dedicated to NRMs and cults (the other being the Cultic Studies Journal ).

[ 6 ] Jolyon Baraka Thomas described it as the "flagship journal" of NRM studies.

[ 3 ] Topics covered in early issues included a debate on the concept of brainwashing between Benjamin Zablocki and David G. Bromley , coverage of the "Cult Wars" and academic neutrality, the relationship between violence and NRMs and law enforcement.

[ 7 ] [ 5 ] It also provided an avenue for the publication of "case studies" on specific groups.

[ 5 ] Later on it has featured "special issues" focusing on a single theme, including topics like archaeology, food, Marian apparitions , and the legacy of Jonestown as they related to NRMs; other issues include shorter "Perspective Essays" not always based on empirical research.

[ 7 ] In the 2010s, its coverage began to cover more things outside the North American context.

[ 7 ] It was initially published semi-annually, changing to tri-annually in 2003, and then quarterly in 2005. It was initially owned by the co-general editors, before ownership was passed to the Association for the Academic Studies of New Religions.

[ 2 ] As of 2002 [update] (volume 6), it was published by the University of California Press .

[ 8 ] In 2024 it moved to the University of Pennsylvania Press .

[ 9 ] The journal is associated with the AAR Program Unit, which holds conferences; much of the journal's content is sourced from the unit's conference papers.

[ 2 ] Abstracting and indexing [ edit ] The journal is abstracted and indexed in: Arts and Humanities Citation Index [ 10 ] ATLA Religion Database [ 11 ] EBSCO databases [ 12 ] International Bibliography of Periodical Literature [ 12 ] Modern Language Association Database [ 12 ] Scopus [ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Submit" .

Nova Religio . University of California Press . Retrieved February 11, 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g Ochoa, Cristina (November 13, 2020).

"Paying It Forward: The Interdisciplinary Mentorship Ethos of Nova Religio" .

American Theological Library Association . Retrieved October 9, 2024 .

^ a b Thomas, Jolyon Baraka (March 25, 2019).

Faking Liberties: Religious Freedom in American-Occupied Japan .

University of Chicago Press . p. 235.

ISBN 978-0-226-61882-1 .

^ Gallagher, Eugene V.

(2016).

'Cult Wars' in Historical Perspective: New and Minority Religions .

Routledge . p. 4.

ISBN 978-1-317-15667-3 .

^ a b c Zeller, Benjamin E.

(2016). "Writing and Researching on New Religious Movements: A View from the American Academy". In Gallagher, Eugene V.

(ed.).

'Cult Wars' in Historical Perspective: New and Minority Religions .

Routledge . pp.

58– 59.

ISBN 978-1-317-15667-3 .

^ Zablocki, Benjamin ; Robbins, Thomas (2001).

Misunderstanding Cults: Searching for Objectivity in a Controversial Field .

University of Toronto Press . p. 515.

ISBN 978-1-4875-9844-0 .

^ a b c Zeller, Benjamin E.

(April 17, 2020).

"New Religious Movements: A Bibliographic Introduction" .

Theological Librarianship .

13 (1): 38– 49.

doi : 10.31046/tl.v13i1.564 .

ISSN 1937-8904 .

^ "Nova religio: NR: The journal of alternative and emergent religions" .

LC Catalog .

Library of Congress .

^ "Penn Press to become publisher of Nova Religio" .

University of Pennsylvania Press . August 9, 2023 . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "Master Journal List" .

Intellectual Property & Science .

Clarivate Analytics . Retrieved November 23, 2019 .

^ "Title and Product Update Lists" .

ATLA Religion Database .

American Theological Library Association . Retrieved November 23, 2019 .

^ a b c "Nova Religio: The Journal of Alternative and Emergent Religions" .

MIAR: Information Matrix for the Analysis of Journals .

University of Barcelona . Retrieved November 22, 2019 .

^ "Source details: Nova Religio" .

Scopus Preview .

Elsevier . Retrieved November 23, 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis v t e Pagan studies Paganism Contemporary paganism Nature religion Western esotericism Anthropological and folkloristic approaches Luhrmann's Persuasions of the Witch's Craft (1989) Orion's Never Again the Burning Times (1995) Hume's Witchcraft and Paganism in Australia (1997) Greenwood's Magic, Witchcraft and the Otherworld (2000) Magliocco's Witching Culture (2004) Historical approaches Hutton's The Pagan Religions of the Ancient British Isles (1991) Hutton's The Triumph of the Moon (1999) Clifton's Her Hidden Children (2005) Religious studies and theological approaches Salomonsen's Enchanted Feminism (2002) Gardell's Gods of the Blood (2003) York's Pagan Theology (2003) Davy's Introduction to Pagan Studies (2007) Sociological approaches Adler's Drawing Down the Moon (1979, 1986, 1996, 2006) Scarboro, Campbell and Stave's Living Witchcraft (1994) Berger's A Community of Witches (1999) Interdisciplinary edited volumes Pearson, Roberts and Samuel's Nature Religion Today (1998) Strmiska's Modern Paganism in World Cultures (2005) Bramwell's Pagan Themes in Modern Children's Fiction (2009) Academic, peer-reviewed journals Aries The Pomegranate Magic, Ritual, and Witchcraft Nova Religio Pagan studies books v t e New religious movements Major groups Brahmoism Adventism CoG7 SDA Aetherius Society Ahmadiyya Lahore Ahmadiyya Ananda Marga AMORC Anthroposophy Antoinism Armstrongism Bábism Baháʼí Faith Bible Students / Jehovah's Witnesses Black Hebrew Israelites Brahma Kumaris Branch Davidians Brotherhood of the Cross and Star Caodaism Charismatic Christianity Chinese salvationist religions Chinmaya Mission Christadelphians Christian Science Church of Divine Science Church of Scientology Church of the Guanche People Creativity Discordianism Eastern Lightning Falun Gong The Family International Friends of Man Fourth Way Goddess Godianism Heaven's Gate Iglesia ni Cristo International Peace Mission movement ISKCON Invitation to Life Kingdom of Jesus Christ Kopimism Latter Day Saints / Mormonism Mahikari movement Sukyo Mahikari World Divine Light Messianic Judaism Modern paganism Druidry Heathenry Rodnovery Moorish Science Temple of America Nation of Islam New Acropolis The New Church New Kadampa Tradition New Thought Religious Science Unity Church Nuwaubian Nation Oomoto Order of the Solar Temple Palmarian Catholic Church Peoples Temple Pilgrims of Arès Prathyaksha Raksha Daiva Sabha The Process Church Raëlism Rajneesh movement Ramakrishna Mission Rastafari Risshō Kōsei Kai Sahaja Yoga Sant Mat Radha Soami Sant Nirankari Mission Santa Muerte Santo Daime Satanism LaVeyan Church of Satan Temple of Set The Satanic Temple Theistic Sathya Sai Baba Shakers Shambhala Buddhism Shri Ram Chandra Mission Soka Gakkai Spiritualism Spiritism Tenrikyo Thelema Theosophy Theosophical Society Transcendental Meditation True Buddha School Twelve Tribes communities Unarius Academy of Science Unification Church Unitarian Universalist Association Universal Church of the Kingdom of God Universal White Brotherhood Vipassana movement The Way International Weixinjiao Wicca Word of Faith World Mission Society Church of God Notable figures Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Noble Drew Ali Marshall Applewhite Michael Angelo Aquino Herbert W. Armstrong Shoko Asahara Sri Aurobindo Báb Sathya Sai Baba Baháʼu'lláh Alice Bailey Chinmayananda Saraswati David Berg Helena Blavatsky Sri Chinmoy Aleister Crowley Mary Baker Eddy Josemaría Escrivá Louis Farrakhan Charles Fillmore Kelsang Gyatso Hak Ja Han L. Ron Hubbard Li Hongzhi David Koresh Anton LaVey Jorge Ángel Livraga Rizzi Lu Sheng-yen Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Meher Baba Nikkyō Niwano Sun Myung Moon Elijah Muhammad Nakayama Miki A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada Phineas Parkhurst Quimby Raël Rajneesh Ramakrishna Prem Rawat Helena Roerich Charles Taze Russell Joseph Franklin Rutherford Ahn Sahng-hong Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar Menachem Mendel Schneerson Shiv Dayal Singh Joseph Smith Nirmala Srivastava Rudolf Steiner Sudiksha Emanuel Swedenborg Joseph W. Tkach Chögyam Trungpa Ellen G. White Poykayil Yohannan By region Pacific Northwest Concepts African-initiated church Buddhist modernism Chabad messianism Christian denomination Classifications of religious movements Conspiracy theories Cult Cybersectarianism Doomsday cult Heresy Hindu reform movements In-group favoritism Japanese new religions Neoshamanism New Age Open-source religion Polytheistic reconstructionism Prosperity theology Religious conversion Religious syncretism Schism Sect Self religion Spiritual evolution UFO religion Public education CESNUR INFORM (Information Network Focus on Religious Movements) World Religions and Spirituality Project Scholarship Academic study of new religious movements Anthropology of religion History of religion Journal of Contemporary Religion Nova Religio Philosophy of religion Psychology of religion Religious studies Sociology of religion When Prophecy Fails Opposition Anti-cult movement Christian countercult movement Anti-Mormonism Persecution of Ahmadis Persecution of Baháʼís Persecution of Falun Gong Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses Persecution of Rastafari Religious discrimination against modern pagans Lists Academic study In popular culture New religious movements Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nova_Religio&oldid=1303223519 " Categories : Religious studies journals University of Pennsylvania Press academic journals Academic journals established in 1997 Quarterly journals New religious movements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2024 Use American English from May 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Short description matches Wikidata Quarterly journals (infobox) Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2002 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 19:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nova Religio 3 languages Add topic

