Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 Online tells 3 Reliability 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Tell (poker) 3 languages Deutsch Nederlands Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Change in a poker players behaviour or demeanour when assessing their hand This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( June 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Tell" poker – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Tell" poker – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Professional poker player Annie Duke . Eye contact may be a sign that a player is trying to disguise a weak hand.

A tell in poker is a change in a player's behavior or demeanor that is claimed by some to give clues to that player's assessment of their hand. A player gains an advantage if they observe and understand the meaning of another player's tell, particularly if the tell is unconscious and reliable. Sometimes a player may fake a tell, hoping to induce their opponents to make poor judgments in response to the false tell. More often, people try to avoid giving out a tell, by maintaining a poker face regardless of how strong or weak their hand is.

Examples [ edit ] A tell may be common to a class of players or unique to a single player. Some possible tells include leaning forward or back, placing chips with more or less force, fidgeting , doing chip tricks, displaying nervous tics or making any changes in one's breathing, tone of voice, facial expressions, direction of gaze or in one's actions with the cards, chips, cigarettes or drinks.

[ citation needed ] An underlying rule to many tells is: "weak means strong, strong means weak." Players who hold weak poker hands attempt to convince other players at the table that they are strong: staring down an opponent, throwing chips down forcefully into the pot in an effort to discourage others from calling. Players who hold strong hands tend to try to disguise their hand as being weak. They attempt to fly under the radar by being a passive player at the table - not making direct eye contact, softly tossing the chips in, being friendly and talkative. They are deliberately trying not to come across as intimidating, so as to entice a call.

Online tells [ edit ] Non-physical tells exist in both casino and online poker , but tells like speed of play, betting patterns, the quantity of chips that a player plays with, and player chat can be particularly revealing online.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Reliability [ edit ] A tell can only convey what the player thinks about the strength of their hand and what they think the other players have. Thus, perceiving a tell is useful only to the extent that the perceiver can pick up on enough of that information to come to a well-informed decision.

Sometimes other players may act in nervous or technologically incompetent ways that can make their competitors imagine a tell where none exists. These may include dropping chips seemingly expressively or out of clumsiness, betting the wrong amount by forgetting which chip is which, or accidentally clicking on the wrong thing online.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Poker strategy Telegraph (sports) Microexpression Notes [ edit ] ^ PartyPoker.com: The Ultimate Guide to Online Poker Tells ^ Pokernews.com: Introduction to Bet-Timing Poker Tells References [ edit ] Mike Caro (1994).

Mike Caro's Book of Tells . Carol Publishing Corporation.

ISBN 0-89746-100-2 .

External links [ edit ] Poker Tells Basics Archived 2006-01-10 at the Wayback Machine Poker Tells articles v t e Poker Index of poker articles Overview Betting Cheating Glossary History Poker boom List of poker playing card nicknames Tournaments Play Elements Chip Position Pot Playing card Hands Non-standard Tell Plays Aggression Bluff Check-raise Draw Isolation Protection Steal Variations Brag Draw poker Five-card draw Stud poker Five-card stud Seven-card stud Razz Community card poker Texas hold 'em Greek hold 'em Omaha hold 'em Six-plus hold 'em Casino games Caribbean stud Let It Ride Mississippi Stud Three Card Poker Four Card Poker Chinese poker Open-face Chinese poker Strategy Fundamental theorem of poker Morton's theorem Pot odds Slow play Computing Computer poker player Online poker Poker tools Category Commons Outline v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tell_(poker)&oldid=1305963369 " Category : Poker terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from June 2014 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with topics of unclear notability from September 2024 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles needing additional references from February 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from February 2025 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 03:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tell (poker) 3 languages Add topic

