Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theme 2 Eichmann 3 Legality of the trial 4 Banality of evil 5 Alleged Jewish cooperation 6 Reception and controversy 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Eichmann in Jerusalem 23 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1963 book by Hannah Arendt This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil Cover of the first edition Author Hannah Arendt Language English Publisher Viking Press Publication date 1963 Media type Print ( Hardcover , Paperback ) Pages 312 Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil is a 1963 book by the philosopher and political thinker Hannah Arendt . Arendt, a Jew who fled Germany during Adolf Hitler's rise to power , reported on the trial of Adolf Eichmann , one of the major organizers of the Holocaust , for The New Yorker . A revised and enlarged edition was published in 1964.

Theme [ edit ] Arendt during the trial Arendt's subtitle famously introduced the phrase "the banality of evil." In part the phrase refers to Eichmann's deportment at the trial as the man displayed neither guilt for his actions nor hatred for those trying him, claiming he bore no responsibility because he was simply " doing his job ." ("He did his 'duty'...; he not only obeyed 'orders,' he also obeyed the 'law.'") [ 1 ] Eichmann [ edit ] Arendt takes Eichmann's court testimony and the historical evidence available and makes several observations about him: Eichmann stated in court that he had always tried to abide by Immanuel Kant 's categorical imperative .

[ 2 ] She argues that Eichmann had essentially taken the wrong lesson from Kant: Eichmann had not recognized the " Golden Rule " and principle of reciprocity implicit in the categorical imperative, but had understood only the concept of one man's actions coinciding with general law.  Eichmann attempted to follow the spirit of the laws he carried out, as if the legislator himself would approve. In Kant's formulation of the categorical imperative, the legislator is the moral self , and all people are legislators; in Eichmann's formulation, the legislator was Hitler .  Eichmann claimed this changed when he was charged with carrying out the Final Solution , at which point Arendt says, "He had ceased to live according to Kantian principles, that he had known it, and that he had consoled himself with the thoughts that he no longer 'was master of his own deeds,' that he was unable 'to change anything ' ".

[ 3 ] Eichmann's inability to think for himself was exemplified by his consistent use of "stock phrases and self-invented clichés". The man demonstrated his unrealistic worldview and crippling lack of communication skills through reliance on "officialese" ( Amtssprache ) and the euphemistic Sprachregelung (convention of speech) that made implementation of Hitler's policies "somehow palatable".

While Eichmann might have had antisemitic leanings, Arendt argued that he showed "no case of insane hatred of Jews, of fanatical antisemitism or indoctrination of any kind. He personally never had anything whatever against Jews" according to his own testimony.

[ 4 ] Eichmann was a "joiner" his entire life, in that he constantly joined organizations in order to define himself, and had difficulties thinking for himself without doing so. As a youth, he belonged to the YMCA , the Wandervogel , and the Jungfrontkämpferverband . In 1933, he failed in his attempt to join the Schlaraffia (a men's organization similar to Freemasonry ), at which point a family friend (and future war criminal ) Ernst Kaltenbrunner encouraged him to join the SS . At the end of World War II , Eichmann found himself depressed because "it then dawned on him that thenceforward he would have to live without being a member of something or other".

[ 5 ] Arendt pointed out that his actions were not driven by malice, but rather blind dedication to the regime and his need to belong, to be a joiner. In his own words: "I sensed I would have to live a leaderless and difficult individual life, I would receive no directives from anybody, no orders and commands would any longer be issued to me, no pertinent ordinances would be there to consult—in brief, a life never known before lay ahead of me." [ 6 ] Despite his claims, Eichmann was not, in fact, very intelligent. As Arendt details in the book's second chapter, he was unable to complete either high school or vocational training , and only found his first significant job, as a traveling salesman for the Vacuum Oil Company , through family connections. Arendt noted that, during both his SS career and Jerusalem trial, Eichmann tried to cover up his lack of skills and education, and even "blushed" when these facts came to light.

Arendt confirms Eichmann and the heads of the Einsatzgruppen were part of an " intellectual elite." Unlike the Einsatzgruppen leaders, however, Eichmann would suffer from a "lack of imagination" and an "inability to think." [ 7 ] Arendt confirms several points where Eichmann actually claimed he was responsible for certain atrocities, even though he lacked the power or expertise to take these actions. Moreover, Eichmann made these claims even though they hurt his defense, hence Arendt's remark that "Bragging was the vice that was Eichmann's undoing".

[ 8 ] Arendt also suggests that Eichmann may have preferred to be executed as a war criminal than live as a nobody. This parallels his overestimation of his own intelligence and his past value in the organizations in which he had served, as stated above.

Arendt argues that Eichmann, in his peripheral role at the Wannsee Conference , witnessed the rank-and-file of the German civil service heartily endorse Reinhard Heydrich 's program for the Final Solution of the Jewish question in Europe ( German : die Endlösung der Judenfrage ).  Upon seeing members of "respectable society" endorsing mass murder , and enthusiastically participating in the planning of the solution, Eichmann felt that his moral responsibility was relaxed, as if he were " Pontius Pilate ".

During his imprisonment before his trial, the Israeli government sent no fewer than six psychologists to examine Eichmann. These psychologists found no trace of mental illness , including personality disorder . One doctor remarked that his overall attitude towards other people, especially his family and friends, was "highly desirable", while another remarked that the only unusual trait Eichmann displayed was being more "normal" in his habits and speech than the average person.

[ 9 ] Arendt suggests that this most strikingly discredits the idea that the Nazi criminals were manifestly psychopathic and different from "normal" people. From this document, many concluded that situations such as the Holocaust can make even the most ordinary of people commit horrendous crimes with the proper incentives, but Arendt adamantly disagreed with this interpretation, as Eichmann was voluntarily following the Führerprinzip . Arendt said that moral choice remains even under totalitarianism , and that this choice has political consequences even when the chooser is politically powerless: [U]nder conditions of terror most people will comply but some people will not , just as the lesson of the countries to which the Final Solution was proposed is that "it could happen" in most places but it did not happen everywhere . Humanly speaking, no more is required, and no more can reasonably be asked, for this planet to remain a place fit for human habitation.

Arendt mentions, as a case in point, Denmark : One is tempted to recommend the story as required reading in political science for all students who wish to learn something about the enormous power potential inherent in non-violent action and in resistance to an opponent possessing vastly superior means of violence.
It was not just that the people of Denmark refused to assist in implementing the Final Solution, as the peoples of so many other conquered nations had been persuaded to do (or had been eager to do) — but also, that when the Reich cracked down and decided to do the job itself it found that its own personnel in Denmark had been infected by this and were unable to overcome their human aversion with the appropriate ruthlessness, as their peers in more cooperative areas had.

On Eichmann's personality, Arendt concludes: Despite all the efforts of the prosecution, everybody could see that this man was not a "monster," but it was difficult indeed not to suspect that he was a clown. And since this suspicion would have been fatal to the entire enterprise [his trial], and was also rather hard to sustain in view of the sufferings he and his like had caused to millions of people, his worst clowneries were hardly noticed and almost never reported.

[ 10 ] Arendt ended the book by writing: And just as you [Eichmann] supported and carried out a policy of not wanting to share the earth with the Jewish people and the people of a number of other nations—as though you and your superiors had any right to determine who should and who should not inhabit the world—we find that no one, that is, no member of the human race, can be expected to want to share the earth with you. This is the reason, and the only reason, you must hang.

Legality of the trial [ edit ] Beyond her discussion of Eichmann himself, Arendt discusses several additional aspects of the trial, its context, and the Holocaust.

She points out that Eichmann was kidnapped by Israeli agents in Argentina and transported to Israel, an illegal act, and that he was tried in Israel even though he was not accused of committing any crimes there.  "If he had not been found guilty before he appeared in Jerusalem, guilty beyond any reasonable doubt, the Israelis would never have dared, or wanted, to kidnap him in formal violation of Argentine law." She describes his trial as a show trial arranged and managed by Prime Minister Ben-Gurion , and says that Ben-Gurion wanted, for several political reasons, to emphasize not primarily what Eichmann had done, but what the Jews had suffered during the Holocaust.

[ 11 ] She points out that the war criminals tried at Nuremberg were "indicted for crimes against the members of various nations," without special reference to the Nazi genocide against the Jews.

She questions Israel's right to try Eichmann. Israel was a signatory to the 1950 UN Genocide Convention , which rejected universal jurisdiction and required that defendants be tried "in the territory of which the act was committed" or by an international tribunal. The court in Jerusalem did not pursue either option.

[ 12 ] Eichmann's deeds were not crimes under German law, as, at that time, in the eyes of the Third Reich, he was a law-abiding citizen. He was tried for ' crimes in retrospect '.

[ 13 ] The prosecutor, Gideon Hausner , followed the tone set by Prime Minister Ben-Gurion, who stated, "It is not an individual nor the Nazi regime on trial, but antisemitism throughout history." Hausner's corresponding opening statements, which heavily referenced biblical passages, was "bad history and cheap rhetoric," according to Arendt. Furthermore, it suggested that Eichmann was no criminal, but the "innocent executor of some foreordained destiny." [ 14 ] Banality of evil [ edit ] Arendt's book introduced the expression and concept of the banality of evil .

[ 15 ] Her thesis is that Eichmann was actually not a fanatic or a sociopath , but instead an average and mundane person who relied on clichéd defenses rather than thinking for himself, [ 16 ] was motivated by professional promotion rather than ideology , and believed in success which he considered the chief standard of "good society".

[ 17 ] Banality, in this sense, does not mean that Eichmann's actions were in any way ordinary, but that his actions were motivated by a sort of complacency which was wholly unexceptional.

[ 18 ] Many mid-20th century pundits were favorable to the concept, [ 19 ] [ 20 ] which has been called "one of the most memorable phrases of 20th-century intellectual life," [ 21 ] and it features in many contemporary debates about morality and justice , [ 16 ] [ 22 ] as well as in the workings of truth and reconciliation commissions.

[ 23 ] Others see the popularization of the concept as a valuable warrant against walking negligently into horror, as the evil of banality , in which failure to interrogate received wisdom results in individual and systemic weakness and decline.

[ 24 ] Alleged Jewish cooperation [ edit ] Another controversial point raised by Arendt in her book is her criticism of the alleged role of Jewish authorities in the Holocaust.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] In her writings, Arendt expressed her objections to the prosecution's refusal to address the cooperation of the leaders of the Judenräte with the Nazis. In the book, Arendt says that Jewish organizations and leaderships in Europe collaborated with the Nazis and were directly responsible for increasing the numbers of Jewish victims: [ 21 ] Wherever Jews lived, there were recognized Jewish leaders, and this leadership, almost without exception, cooperated in one way or another, for one reason or another, with the Nazis. The whole truth was that if the Jewish people had really been unorganized and leaderless, there would have been chaos and plenty of misery but the total number of victims would hardly have been between four and a half and six million people. According to Freudiger's calculations about half of them could have saved themselves if they had not followed the instructions of the Jewish Councils.

[ 27 ] She adds that Pinchas Freudiger , a witness at the trial, had managed to survive the genocide because he was wealthy and able to buy the favors of the Nazi authorities, as did other leaders of Jewish Councils.

[ 28 ] On several occasions, most notably in her interviews with Joachim Fest and Gunter Gaus, Arendt refuted this characterization of her writing, [ 29 ] describing instead ways in which the Judenräte were coerced and intimidated into their roles, and how the Nazis made examples of populations that resisted, [ 30 ] saying in a response during an interview with Gunther Gaus, "When people reproach me with accusing the Jewish people [of nonresistance], that is a malignant lie and propaganda and nothing else. The tone of voice, however, is an objection against me personally. And I cannot do anything about that." [ 31 ] Reception and controversy [ edit ] Eichmann in Jerusalem upon publication and in the years following was controversial.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Arendt has long been accused of "blaming the victim" in the book.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Allegation of Slander Against Zionism She responded to the initial criticism in a postscript to the book: The controversy began by calling attention to the conduct of the Jewish people during the years of the Final Solution, thus following up the question, first raised by the Israeli prosecutor, of whether the Jews could or should have defended themselves. I had dismissed that question as silly and cruel, since it testified to a fatal ignorance of the conditions at the time. It has now been discussed to exhaustion, and the most amazing conclusions have been drawn. The well-known historico-sociological construct of "ghetto mentality"...

has been repeatedly dragged in to explain behavior which was not at all confined to the Jewish people and which therefore cannot be explained by specifically Jewish factors ... This was the unexpected conclusion certain reviewers chose to draw from the "image" of a book, created by certain interest groups, in which I allegedly had claimed that the Jews had murdered themselves.

[ 36 ] The allegation Arendt’s mischaracterization of the Zionists and of her misreadings of Eichmann’s motivations are the two major themes of the critique of the article and run throughout every phase of the article’s reception and criticism. Taken as a whole, Arendt’s article largely refutes the claims made against it without the necessity of an external defense.

However critics focus on the tone of individual sections, the lack of rhetorical handholding in segments of the article where Arendt summarizes Eichmann’s defense (whose transcripts run to many thousands of pages).

Allegation of Mischaracterizing Eichmann Regarding this latter concern: Arendt’s critics tend to insinuate that the confidence she places in her audience to know—and to be capable of steadily holding in mind throughout her presentation—that Eichmann is so obviously and inarguably an objective antisemite , whatever he might claim in his defense, that it is unnecessary for her to point this out at every turn in an incantatory rhythm of denunciation. These two accusations (mischaracterization of Zionism, mischaracterization of Eichmann) recur in every phase of the backlash into the 21st century.

From Arendt’s perspective on slogans and magical phrases discussed in the article as constitutive of Eichmann’s defenses against empathy, the style of presentation inferred from the demands of her critics on this point would itself be...

banal; if—generously read—not yet evil.

Conformity & Cliché as Determining Forces in Human Behavior Stanley Milgram , who would conduct controversial experiments on obedience , maintains that "Arendt became the object of considerable scorn, even calumny" because she highlighted Eichmann's "banality" and "normalcy", and accepted Eichmann's claim that he did not subjectively experience himself as having evil intents or motives to commit such horrors; nor did he have a thought to the immorality and evil of his actions, or indeed, display, as the prosecution depicted, that he was a sadistic "monster".

[ 37 ] Milgram’s experimental findings would tend to verify Arendt’s emphasis on Eichmann’s bureaucratic careerism being a powerful driver of actions and decision-making by extrapolations from qualitative and quantitative behavioral research data.

But Arendt also notes very explicitly in the article, Eichmann’s evident pride in having been responsible for so many deaths.

[ 24 ] She notes also the rhetorical contradiction of this pride with his claim that he will gladly go to the gallows as a warning to all future antisemites, as well as the contradiction between this sentiment and the entire argument of his defense (that he should not be put to death). Eichmann, as Arendt observes, does not experience the dissonance between these evidently contradictory assertions but finds the aptness of his clichés themselves to be  —from the perspective of his own inclination—satisfactory substitutes for moral or ethical evaluation. He has no concern about their contradiction. This, coupled with an inability to imagine the perspective others, is the individually psychological expression of what Arendt calls the banality of evil.

[ 15 ] Careerism without moral evaluation of the consequences of one’s work is the collective or social aspect of this banality of evil.

Zionist Critique Jacob Robinson published And the Crooked Shall be Made Straight , the first full-length rebuttal of her book.

[ 19 ] Robinson presented himself as an expert in international law, not saying that he was an assistant to the prosecutor in the case.

[ 20 ] The book Judenrat by Isaiah Trunk , published in 1972, presents a history of the Zionist councils set up inside of the Nazi ghettoes whose discussion in Arendt's accounting of the historical background and context of Eichmann's crimes is the section of the work that especially caused offense and incited the furor of criticism against the cycle of articles collected in her book Eichmann in Jerusalem.

[ 38 ] Historical Sources Supporting Arendt’s Characterization of Zionist Councils Arendt had drawn much of the substance of her account of the Judenrat's complicity with Nazi schedules for liquidation from Raul Hilberg's Destruction of the European Jews , a work that is generally not mentioned or critiqued in the polemic attacks against her—presumably because it maintains a neutral historicist stance while recording events and does not attempt to synthesize any memorable moral or ethical evaluation of these events as Arendt did in her cycle of articles for the New Yorker .

[ 39 ] In fact, Eichmann in Jerusalem , according to Hugh Trevor-Roper , is so deeply indebted to Raul Hilberg 's The Destruction of the European Jews , that Hilberg himself spoke of plagiarism.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] The Destruction of the European Jews was at that time, and—given that it is so heavily cited for essential data in all major historical standards on the subject published at a later date—arguably remains the best-in-class standard reference on the administratively designed and militantly executed extermination of European Jews in the Nazi holocaust during the Second World War.

Arendt’s Service to Zionist Organizations Also worth noting (though rarely or only elusively mentioned by Arendt in the interest of her own self-defense) is the fact that Arendt had also been an employee of the Zionist World Congress and other Zionist organizations in various capacities, and that she worked during the war in finding placements for refugee children fleeing the Third Reich in Israel: [ 43 ] [ 44 ] though she draws a line between her own beliefs and the Zionist platform she speaks as an insider rather than as an outsider of the movement and its organizations within the diaspora, performing work for the benefit of these organizations during the time that she remained inside Germany after Hitler was appointed Chancellor, [ 45 ] acting as a touchpoint and administrator in the diaspora, and on several occasions as a chaperone delivering children to the territory of Palestine (later Israel ) itself during the war and recovering sacred libraries left tenantless by the Holocaust after the war in coordination with Gershom Scholem .

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 46 ] Arendt’s Assertions Taken Out of Context by Critics vs. The Full Text of Arendt’s Article & Her Argument The inhuman and humanly-impossible-to-resist level of pressure to conform to regulation and commands from the Nazi hierarchy is addressed by Arendt in her articles—she mentions an anecdote citing a situation in which 430 people were tortured for weeks on end after an incidence of infraction as an exemplar of this extenuating circumstance, explanatory of a tendency toward obedience to authority.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] She also addresses the historical and multigenerational cultural acclimation to rule-following and legal-obedience as a defense mechanism that was a force-multiplier exploited by the Nazis. She even gives at least one, if not several, incidents where Eichmann appears—quite notably—to be an obviously antisemitic sadistic monster.

[ 49 ] However many of these qualifications appear in the first installment of the cycle whereas she coins the phrase "the banality of evil" in the last article of the series.

[ 50 ] Distinction between Issues of Historical Fact & Tone of Delivery As Arendt explained in an interview, there seemed to be two kinds objections amongst the challenges and critiques she received.

[ 51 ] She had been critiqued on questions of historical fact—these critiques were largely invalid, since she had mentioned the historically extenuating details which were appealed to by these critics in her reporting on the trial.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] But she had also been critiqued on tone—and this accusation, she says, she cannot and does not even want to refute.

[ 51 ] ARENDT: Nowhere in my book did I accuse the Jewish people of not resisting. Someone else did. Mr. Haussner of the Israeli public prosecutor’s office. I called the questions he directed at the witnesses in Jerusalem: foolish and cruel… GAUS: But some of the accusations against you are based on the tone in which the book is written.

ARENDT: Well, that’s a different matter. I can’t say anything against that and I don’t want to. If it’s the thought that one can only write about these things solemnly…Look there are a lot of people who take offense. And I can understand that…That is, I can still laugh. And I really thought that Eichmann was a clown. And I’ll tell you this, I read his police interrogation, 3600 pages, very very carefully. And I don’t know how many times I laughed out loud!  Now, this reaction offended people. I cannot help that. But I do know one thing—I’d probably still laugh three minutes before certain death. And they say that is the tone. The tone is largely ironic. That’s absolutely true. The tone is really the person in this case. So when people reproach me with accusing the Jewish people, that is a malicious propaganda lie and nothing else . The tone, however, is an objection against me personally. I can’t help that.

[ 51 ] GAUS: You’re prepared to bear that?

ARENDT: Oh, gladly. I can’t tell people,'You misunderstand me and in my heart is really this or that.' That’s ridiculous.

Gershom Scholem’s denunciation on the basis insufficient of “Ahavat Israel” In a public letter her friend and longtime colleague, Gershom Scholem , accused her of insufficiently displaying her love for the people of Israel in a phrase ( Ahavat Israel ) which indicates the love and respect of Jewish people (not just in Israel) as if this love were circumscribed by nationalist allegiance (by implication of the term ‘Israel’ denoting Judaism in context of the charge) .

[ 46 ] In her response, amongst the points she makes to Scholem, was that she bears love for individual persons, not for peoples.

[ 46 ] The concept of peoples as a whole, she respects—“I always knew that I belonged to the Jewish people [from early youth] before I belonged to the German people” and that her personal considerations for or against Judaism were not relevant to this fact of being a Jew—but, she says, her friends and people that she loved tended to be both German (re: not Jewish according to the terms of her description) and also Jewish.

[ 46 ] She describes the condition of nascent statelessness as her origin, and exile as her home. She loved thoughtful people whom she knew and happened to be intimate with, she explains, regardless of their ethnic affiliation.

[ 46 ] Critical race theory In her articles, Arendt also made use of H.G. Adler 's book Theresienstadt 1941-1945:The Face of a Coerced Community (Cambridge University Press. 2017), which she had read in manuscript. Adler took her to task on her view of Eichmann in his keynote essay "What does Hannah Arendt know about Eichmann and the Final Solution?" ( Allgemeine Wochenzeitung der Juden in Deutschland . 20 November 1964).

[ 54 ] Adler’s objections to Arendt are later taken up in a book-length study by a scholar named Cesarini in the 21st century.

In his 2006 book, Becoming Eichmann: Rethinking the Life, Crimes and Trial of a "Desk Murderer" , Holocaust researcher David Cesarani questioned Arendt's portrait of Eichmann on several grounds. According to his findings, Arendt attended only part of the trial, witnessing Eichmann's testimony for "at most four days" and based her writings mostly on recordings and the trial transcript. Cesarani feels that this may have skewed her opinion of him, since it was in the parts of the trial that she missed that the more forceful aspects of his character appeared.

[ 55 ] Cesarani also suggested that Eichmann was in fact highly anti-Semitic and that these feelings were important motivators of his actions. Thus, he alleges that Arendt's opinion that his motives were "banal" and non-ideological and that he had abdicated his autonomy of choice by obeying Hitler's orders without question may stand on weak foundations.

[ 56 ] This is a recurrent criticism of Arendt, though nowhere in her work does Arendt deny that Eichmann was an anti-Semite, and she also did not say that Eichmann was "simply" following orders, but rather had internalized the rationalities of the Nazi regime.

[ 57 ] But when Arendt spoke of anti-semitism—in relation to whether or not Eichmann was an anti-semite, himself—she was summarizing Eichmann's own account of himself in the transcripts.

[ 58 ] Perhaps she considered it so obvious that he was an objectively antisemitic, that she felt no need to underline the point and she notes this in her interview with Fest .

[ 52 ] Arendt had, after all, written the first major manual in the literature of antisemitism outside the propaganda materials produced by the antisemitic parties themselves—a fact that she nevers mentions in the interviews.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] She does not mention this and nowhere does she claim ownership of the term or its definition. She considers the necessity of pointing out Eichmann’s antisemitism or of proving rhetorically that there is a dissonance between Eichmann's claims and what he understands (or fails to understand) subjectively in his testimony to be histrionic and unnecessary.

[ 61 ] It is the psychic dissonance—the fact that Eichmann is apparently so lacking in self-reflective capacity, and so much more motivated by his instinctual careerism than by his hatred of Jews—that Arendt wishes to highlight in the article.

[ 61 ] She appears to make the mistake of focusing on a difficult point of interest that produced a new clarification of the problem of antisemitism under the Third Reich , rather than of reciting by rote what all the more-than-adequately-informed readers of her article in The New Yorker already knew from headlines and news bulletins spanning the past forty years at the time she was writing.

Cesarani, after Adler and others, suggests that Arendt's own prejudices influenced the opinions she expressed during the trial. He argues that like many Jews of German origin , she held Ostjuden ( Jews from Eastern Europe ) in great disdain.

Cesarani's suggestion may or may not be refuted by the fact that Arendt once instigated a class rebellion against her gymnasium instructor in defense of several Ostjuden refugees from Silesia who were being abused by him repeatedly, and was expelled from her preparatory school as a consequence.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] The suggestion that Arendt held Ostjuden in contempt also may or may not be refuted by the fact that Hannah Arendt was, herself, a borderline an Ostjuden relative to most of her Jewish and gentile German acquaintances, having grown up in Konigsberg , Silesia : a region that was cut off from Germany and isolated in a part of Poland by the time she was twelve years old—the city of Konigsberg is now Kaliningrad , an exclave in the territory of Russia after boundaries were redrawn following the end of the Second World War and thus had been Russia for over a decade by the time she wrote the article.

[ 63 ] This alleged racist sentiment, according to Cesarani, led Arendt to attack the conduct and efficacy of the chief prosecutor, Gideon Hausner , who was of Galician Jewish origin—as opposed, presumably, to what he actually said or did during the trial. According to Cesarani, in a letter to the noted German philosopher Karl Jaspers she stated that Hausner was "a typical Galician Jew... constantly making mistakes. Probably one of those people who doesn't know any language." [ 64 ] Whether or not one of the mistakes that Hausner made, and which Arendt highlights in her treatment of the trial, was accusing the Jews of the ghetto of never resisting their deportation--"a foolish and cruel" assertion as Arendt called it [ 51 ] —is not explored by Cesarani as he considers this possible motivation for Arendt's tone.

When Cesarani says that some of Arendt’s opinions of Jews of Middle Eastern origin verged on racism ; he notes a letter in which she described the Israeli crowds to Karl Jaspers: My first impression: On top, the judges, the best of German Jewry. Below them, the prosecuting attorneys, Galicians, but still Europeans. Everything is organized by a police force that gives me the creeps, speaks only Hebrew, and looks Arabic. Some downright brutal types among them. They would obey any order. And outside the doors, the Oriental mob, as if one were in Istanbul or some other half-Asiatic country. In addition, and very visible in Jerusalem, the peies [sidelocks] and caftan Jews, who make life impossible for all reasonable people here.

[ 65 ] Whether or not Arendt's concern about the aspect of institutional Zionism in Israel has any affinity with the forms of identitarian -style authoritarianism that influenced institutional cooperation between Zionism and Nazism, as Arendt points out in her report Eichmann in Jerusalem very explicitly, [ 66 ] [ 67 ] temper her reservations about the comportment of Israeli justice in the framing and procedure of the Eichmann case is not considered as a dimension of Arendt's thinking or her description in Cesarani's analysis of the issue.

[ 64 ] The precedent of centuries in which Sharia law in symbiosis with a system of Sultanic law which was intended as a helpful complement to the enforcement of Sharia, under the authoritarian system of the Ottomans in Palestine prior to Israeli independence, the relative youth of Israeli constitutionalism (officially 13 years old at the time of the trial, though older if the prosecution of Arab and of Israeli murderers in clashes over the past decades is countenanced—revealing either a pattern of preference for Israelis in penalties or a substantively skewed finding of homicidal aggression amongst Arab attackers and of justifiable self-defense amongst Israelis responding to assaults), or the similarity of archaic violence of tenor between Sharia and ultraorthodox Jewish law , might have been relevant to Arendt’s reservations about the gestalt of forces surrounding the trial, has been dismissed without mention by Cesarini. Arendt’s considerations in sizing up the potential character of ensuing legal proceedings in her letter to Jaspers come before she has witnessed or otherwise read the trial transcripts in an exhaustive survey of the proceedings. Cesarini does not mention or acknowledge the voluble praise that Arendt pays to the actual judicial proceedings in her widely published and broadly disseminated reporting on the case (as distinct from her equally voluble criticism of the prosecuting attorney), nor does Caesarini consider her final analysis of the Israeli justice system (which is largely complimentary) in the  pages of her book on the subject as possibly more important indications of her opinions and inclinations than the fears that she expressed prior to the main phase of her attendance and review of the trial, which were expressed in a private letter, published posthumously by Jaspers estate.

Cesarani's book was itself criticized. In a review that appeared in The New York Times Book Review , Barry Gewen argued that Cesarani's hostility stemmed from his book standing "in the shadow of one of the great books of the last half-century", and that Cesarani's suggestion that both Arendt and Eichmann had much in common in their backgrounds, making it easier for her to look down on the proceedings, "reveals a writer in control neither of his material nor of himself." [ 68 ] Arendt also received criticism in the form of responses to her article. One instance of this came mere weeks after the publication of her articles in the form of an article entitled "Man With an Unspotted Conscience". This work was written by witness for the prosecution Michael A. Musmanno . He argued that Arendt fell prey to her own preconceived notions that rendered her work ahistorical. He also directly criticized her for ignoring the facts offered at the trial in stating that "the disparity between what Miss Arendt states, and what the ascertained facts are, occurs with such a disturbing frequency in her book that it can hardly be accepted as an authoritative historical work." He further condemned Arendt and her work for her prejudices against Hauser and Ben-Gurion depicted in Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil . Musmanno argued that Arendt revealed "so frequently her own prejudices" that it could not stand as an accurate work.

[ 69 ] These early responsa are much in line with the Cesarini argument outlined above in their character and in the specifics of their charges against Arendt.

Radical Evil & The Banality of Evil By the 21st century, Arendt has been the subject of further and more encompassing criticism from authors Bettina Stangneth and Deborah Lipstadt . Stangneth argues in her work, Eichmann Before Jerusalem , that Eichmann was, in fact, an insidious antisemite—a point which, again, Arendt never denied but which was denied by Eichmann in his defense.

[ 70 ] She utilized the Sassen Papers and accounts of Eichmann while in Argentina to prove that he was proud of his position as a powerful Nazi and the murders that this allowed him to commit. While she acknowledges that the Sassen Papers were not disclosed in the lifetime of Arendt, she argues that the evidence was there at the trial to prove that Eichmann was an antisemitic murderer and that Arendt simply ignored this.

[ 71 ] Insofar as Lipstadt and Stangneth believe that Hannah Arendt ignores the fact Eichmann is an antisemitic murderer, [ 71 ] readers of all the authors involved in this controversy—of Stangneth, Lipstadt and Arendt taken together—might be forgiven for wondering whether or not Stangneth or Lipstadt read the book, [ 72 ] or the cycle of articles for the New Yorker which later appear under the heading Eichmann In Jerusalem by Hannah Arendt rather than a scattered sampling of isolated passages taken out of context. Arendt pays attention to a theme of the prosecution—in the context of the trial—where the physical murder of any Jewish individual committed by Eichmann with his own hands is investigated (and may later have been proven to the satisfaction of historians) but is not proven beyond a shadow of a doubt in the context of the trial in Jerusalem. She attends to this, according to her own prose in the first article of the cycle, [ 73 ] since it was an issue of material concern and focus during the proceedings of the trial.

[ 72 ] However, in her summation in the final article, she holds him guilty and supports the death sentence decisively in her final statement.

[ 50 ] Deborah Lipstadt contends in her book The Eichmann Trial that Arendt was too distracted by her own views of totalitarianism to objectively judge Eichmann. She refers to Arendt's own work on totalitarianism, The Origins of Totalitarianism , as a basis for Arendt's seeking to validate her own work by using Eichmann as an example.  Lipstadt further contends that Arendt "wanted the trial to explicate how these societies succeeded in getting others to do their atrocious biddings" and so framed her analysis in a way which would agree with this pursuit.” [ 41 ] Lipstadt alleges, then, that Hannah Arendt’s research for Origins of Totalitarianism — the first-ever attempt to take on the task of rendering a systematic and comprehensive account of the Holocaust (not yet named as such, and referred to only elliptically in insinuating references to ‘what happened to the Jews under Hitler’ etc.) of the exterminating persecutions as an overall complex going beyond the testimony of a few individuals about singular camps within the larger constellation of the killing apparatus, a larger constellation that had only been alluded to in the earlier testimonies and not described in detail (since details were hard to come by, and extraordinarily painful to interrogate amongst the minority of victims who had survived), also apart from the transcripts of the Soviet Black Books (which were censored and not widely distributed until later decades) and the protocols of the Nuremberg trials (largely inaccessible to the public not professionally employed as researchers or federal attorneys)—may have influenced her thinking on the subject.

Lipstadt further insinuates by her objection to self-reference toward the Origins book that Hannah Arendt’s own experience as a Jewish citizen of Weimar Germany and the Third Reich (which is registered throughout the book without autobiographical attribution because her experience was in many respects a common experience of Jews in the Third Reich, re: many others had been there with her with whom she was still in contact, and so did not belong to her alone) may have influenced her thinking on the subject. Further: Arendt’s experience as a person who was arrested and held by the Gestapo for work as a Zionist agent researching and reporting on propaganda internal to Hitler’s regime, and her experience as an inmate of an internment camp —where she helped to organize a mass breakout from the camp as it was being converted to a depot to deport Jews to ghettoes in the east where they would wait to be shipped to concentration camps after the Fall of France [ 74 ] [ 75 ] (not referred to in any of her books because it was an exceptional incident and not a commonly experienced scenario)—in addition to her research as an authoritative scholar on the subject over the critical decades when the persecution and genocide was being carried out, may have influenced her later thinking about the subject of the Nazi Holocaust.

That may well be case.

Here, however, Lipstadt glosses over the fact that the very aspect of Eichmann in Jerusalem that is being criticized by her own critique of Arendt (as well as by other critiques in the same genre of assaults on Arendt’s reputation) is the foregrounding of the banality of evil in Eichmann in Jerusalem as opposed to the ‘Radical Evil’ which she had spoken of in her book on the Origins of Totalitarianism.

Additionally: Arendt’s the complicity of Zionist councils with the Nazis in preparing and coordinating the populations of the ghettoes for deportation to the camps is framed as dubious provocation rather than as reporting on historical fact. The issues that Lipstadt and others have taken exception to in Arendt’s Eichmann report, in other words, are precisely those elements not yet explicitly recorded in the Origins book .

Arendt’s critics allege, on the one hand, that she should have stuck with her interpretation in Origins , and on the other hand, they insinuate she should have ignored this earlier material so that the Israeli prosecutor’s tenor could be absorbed impartially without contaminating references or reliance on earlier experiences and research. Arendt’s treatment of radical evil in the Origins book (both essential and contaminating of a fair impartial view of the Israeli judiciary, according to Arendt’s critics) is summarized in an abbreviated form on several occasions by many prestigious scholars ( Steiner , for example), [ 76 ] of whom Terry Eagleton is only one, when he writes the following precis: There is a kind of evil which is mysterious because its motive seems not to be to destroy specific beings for specific reasons, but to negate being as such. [...] Hannah Arendt speculates that the Holocaust was not so much a question of killing human beings for human reasons, as of seeking to annihilate the concept of the human as such. This sort of evil is a Satanic parody of the divine, finding in the act of destruction the sort of orgasmic release which one can imagine God finding in the act of creation. It is evil as nihilism —a cackle of mocking laughter at the whole solemnly farcical assumption that anything merely human could ever matter. In its vulgarly knowing way, it delights in unmasking human value as a pretentious sham. It is a raging vindictive fury at existence as such. It is the evil of the Nazi death camps rather than of a hired assassin, or even of a massacre carried out for some political end. It is not the same kind of evil as most terrorism, which is malign but which has a point.

[ 77 ] As Arendt explains in several interviews, her introduction of the "banality of evil" as a phrase was not intended as a propositional truth—rather she coined the phrase without aforethought of its being or meaning anything beyond a merely descriptive flourish of what she had witnessed and discovered through her research as a witness present at the trial who also read the complete the transcripts of the trial.: [ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] thus it was her critics who stabilize the notion of the 'Banality of Evil' into a static proposition about which the question of its truth or falsity may be asked, not (in terms of self-conscious intention) by Hannah Arendt herself.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] Arendt states that she does not intend to retract the charge that Nazism introduces a radical form of evil into the world [ 44 ] —a charge that does not depend on her opinion or her earlier discussions of this matter in the Origins of Totalitarianism —as she noted. The truth of this radical evil is well-known, as she explains at great length and amidst many conversational detours thrown at her by her interviewers in her conversations with journalists in the aftermath of the controversy.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] In Eichmann in Jerusalem , she focuses (according to her own testimony in interviews), [ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] on a particular dimension or trait of this larger horizon of evil: the careerism and lack of self-reflection of officers in the Nazi hierarchy as a major element of radical evil, perhaps (or perhaps not) exceeding their sadism or bloodlust in the range of scaled damage that proceeds from the system they collectively created and unleashed.

[ 81 ] A comparison of Klaus Barbie and Adolph Eichmann , for example, will reveal who was more notably and obviously a sadist , who was more of a careerist and who was responsible, as an officer and as an administrator, for the larger number of deaths between the two.

As is made evident by her continuing commentary and journalism during this period, she does not—either explicitly or implicitly—intend to retract the charge of radical evil but to turn the mirror in order to examine whether or not such radical evil is likely to recur under the post-war global order.

[ 82 ] She finds that it is likely, [ 83 ] [ 84 ] but not inevitable.

[ 85 ] Arendt has also been praised for being among the first to point out that intellectuals, such as Eichmann and other leaders of the Einsatzgruppen , were in fact more accepted in the Third Reich despite Nazi Germany's persistent use of anti-intellectual propaganda.

[ 7 ] During a 2013 review of historian Christian Ingrao 's book Believe and Destroy , which pointed out that Hitler was more accepting of intellectuals with German ancestry and that at least 80 German intellectuals assisted his "SS War Machine," [ 7 ] [ 86 ] Los Angeles Review of Books journalist Jan Mieszkowski praised Arendt for being "well aware that there was a place for the thinking man in the Third Reich." [ 7 ] Several trenchant political commentators and historians of the Trump Era rely heavily on Arendt's conceptions—including the tendencies that she outlines in Eichmann in Jerusalem —to underscore their arguments in a continuuing vocation of resistance to the encroachments of racism and totalitarianism.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] Her many vociferous critics, seen in this light, appear to offer low-hanging fruit to those who would,"unmask[...] human value as a pretentious sham." [ 77 ] However, as we have seen from this review of the literature, they are not without their challengers and she is not without her defenders.

See also [ edit ] Books portal Little Eichmanns Moral disengagement Milgram experiment (obedience to authority, 1961) Stanford prison experiment (Zimbardo, 1972) Superior orders References [ edit ] ^ Arendt 2006 , p. 135.

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 135–137.

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 136.

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 26.

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 32–33.

^ Arendt, Hannah (February–March 1963).

"Eichmann in Jerusalem. 5 parts" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 11 August 2018 .

^ a b c d Mieszkowski, Jan (July 21, 2013).

"The Banality of Intellect: Christian Ingrao's 'Believe and Destroy' " .

Los Angeles Review of Books . Retrieved August 1, 2020 .

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 46.

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 25–26.

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 55.

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 7.

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 241.

^ Arendt 2006 , pp. 18,21.

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 16.

^ a b Bird, David (December 6, 1975).

"Hannah Arendt, Political Scientist, Dead" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2011-03-12 .

^ a b Baer, Ulrich.

"The De-demonization of Evil" .

Cabinet Magazine . Retrieved 2023-07-19 .

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 112.

^ Arendt, Hannah (2013-12-03). "Eichmann Was Outrageously Stupid".

The Last Interview . Melville House. p. 47.

ISBN 978-1612193113 .

^ a b Robinson, Jacob (1965).

And the crooked shall be made straight . Macmillan . Retrieved 26 June 2014 .

^ a b Arendt, Hannah (January 20, 1966).

" 'The Formidable Dr. Robinson': A Reply" .

The New York Review of Books .

5 (12) . Retrieved 26 June 2014 .

^ a b Russell, Luke (2022-10-27), "The banality of evil" , Evil: A Very Short Introduction (1 ed.), Oxford University Press, pp.

53– 69, doi : 10.1093/actrade/9780198819271.003.0004 , ISBN 978-0-19-881927-1 ^ White, Thomas (23 April 2018).

"What did Hannah Arendt really mean by the banality of evil?" . Aeon.

^ MANNATHUKKAREN, NISSIM (2016-05-19).

"The banality of evil" .

The Hindu, Magazine .

ISSN 0971-751X .

^ a b Minnich, Elizabeth K. (2016-12-07).

The Evil of Banality: On The Life and Death Importance of Thinking . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-1-4422-7597-3 .

^ Staudenmaier, Peter (2012-05-01).

"Hannah Arendt's analysis of antisemitism in The Origins of Totalitarianism: a critical appraisal" .

Patterns of Prejudice .

46 (2): 154– 179.

doi : 10.1080/0031322X.2012.672224 .

ISSN 0031-322X .

S2CID 145290626 .

^ Aharony, Michal (11 May 2019).

"Why Does Hannah Arendt's 'Banality of Evil' Still Anger Israelis?" .

Haaretz .

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 125.

^ Arendt 2006 , p. 125.

^ Philosophy Overdose (2021-08-21).

Hannah Arendt (1964) - What Remains? (Full Interview with Günter Gaus) . Retrieved 2024-12-18 – via YouTube.

^ Arendt 2006 , pp. eg. 11–14.

^ Arendt, Hannah (1994). "Interview with Gunther Gaus". In Kohn, Jerome (ed.).

Essays in understanding: 1930 - 1954 . New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co. pp.

3– 24.

ISBN 978-0-15-172817-6 .

^ "Hannah Arendt," 300 women who changed the world, Encyclopædia Britannica Online Profiles.

^ "The Eichmann Polemics: Hannah Arendt And Her Critics" , Democratiya Magazine, Vol. 9 ^ Rosenbaum, Ron (October 30, 2009).

"The Evil of Banality" .

Slate . Retrieved March 11, 2014 .

^ Staudenmaier, Peter (May 2012).

"Hannah Arendt's analysis of antisemitism in The Origins of Totalitarianism: A critical appraisal" .

Patterns of Prejudice .

46 (2): 154– 179.

doi : 10.1080/0031322X.2012.672224 .

ISSN 0031-322X .

S2CID 145290626 .

^ Arendt 2006 , pp. 283–284.

^ Milgram, Stanley (1974). "Chapter 1".

Obedience to Authority . New York: Harper.

ISBN 978-0-06012938-5 .

^ Trunk, Isaiah (1996).

Judenrat: the Jewish councils in Eastern Europe under Nazi occupation . Bison books (1. Bison books print ed.). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 978-0-8032-9428-8 .

^ Hilberg, Raul (1961).

The destruction of the European Jews . Harper torchbooks (4. [print.] ed.). New York: Harper & Row.

ISBN 978-0-06-131959-4 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Popper, Nathaniel (March 31, 2010).

"A Conscious Pariah" .

The Nation . Retrieved September 22, 2023 .

"She acknowledges her debt," Trevor-Roper wrote, "but the full extent of that debt can be appreciated only by those who have read both. Again and again the arguments, the very phrases, are unconsciously repeated." Trevor-Roper's review was largely forgotten, as was his conclusion that "indeed, behind the whole of Miss Arendt's book stands the overshadowing bulk of Mr. Hilberg's." ^ a b Deborah E. Lipstadt , The Eichmann Trial, 2011 p.219, n.45.

^ Raul Hilberg , The Politics of Memory, Ivan R. Dee 1996 pp.147-157.

^ a b Young-Bruehl, Elisabeth (1982).

Hannah Arendt, for love of the world . Internet Archive. New Haven : Yale University Press. pp. 8, 16, 29, 60, 70, 71, 73, 91, 92, 98, 99, 100, 102, 103, 104, 105, 108, 109, 115, 118, 119, 122, 127, 134, 137– 139, 142, 148, 164, 168– 169, 174, 181, 182, 186, 189, 232, 238, 291, 337, 340.

ISBN 978-0-300-02660-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b c Arendt, Hannah; Scholem, Gershom Gerhard; Knott, Marie Luise (2017).

The correspondence of Hannah Arendt and Gershom Scholem . Chicago (Ill.): University of Chicago press.

ISBN 978-0-226-92451-9 .

^ Young-Bruehl, Elisabeth (1982).

Hannah Arendt, for love of the world . Internet Archive. New Haven : Yale University Press. pp.

105– 107.

ISBN 978-0-300-02660-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b c d e ז״ל, Gershom Scholem.

"Gershom Scholem and Hannah Arendt, "Eichmann in Jerusalem: An Exchange of Letters," Encounter, vol. 22, no. 124 (January 1964): 51-53" .

Encounters .

^ Arendt Hannah (1963).

Arendt Hannah Eichmann In Jerusalem . Public Domain.

The contrast between Israeli heroism and the submissive meekness with which Jews went to their death - arriving on time at the transportation points, walking on their own feet to the places of execution, digging their own graves, undressing and making neat piles of their clothing, and lying down side by side to be shot - seemed a fine point, and the prosecutor, asking witness after witness, "Why did you not protest?," "Why did you board the train?," "Fifteen thousand people were standing there and hundreds of guards facing you - why didn't you revolt and charge and attack?," was elaborating it for all it was worth. But the sad truth of the matter is that the point was ill taken, for no non-Jewish group or people had behaved differently. Sixteen years ago, while still under the direct impact of the events, David Rousset, a former inmate of Buchenwald, described what we know happened in all concentration camps: "The triumph of the S.S. demands that the tortured victim allow himself to be led to the noose without protesting, that he renounce and abandon himself to the point of ceasing to affirm his identity. And it is not for nothing. It is not gratuitously, out of sheer sadism, that the S.S. men desire his defeat. They know that the system which succeeds in destroying its victim before he mounts the scaffold . . . is incomparably the best for keeping a whole people in slavery. In submission. Nothing is more terrible than these processions of human beings going like dummies to their deaths" (Les lours de notre mort, 1947). The court received no answer to this cruel and silly question, but one could easily have found an answer had he permitted his imagination to dwell for a few minutes on the fate of those Dutch Jews who in 1941, in the old Jewish quarter of Amsterdam, dared to attack a German security police detachment. Four hundred and thirty Jews were arrested in reprisal and they were literally tortured to death, first in Buchenwald and then in the Austrian camp of Mauthausen. For months on end they died a thousand deaths, and every single one of them would have envied his brethren in Auschwitz and even in Riga and Minsk. There exist many things considerably worse than death, and the S.S. saw to it that none of them was ever very far from their victims' minds and imagination. In this respect, perhaps even more significantly than in others, the deliberate attempt at the trial to tell only the Jewish side of the story distorted the truth, even the Jewish truth. The glory of the uprising in the Warsaw ghetto and the heroism of the few others who fought back lay precisely in their having refused the comparatively easy death the Nazis offered them-before the firing squad or in the gas chamber. And the witnesses in Jerusalem who testified to resistance and rebellion, to "the small place [it had] in the history of the holocaust," confirmed once more the fact that only the very young had been capable of taking "the decision that we cannot go and be slaughtered like sheep." {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Arendt, Hannah (1963-02-08).

"Eichmann in Jerusalem (part i)" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2025-06-12 .

^ Arendt, Hannah (1963-02-08).

"Eichmann in Jerusalem" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2025-06-12 .

Now and then, the comedy breaks into the horror itself, and the result is stories, presumably true enough, whose macabre humor easily surpasses that of any Surrealist invention. Such was the story that Eichmann told during the police examination about the unlucky Commercial Councillor Bertold Storfer, one of the representatives of the Viennese Jewish Community. Eichmann had received a telegram from Rudolf Höss, Commandant of Auschwitz, telling him that Storfer had arrived and had urgently requested to see Eichmann. "I said to myself, O.K., this man has always behaved well; that is worth my while. . . . I'll go there myself and see what is the matter with him. And I go to Ebner [chief of the Gestapo in Vienna], and Ebner says—I remember it only vaguely—'Yes,' he said, 'if only he had not been so clumsy! He went into hiding and wanted to escape,' or something of the sort. And the police arrested him and sent him to the concentration camp, and, according to the orders of the Reichsführer [Himmler], no one could get out once he was in. Nothing could be done; neither Dr. Ebner nor I nor anybody else could do anything about it. I went to Auschwitz, looked up Höss, and said: 'Storfer is here?' 'Yes, yes [he replied], he is in one of the labor gangs.' With Storfer afterward, well, it was normal and human; we had a normal, human encounter. He told me all his grief and sorrow. I said, 'Well, my dear old friend [Ja, mein Lieber guter Storfer], we certainly got it! What rotten luck!' And I also said, 'Look, I really cannot help you, because according to orders of the Reichsführer nobody can get you out. I can't get you out. Dr. Ebner can't get you out. I hear you made a mistake, that you went into hiding or wanted to bolt, which, after all, you did not need to do.' [Eichmann meant that Storfer, as a Jewish functionary, had immunity from deportation.] I forget what his reply to this was. And then I asked him how he was. And he said, yes, he wondered if he couldn't be let off work; it was heavy work. And then I said to Höss, 'Work—Storfer won't have to work!' Höss said, 'Everyone works here.' So I said, 'O.K. I'll make out a chit to the effect that Storfer has to keep the gravel paths in order with a broom'—there were little gravel paths there—'and that he has the right to sit down with his broom on one of the benches.' I said, 'Will that be all right, Mr. Storfer? Will that suit you?' Whereupon he was very pleased, and we shook hands, and then he was given the broom and sat down on the bench. It was a great inner joy to me that I could at least see the man with whom I had worked for so many long years, and that we could speak with each other." Six weeks after this normal, human encounter, Storfer was dead—not gassed, apparently, but shot.

^ a b Arendt, Hannah (2018-11-19).

"Eichmann in Jerusalem—V" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2025-06-12 .

^ a b c d Philosophy Overdose (2021-08-21).

Hannah Arendt (1964) - What Remains? (Full Interview w/ Günter Gaus) . Retrieved 2025-06-12 – via YouTube.

^ a b Arendt, Hannah (2007-05-15).

"Hannah Arendt im Gespräch mit Joachim Fest. Eine Rundfunksendung aus dem Jahr 1964" .

HannahArendt.net (in German).

3 (1).

doi : 10.57773/hanet.v3i1.114 .

ISSN 1869-5787 .

^ Philosophy Overdose (2021-08-21).

Hannah Arendt (1964) - What Remains? (Full Interview w/ Günter Gaus) . Retrieved 2025-06-12 – via YouTube.

^ Filkins, Peter.

H. G. Adler: A Life in Many Worlds . Oxford University Press. p. 262.

^ Cesarani 2006 , pp. 15, 346.

^ Cesarani 2006 , p. 346.

^ Berkowitz, Roger (July 7, 2013).

"Misreading 'Eichmann in Jerusalem' " .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 26, 2014 .

^ Arendt Hannah (1963).

Arendt Hannah Eichmann In Jerusalem . pp. eg. 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 20, 21, 23, 28, 30, 31, 38.

^ Arendt, Hannah (2012).

Antisemitism: Part One of The Origins of Totalitarianism . Harvest Book. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

ISBN 978-0-15-607810-8 .

^ Arendt, Hannah (1951).

Origins of Totalitariansim .

^ a b ArendtKanal (2014-08-08).

Hannah Arendt im Gespräch mit Joachim Fest (1964) . Retrieved 2025-06-12 – via YouTube.

^ ArendtKanal (2014-08-08).

Hannah Arendt im Gespräch mit Joachim Fest (1964) . Retrieved 2025-06-12 – via YouTube.

^ a b Young-Bruehl, Elisabeth (1982).

Hannah Arendt, for love of the world . Internet Archive. New Haven : Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-02660-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b Cesarani 2006 , p. 345.

^ Hannah Arendt and Karl Jaspers Correspondence, 1926–1969, p. 435, Letter 285.

^ Arendt Hannah (1963).

Arendt Hannah Eichmann In Jerusalem . p. 13.

This was the tone set by Ben-Gurion and faithfully followed by Mr. Hausner, who began his opening address (which lasted through three sessions) with Pharaoh in Egypt and Haman's decree "to destroy, to slay, and to cause them to perish." He then proceeded to quote Ezekiel: "And when | [the Lord] passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, | said unto thee: In thy blood, live," explaining that these words must be understood as "the imperative that has confronted this nation ever since its first appearance on the stage of history." It was bad history and cheap rhetoric; worse, it was clearly at cross-purposes with putting Eichmann on trial, suggesting that perhaps he was only an innocent executor of some mysteriously foreordained destiny, or, for that matter, even of anti-Semitism, which perhaps was necessary to blaze the trail of "the bloodstained road traveled by this people" to fulfill its destiny. A few sessions later, when Professor Salo W. Baron of Columbia University had testified to the more recent history of Eastern European Jewry, Dr. Servatius could no longer resist temptation and asked the obvious questions: "Why did all this bad luck fall upon the Jewish people?" and "Don't you think that irrational motives are at the basis of the fate of this people? Beyond the understanding of a human being?" Is not there perhaps something like "the spirit of history, which brings history forward . . . without the influence 'of men?" Is not Mr. Hausner basically in agreement with "the school of historical law" - an allusion to Hegel - and has he not shown that what "the leaders do will not always lead to the aim and destination they wanted? . . . Here the intention was to destroy the Jewish people and the objective was not reached and a new flourishing State came into being." The argument of the defense had now come perilously close to the newest anti-Semitic notion about the Elders of Zion, set forth in all seriousness a few weeks earlier in the Egyptian National Assembly by Deputy Foreign Minister Hussain Zulficar Sabri: Hitler was innocent of the slaughter of the Jews; he was a victim of the Zionists, who had "compelled him to perpetrate crimes that would eventually enable them to achieve their aim - the creation of the State of Israel." Except that Dr. Servatius, following the philosophy of history expounded by the prosecutor, had put History in the place usually reserved for the Elders of Zion. Despite the intentions of Ben-Gurion and all the efforts of the prosecution, there remained an individual in the dock, a person of flesh and blood; and if Ben-Gurion did "not care what verdict is delivered against Eichmann," it was undeniably the sole task of the Jerusalem court to deliver one.

^ Arendt Hannah (1963).

Arendt Hannah Eichmann In Jerusalem . p. 30.

But quite apart from all slogans and ideological quarrels, it was in those years a fact of everyday life that only Zionists had any chance of negotiating with the German authorities, for the simple reason that their chief Jewish adversary, the Central Association of German Citizens of Jewish Faith, to which ninety-five per cent of organized Jews in Germany then belonged, specified in its bylaws that its chief task was the "fight against anti-Semitism"; it had suddenly become by definition an organization "hostile to the State," and would indeed have been persecuted - which it was not - if it had ever dared to do what it was supposed to do. During its first few years, Hitler's rise to power appeared to the Zionists chiefly as "the decisive defeat of assimilationism." Hence, the Zionists could, for a time, at least, engage in a certain amount of non-criminal cooperation with the Nazi authorities; the Zionists too believed that "dissimilation," combined with the emigration to Palestine of Jewish youngsters and, they hoped, Jewish capitalists, could be a "mutually fair solution." At the time, many German officials held this opinion, and this kind of talk seems to have been quite common up to the end. A letter from a survivor of Theresienstadt, a German Jew, relates that all leading positions in the Nazi-appointed Reichsvereinigung were held by Zionists (whereas the authentically Jewish Reichsvertretung had been composed of both Zionists and non-Zionists), because Zionists, according to the Nazis, were "the 'decent' Jews since they too thought in 'national' terms." To be sure, no prominent Nazi ever spoke publicly in this vein; from beginning to end, Nazi propaganda was fiercely, unequivocally, uncompromisingly anti-Semitic, and eventually nothing counted but what people who were still without experience in the mysteries of totalitarian government dismissed as "mere propaganda." There existed in those first years a mutually highly satisfactory agreement between the Nazi authorities and the Jewish Agency for Palestine - a Ha'avarah, or Transfer Agreement, which provided that an emigrant to Palestine could transfer his money there in German goods and exchange them for pounds upon arrival. It was soon the only legal way for a Jew to take his money with him (the alternative then being the establishment of a blocked account, which could be liquidated abroad only at a loss of between fifty and ninety-five per cent). The result was that in the thirties, when American Jewry took great pains to organize a boycott of German merchandise, Palestine, of all places, was swamped with all kinds of goods "made in Germany." Of greater importance for Eichmann were the emissaries from Palestine, who would approach the Gestapo and the S.S. on their own initiative, without taking orders from either the German Zionists or the Jewish Agency for Palestine. They came in order to enlist help for the illegal immigration of Jews into British-ruled Palestine, and both the Gestapo and the S.S. were helpful. They negotiated with Eichmann in Vienna, and they reported that he was "polite," "not the shouting type," and that he even provided them with farms and facilities for setting up vocational training camps for prospective immigrants. ("On one occasion, he expelled a group of nuns from a convent to provide a training farm for young Jews," and on another "a special train [was made available] and Nazi officials accompanied" a group of emigrants, ostensibly headed for Zionist training farms in Yugoslavia, to see them safely across the border.) According to the story told by Jon and David Kimche, with "the full and generous cooperation of all the chief actors" (The Secret Roads: The "Illegal" Migration of a People, 1938-1948, London, 1954), these Jews from Palestine spoke a language not totally different from that of Eichmann. They had been sent to Europe by the communal settlements in Palestine, and they were not interested in rescue operations: "That was not their job." They wanted to select "suitable material," and their chief enemy, prior to the extermination program, was not those who made life impossible for Jews in the old countries, Germany or Austria, but those who barred access to the new homeland; that enemy was definitely Britain, not Germany. Indeed, they were in a position to deal with the Nazi authorities on a footing amounting to equality, which native Jews were not, since they enjoyed the protection of the mandatory power; they were probably among the first Jews to talk openly about mutual interests and were certainly the first to be given permission "to pick young Jewish pioneers" from among the Jews in the concentration camps. Of course, they were unaware of the sinister implications of this deal, which still lay in the future; but they too somehow believed that if it was a question of selecting Jews for survival, the Jews should do the selecting themselves. It was this fundamental error in judgment that eventually led to a situation in which the non-selected majority of Jews inevitably found themselves confronted with two enemies - the Nazi authorities and the Jewish authorities. As far as the Viennese episode is concerned, Eichmann's preposterous claim to have saved hundreds of thousands of Jewish lives, which was laughed out of court, finds strange support in the considered judgment of the Jewish historians, the Kimches: "Thus what must have been one of the most paradoxical episodes of the entire period of the Nazi regime began: the man who was to go down in history as one of the arch-murderers of the Jewish people entered the lists as an active worker in the rescue of Jews from Europe." ^ Gewen, Barry (14 May 2006).

"The Everyman of Genocide" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 27 April 2012 .

^ Musmanno, Michael (May 19, 1963).

“Man With an Unspotted Conscience” .

The New York Times . Retrieved December 3, 2024.

^ Roger Berkowitz. “Misreading Eichmann in Jerusalem” New York Times, 2014.

^ a b Stangneth 2014 .

^ a b Arendt Hannah (1963).

Arendt Hannah Eichmann In Jerusalem .

^ Arendt, Hannah (1963-02-08).

"Eichmann in Jerusalem" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2025-06-12 .

^ Young-Bruehl, Elisabeth (1982).

Hannah Arendt, for love of the world . Internet Archive. New Haven : Yale University Press. pp.

153– 181.

ISBN 978-0-300-02660-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Fittko, Lisa (2000).

Escape through the Pyrenees . Jewish lives. Evanston, Ill: Northwestern University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8101-1803-4 .

OCLC 43050181 .

^ 1.

George Steiner re: In Bluebeard’s Castle (1971), Grammars of Creation, “ The Hollow Miracle”, “Some Black Holes” et. al 2. Also re: Negative Dialectics (1966) by Theodor Adorno. Adorno & Horkheimer ’s Dialectic of the Enlightenment (1947) is also relevant , precedes the publication of Arendt’s Origins but was only read by the heavily circumscribed and delimited audience of the Frankfurt School’s post-Marxist arcana. (As stated above, and as admitted by Hannah Arendt: the definition and understanding of radical evil does not depend upon her, and is not her copyright or her possession—she merely introduced these concepts to a larger reading public than had hitherto been exposed to its conception and description.) 3. Another account of radical evil predating Arendt’s is included in Leo Strauss’s lecture on “German Nihilism” in 1941 at the New School in New York City–it was not published and distributed to a public of scholarly readers in political theory until 1999 in the journal Interpretation.

4. The work of many other scholars touches upon this subject. Few, if any of them, reached an audience as broad or as diverse as those spoken to by Arendt and none spoke to a broad section of the educated and historically concerned public as early as she did.

^ a b Eagleton, Terry (2003).

After theory . Internet Archive. London : Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-0-7139-9732-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b c d Philosophy Overdose (2021-08-21).

Hannah Arendt (1964) - What Remains? (Full Interview w/ Günter Gaus) . Retrieved 2025-06-12 – via YouTube.

^ a b c d ArendtKanal (2014-08-08).

Hannah Arendt im Gespräch mit Joachim Fest (1964) . Retrieved 2025-06-12 – via YouTube.

^ a b c d Arendt, Hannah (1978-10-26).

"Hannah Arendt: From an Interview" .

The New York Review of Books . Vol. 25, no. 16.

ISSN 0028-7504 . Retrieved 2025-06-12 .

^ "Organized Guilt and Universal Responsibility by Hannah Arendt" .

მატიანე (in Georgian). 2020-10-26 . Retrieved 2025-06-12 .

^ Arendt, Hannah; Bromwich, David (2022).

On lying and politics . A library of America special publication. New York (N.Y.): Library of America.

ISBN 978-1-59853-731-4 .

^ Arendt, Hannah (1976).

On violence . A Harvest book. San Diego: Harcourt, Brace.

ISBN 978-0-15-669500-8 .

^ Hannah Arendt.

The Crisis of Democracy and other Essays.

^ Arendt, Hannah; Kohn, Jerome (2005).

The promise of politics . New York: Schoken books.

ISBN 978-0-8052-1213-6 .

^ Grey, Tobias (June 23, 2020).

"Hitler's Intellectuals" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved August 1, 2020 .

^ "Men in Dark Times, by Rebecca Panovka" .

Harper's Magazine . Archived from the original on 2025-05-04 . Retrieved 2025-06-12 .

^ Pomerantsev, Peter (2020).

This is not propaganda: adventures in the war against reality (Paperback ed.). London: Faber.

ISBN 978-0-571-33864-1 .

^ Snyder, Timothy (2018).

The road to unfreedom: Russia, Europe, America (First edition, first paperback ed.). New York, NY: Tim Duggan Books.

ISBN 978-0-525-57446-0 .

^ Snyder, Timothy (2015).

Black Earth: the Holocaust as history and warning (First ed.). New York: Tim Duggan Books.

ISBN 978-1-101-90345-2 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Arendt, Hannah (2006) [1963, Viking Press , revised 1968].

Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil .

Penguin Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-1-101-00716-7 .

Full text: 1964 edition Azoulay, Ariella; Honig, Bonnie (May 2016). "Between Nuremberg and Jerusalem: Hannah Arendt's Tikkun Olam ".

differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies .

27 (1).

Duke University Press : 48– 93.

doi : 10.1215/10407391-3522757 .

Cesarani, David (2006).

Becoming Eichmann: Rethinking the Life, Crimes and Trial of a "Desk Murderer" .

Cambridge, MA : Da Capo Press .

ISBN 9780306814761 .

Lozowick, Yaacov (Apr 5, 2011).

Hannah Arendt, Adolf Eichmann, and how Evil Isn't Banal .

The Holocaust Resource Center (video). Jerusalem: Yad Vashem . The World Holocaust Remembrance Center.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21.

Stangneth, Bettina (2014).

Eichmann Before Jerusalem: The Unexamined Life of a Mass Murderer .

Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-0-307-95968-3 .

Jochen von Lang [ de ] , Eichmann Interrogated (1982) ISBN 0-88619-017-7 — a book referenced in Eichmann in Jerusalem which contains excerpts from Eichmann's pre-trial interrogation "Hannah Arendt Latest Articles" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 4 December 2024 .

"Abstracts from Eichmann in Jerusalem with links to articles" .

The New Yorker . Archived from the original on 2013-01-29 . Retrieved 2010-11-10 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Eichmann in Jerusalem .

Full text of 1964 edition articles tagged Hannah Arendt from The New Yorker Hannah Arendt Papers: Speeches and Writings File, 1923-1975 Library of Congress , Manuscript Division. Includes manuscript copy of Eichmann in Jerusalem.

v t e Hannah Arendt List of works by Hannah Arendt Books Love and Saint Augustine (1929) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) Rahel Varnhagen (1957) The Human Condition (1958) Between Past and Future (1961) Eichmann in Jerusalem (1963) On Revolution (1963) Crises of the Republic (1972) The Life of the Mind (1978) People Günther Anders Heinrich Blücher Related Hannah Arendt (2012 film) Hannah Arendt Prize Hannah Arendt Institute for Totalitarianism Studies Memorials Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9gm7g
Cached time: 20250817044330
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.199 seconds
Real time usage: 1.387 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6551/1000000
Revision size: 87191/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 183208/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7917/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 286232/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.824/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23114675/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1251.044      1 -total
 40.55%  507.316      1 Template:Reflist
 15.98%  199.978     31 Template:Cite_book
 12.13%  151.814     12 Template:Cite_magazine
  9.59%  119.971      1 Template:Langx
  8.64%  108.063     23 Template:Sfn
  6.25%   78.201      1 Template:Short_description
  6.00%   75.035      1 Template:Hannah_Arendt
  5.97%   74.667      1 Template:Essay-like
  5.80%   72.512      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2900572:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044330 and revision id 1303891589. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eichmann_in_Jerusalem&oldid=1303891589 " Categories : 1963 non-fiction books Books by Hannah Arendt Cultural depictions of Adolf Eichmann History books about the Holocaust Holocaust trials Political books Viking Press books Works originally published in The New Yorker Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Georgian-language sources (ka) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2025 All articles with style issues Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 17:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eichmann in Jerusalem 23 languages Add topic

