Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission 2 History 3 Atmospheric Observatories 4 Mobile and aerial observatories 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Atmospheric Radiation Measurement User Facility 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Atmospheric Radiation Measurement ) US Department of Energy scientific facility This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Atmospheric Radiation Measurement User Facility" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article reads like a press release or a news article and may be largely based on routine coverage .

Please help improve it by adding independent secondary sources.

( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ARM User Facility [ 1 ] Established 1989 Operating agency United States Department of Energy Website http://www.arm.gov The Atmospheric Radiation Measurement User Facility ( ARM User Facility ) [ 2 ] is a multi-laboratory United States Department of Energy scientific user facility used for national and international global climate research efforts.

The ARM User Facility consists of three heavily instrumented fixed-location atmospheric observatories and mobile and aerial research facilities that measure radiative properties of the atmosphere, particularly cloud and aerosol formation processes.

[ 3 ] Continuous data from these sites, as well as supplemental data obtained through intensive field research campaigns, are available to scientists online through the ARM Data Archive. ARM is collaboratively managed by nine DOE national laboratories.

[ 4 ] Mission [ edit ] ARM seeks to provide the climate research community with strategically located in situ and remote-sensing observatories designed to improve the understanding and representation, in climate and earth system models, of clouds and aerosols as well as their interactions and coupling with the Earth’s surface. ARM focuses on obtaining continuous measurements—supplemented by field campaigns—and providing data products that promote the advancement of earth system models.

History [ edit ] ARM was established in 1989 by the U.S. Department of Energy to develop several highly instrumented ground stations. During the early years of the program, ARM focused on establishing field research sites, developing and procuring instruments, and developing techniques for both atmospheric retrievals and model evaluation. To obtain the most useful climate data, three main sites were chosen that represented a broad range of weather conditions.

Atmospheric Observatories [ edit ] The Southern Great Plains (SGP) [ 5 ] atmospheric observatory was the first field measurement site established by the ARM user facility. This observatory is the world’s largest and most extensive climate research facility.

Scientists use data from the SGP to learn about cloud, aerosol and atmospheric processes, which in turn leads to improvements in models of the Earth’s climate. The SGP observatory consists of in situ and remote-sensing instrument clusters arrayed across approximately 9,000 square miles in north-central Oklahoma and south Kansas.

The North Slope of Alaska (NSA) [ 6 ] atmospheric observatory provides data about cloud and radiative processes at high latitudes. This observatory includes a central facility at Barrow (known officially as Utqiaġvik ) and, from 2013 to 2021, an ARM Mobile Facility operated at Oliktok Point, about 160 miles east of Utqiaġvik.

[ 7 ] The NSA is a focal point for atmospheric and ecological research activity in the Arctic. Scientists use data from the NSA to improve the representation of high-latitude cloud and radiation processes in earth system models .

The Eastern North Atlantic atmospheric observatory [ 8 ] is the newest measurement site established by the ARM user facility. This observatory is located on Graciosa Island in the Azores archipelago. The Azores are located in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean west of Portugal .

The Tropical Western Pacific sites [ 9 ] , where data was collected from 1996 to 2014, obtained data from the "warm pool" where the warmest sea surface temperatures on the planet and widespread convective clouds play a large role in the interannual variability observed in the global climate system. This site was discontinued in August 2014.

Mobile and aerial observatories [ edit ] In addition to the fixed-location observatories, ARM also offers mobile and aerial facilities.

Mobile observatories To explore research questions beyond those addressed by ARM’s fixed atmospheric observatories located in Alaska, Oklahoma, and the Azores, scientists can propose a field campaign to use one of three ARM mobile facilities (AMF) to collect atmospheric and climate data from under-sampled regions around the world.

Each AMF is designed to operate in any environment—from the cold of the Arctic to the heat of the tropics—for campaigns typically lasting about a year.

ARM Aerial Facility Aerial observatory capabilities of the ARM user facility are operated by the ARM Aerial Facility (AAF). The AAF provides airborne measurements required to answer research questions proposed by scientists from around the world.

References [ edit ] ^ "ARM" .

www.arm.gov . Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Facility . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

^ "ARM" .

www.arm.gov . Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Facility . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

^ "ARM About" .

www.arm.gov . Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Facility . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

^ "About: National Labs" . Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Facility . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

^ "Atmospheric Observatories: Southern Great Plains" .

www.arm.gov . Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Facility . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

^ "Atmospheric Observatories: North Slope of Alaska" .

www.arm.gov . Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Facility . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

^ "Atmospheric Observatories: Oliktok Point" .

www.arm.gov . Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Facility . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

^ "Atmospheric Observatories: Eastern North Atlantic" .

www.arm.gov . Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Facility . Retrieved 10 November 2021 .

^ "Atmospheric Observatories: Tropical Western Pacific" .

www.arm.gov . Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Facility . Retrieved 10 November 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Program .

U.S. Department of Energy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atmospheric_Radiation_Measurement_User_Facility&oldid=1296530625 " Categories : Atmospheric radiation Meteorology research and field projects United States Department of Energy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 14:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Atmospheric Radiation Measurement User Facility 1 language Add topic

