Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Content 2 Legacy 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Notes 3.2 Sources 4 External links Toggle the table of contents On Dreams 4 languages Español Íslenska 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the book by Sigmund Freud, see The Interpretation of Dreams .

On Dreams ( Ancient Greek : Περὶ ἐνυπνίων; Latin : De insomniis ) is one of the short treatises that make up Aristotle 's Parva Naturalia .

The short text is divided into three chapters. In the first, Aristotle tries to determine whether dreams "pertain to the faculty of thought or to that of sense-perception." [ 1 ] In the second chapter, he considers the circumstances of sleep and how the sense organs operate.

[ 2 ] Finally, in the third chapter he explains how dreams are caused, proposing that it is the residual movements of the sensory organs that allow them to arise.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Content [ edit ] Aristotle explains that during sleep there is an absence of external sensory stimulation. While sleeping with our eyes closed, the eyes are unable to see, and so in this respect we perceive nothing while asleep.

[ 5 ] He compares hallucinations to dreams, saying "...the faculty by which, in waking hours, we are subject to illusion when affected by disease, is identical with that which produces illusory effects in sleep." [ 6 ] When awake and perceiving, to see or hear something incorrectly only occurs when one actually sees or hears something, thinking it to be something else. But in sleep, if it is still true that one does not see, hear, or experience sense perception in the normal way, then the faculty of sense, he reasons, must be affected in some different way.

[ 7 ] Ultimately, Aristotle concludes that dreaming is due to residual movements of the sensory organs.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Some dreams, he says, may even be caused by indigestion: [ 8 ] We must suppose that, like the little eddies which are formed in rivers, so the movements are each a continuous process, often remaining like what they were when first started, but often, too, broken, into other forms by collisions with obstacles. This gives the reason why no dreams occur in sleep after meals, or to sleepers who are extremely young, e.g., to infants. The movement in such cases is excessive, owing to the heat generated from the food. Hence, just as in a liquid, if one vehemently disturbs it, sometimes no reflected image appears, while at other times one appears, indeed, but utterly distorted, so as to seem quite unlike its original; while, when once the motion has ceased, the reflected images are clear and plain; in the same manner during sleep the images, or residuary images are clear and plain; in the same manner during sleep the images, or residuary movements, which are based upon the sensory impressions, become sometimes quite obliterated by the above described motion when too violent; while at other times the sights are indeed seen, but confused and weird, and the dreams are incoherent, like those of persons who are atrabilious, or feverish, or intoxicated with wine. For all such affections, being spirituous, cause much commotion and disturbance.

[ 9 ] Aristotle also describes the phenomenon of lucid dreaming , whereby the dreamer becomes aware that he is dreaming.

[ 4 ] [ 10 ] Legacy [ edit ] The 17th century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes generally adopted Aristotle's view that dreams arise from continued movements of the sensory organs during sleep, [ 8 ] writing that "dreams are caused by the distemper of some inward parts of the Body." He thought this explanation would further help in understanding different types of dreams, for example, "lying cold breedeth Dreams of Feare, and raiseth the thought and Image of some fearfull object." [ 11 ] The neurologist Sigmund Freud cited Aristotle in his 1899 work, The Interpretation of Dreams , as the first to recognize that dreams "do not arise from supernatural manifestations but follow the laws of the human spirit." He held Aristotle's definition of dreams to be "the mental activity of the sleeper in so far as he is asleep." [ 12 ] References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Aristotle, On Dreams , 1.458b1-2 ^ Aristotle, On Dreams , 2.459a23-28 ^ a b Aristotle, On Dreams , 3.461b7-22 ^ a b c Windt 2017, §2.3 ^ Aristotle, On Dreams , 1.458b7-9 ^ Aristotle, On Dreams , 1.458b26-28 ^ Aristotle, On Dreams , 1.458b30-459a8 ^ a b Windt 2017, §2.5 ^ Aristotle, On Dreams , 3.460b28-461a24 ^ Aristotle, On Dreams , 3.462a3-8 ^ Hobbes 1651, p. 95 ^ Freud 1899, pp. 36–37 Sources [ edit ] Barnes, Jonathan, ed. (1984).

The Complete Works of Aristotle (6th printing, with corr. ed.). Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. pp.

729– 735.

ISBN 978-0691016504 .

Freud, Sigmund (1899).

The Interpretation of Dreams . Translated by Strachey, James (2010 ed.). New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465019779 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Hobbes, Thomas (1651).

Leviathan (1985 ed.). Penguin.

ISBN 9780140431957 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Windt, Jennifer M. (2017).

"Dreams and Dreaming" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 7 February 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Works related to On Dreams at Wikisource Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Περὶ ἐνυπνίου Parva Naturalia public domain audiobook at LibriVox On Dreams , translated by J. I. Beare HTML Greek text: Mikros apoplous v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=On_Dreams&oldid=1223028978 " Category : Works by Aristotle Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 9 May 2024, at 12:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents On Dreams 4 languages Add topic

