Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Forms of nihilism Toggle Forms of nihilism subsection 1.1 Ethical language: false versus not truth-apt 1.2 The scope question 2 Applied ethics 3 Arguments for nihilism Toggle Arguments for nihilism subsection 3.1 Argument from queerness 3.1.1 Responses and criticisms 3.2 Argument from explanatory impotence 4 See also 5 Citations 6 Bibliography 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Moral nihilism 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Latina 日本語 Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical view that nothing is morally right or wrong This article is about the meta-ethical position. For a more general discussion of amoralism, see Amorality .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Moral nihilism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Nihilism Category Disambiguation Schools Absurdism Agnosticism Atheism Buddhism Determinism Existentialism Nominalism Noneism Pessimism Presentism Postmodernism Reductionism Skepticism Solipsism Concepts Ambiguity Amorality Anattā Anomie Après moi, le déluge Cognitive bias Continuum hypothesis God is dead Illusion Incompleteness theorems Infinite regress Last man Logical fallacy Meaninglessness Münchhausen trilemma Nonexistence Nothingness Paradox of nihilism Vagueness Valuelessness Thinkers Bakunin Baudrillard Camus Derrida Mackie Dostoevsky Foucault Heidegger Kierkegaard Nietzsche Rorty Peirce Sartre This is a subseries on philosophy . In order to explore related topics, please visit navigation .

v t e Moral nihilism (also called ethical nihilism ) is the metaethical view that nothing is morally right or morally wrong and that morality does not exist.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Moral nihilism is distinct from moral relativism , which allows for actions to be wrong relative to a particular culture or individual. It is also distinct from expressivism , according to which when we make moral claims, "We are not making an effort to describe the way the world is ... we are venting our emotions, commanding others to act in certain ways, or revealing a plan of action".

[ 3 ] Moral nihilism today broadly tends to take the form of an Error Theory: the view developed originally by J.L. Mackie in his 1977 book Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong , although prefigured by Axel Hägerström in 1911. Error theory and nihilism broadly take the form of a negative claim about the existence of objective values or properties. Under traditional views there are moral properties or methods which hold objectively in some sense beyond our contingent interests which morally obligate us to act. For Mackie and the Error Theorists, such properties do not exist in the world, and therefore morality conceived of by reference to objective facts must also not exist. Therefore, morality in the traditional sense does not exist.

[ citation needed ] However, holding nihilism does not necessarily imply that one should give up using moral or ethical language; some nihilists contend that it remains a useful tool.

[ 4 ] In fact Mackie and other contemporary defenders of Error Theory, such as Richard Joyce , defend the use of moral or ethical talk and action even in knowledge of their fundamental falsity. The legitimacy of this activity is a subject of debate in philosophy.

Forms of nihilism [ edit ] Moral nihilists agree that all claims such as "murder is morally wrong" are not true. But different nihilistic views differ in two ways.

Some may say that such claims are neither true nor false; others say that they are all false.

Nihilists differ in the scope of their theories. Error theorists typically claim that it is only distinctively moral claims which are false; practical nihilists claim that there are no reasons for action of any kind; some nihilists extend this claim to include reasons for belief.

[ citation needed ] Ethical language: false versus not truth-apt [ edit ] J. L. Mackie argues that moral assertions are only true if there are moral properties, but because there are none, all such claims are false.

[ 5 ] Under such a view moral propositions which express beliefs are then systematically in error. For under Mackie's view, if there are to be moral properties, they must be objective and therefore not amenable to differences in subjective desires and preferences. Moreover any claims that these moral properties, if they did exist would need to be intrinsically motivating by being in some primitive relation to our consciousness. They must be able of guiding us morally just by the fact of being in some clear awareness of their truth.

Other versions of the theory claim that moral assertions are not true because they are neither true nor false. This form of moral nihilism claims that moral beliefs and assertions presuppose the existence of moral facts that do not exist. Consider, for example, the claim that the present king of France is bald . Some argue that this claim is neither true nor false because it presupposes that there is currently a king of France, but there is not. The claim suffers from "presupposition failure".

Richard Joyce [ 6 ] argues for this form of moral nihilism under the name "fictionalism".

The scope question [ edit ] Error theory is built on three principles: There are no moral features in this world; nothing is right or wrong.

Therefore, no moral judgments are true.

However, our sincere moral judgments try, but always fail, to describe the moral features of things.

Thus, we always lapse into error when thinking in moral terms. We are trying to state the truth when we make moral judgments. But since there is no moral truth, all of our moral claims are mistaken. Hence the error. These three principles lead to the conclusion that there is no moral knowledge. Knowledge requires truth. If there is no moral truth, there can be no moral knowledge. Thus moral values are purely chimerical.

[ 3 ] [ 7 ] Applied ethics [ edit ] A pressing question is how one might apply the belief that there are no objective morals. Perhaps the most common response, and the position which Mackie adopts, is to view moralizing as an inherently useful practice, and that everyone is better off behaving in a moralistic manner.

[ 8 ] On the other hand, Richard Garner advocated for the idea of "moral abolitionism". He argues that, if one were to believe that there are no objective morals, then to engage in moralism is a deceptive behavior. It is wrong because it harms one's epistemological integrity. Furthermore, by refusing to make moral judgements generally, people would be more likely to engage with others in a more genuine fashion. The social benefit is that "we will find that there will be less to argue about, and that our conflicts and disagreements with others, at last seen for what they are, can be addressed and resolved".

[ 8 ] Garner encouraged people to adhere to an alternative to traditional normative morality: "informed, compassionate amoralism", a blend of compassion, non-duplicity, and clarity of language that he believed would nurture our capability for tolerance, creation, and cooperation.

Arguments for nihilism [ edit ] Argument from queerness [ edit ] The most prominent argument for nihilism is the argument from queerness .

J. L. Mackie argues that there are no objective ethical values , by arguing that they would be queer (strange): If there were objective values, then they would be entities or qualities or relations of a very strange sort, utterly different from anything else in the universe.

[ 9 ] For all those who also find such entities queer ( prima facie implausible), there is reason to doubt the existence of objective values.

In his book Morality without Foundations: A Defense of Ethical Contextualism (1999), Mark Timmons provides a reconstruction of Mackie's views in the form of the two related arguments . These are based on the rejection of properties, facts, and relationships that do not fit within the worldview of philosophical naturalism , the idea "that everything—including any particular events, facts, properties, and so on—is part of the natural physical world that science investigates" (1999, p. 12). Timmons adds, "The undeniable attraction of this outlook in contemporary philosophy no doubt stems from the rise of modern science and the belief that science is our best avenue for discovering the nature of reality".

[ 10 ] There are several ways in which moral properties are supposedly queer: our ordinary moral discourse purports to refer to intrinsically prescriptive properties and facts "that would somehow motivate us or provide us with reasons for action independent of our desires and aversions"—but such properties and facts do not comport with philosophical naturalism.

[ 11 ] given that objective moral properties supposedly supervene upon natural properties (such as biological or psychological properties), the relation between the moral properties and the natural properties is metaphysically mysterious and does not comport with philosophical naturalism.

[ 12 ] a moral realist who countenances the existence of metaphysically queer properties, facts, and relations must also posit some special faculty by which we have knowledge of them.

[ 12 ] Responses and criticisms [ edit ] Christine Korsgaard responds to Mackie by saying: Of course there are entities that meet these criteria. It's true that they are queer sorts of entities and that knowing them isn't like anything else. But that doesn't mean that they don't exist. ... For it is the most familiar fact of human life that the world contains entities that can tell us what to do and make us do it. They are people, and the other animals.

[ 13 ] Other criticisms of the argument include noting that the very fact that such entities would have to be something fundamentally different from what we normally experience, therefore assumably outside our sphere of experience, we cannot prima facie have reason to either doubt or affirm their existence. Therefore if one had independent grounds for supposing such things to exist (such as a reductio ad absurdum of the contrary) the argument from queerness cannot give one any particular reason to think otherwise. An argument along these lines has been provided by, e.g., Akeel Bilgrami .

[ 14 ] Also, quantum phenomena have been shown to share several of the unusual characteristics of ethical entities. The observer effect , quantum entanglement , the wave-particle duality of light , and other phenomena have been shown to mirror aspects of ethics, providing a response to both the epistemological and meta-ethical puzzles raised by Mackie.

[ 15 ] Argument from explanatory impotence [ edit ] Gilbert Harman argued that we do not need to posit the existence of objective values in order to explain our "moral observations".

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Antinomianism Deontology Eliminativism Egoist anarchism Evolution of morality Existential nihilism Illegalism Non-cognitivism Metaethics Might makes right Moral relativism Moral skepticism Perspectivism Psychological determinism Reductionism Transcendental nihilism Citations [ edit ] ^ Sinnott-Armstrong 2019 .

^ Pratt n.d.

^ a b Shafer-Landau 2010 , pp. 292–293.

^ ( Pratt n.d.

) ^ Mackie 1977 , [ page needed ] .

^ Joyce 2001 , [ page needed ] .

^ Shafer-Landau 2018 , [ page needed ] .

^ a b Garner, Richard (2009-11-09). "Abolishing Morality".

A World Without Values . Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. pp.

217– 233.

doi : 10.1007/978-90-481-3339-0_13 .

ISBN 978-90-481-3338-3 .

^ Mackie 1977 , p. 38.

^ Timmons 1999 , pp. 12–13.

^ Timmons 1999 , p. 50.

^ a b Timmons 1999 , p. 51.

^ Korsgaard 1996 , p. 166.

^ Bilgrami 2006 .

^ 'Ethical Truth in Light of Quantum Mechanics' by King, I. and King, M.

Philosophy Now Issue 156 (June/July 2023) ^ Harman 1977 , Chapter 1.

Bibliography [ edit ] Pratt, Alan (n.d.).

"Nihilism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

ISSN 2161-0002 . Retrieved 2020-12-01 .

Bilgrami, Akeel (2006).

Self-Knowledge and Resentment . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Harman, Gilbert (1977).

The Nature of Morality: An Introduction to Ethics . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195021431 .

OCLC 2725781 .

Joyce, Richard (2001).

The Myth of Morality . Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780511328787 .

Korsgaard, Christine (1996).

The Sources of Normativity . Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

Mackie, John (1977).

Ethics: inventing right and wrong . London.

ISBN 0140135588 .

OCLC 24729622 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Shafer-Landau, Russ (2010).

The Fundamentals of Ethics . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-063139-0 .

Shafer-Landau, Russ (2018).

The Fundamentals of Ethics (fourth ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-532086-2 .

Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter (2019), "Moral Skepticism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2020-05-28 Timmons, Mark (1999).

Morality without Foundations: A Defense of Ethical Contextualism . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

.

Further reading [ edit ] Garner, Richard T.; Bernard Rosen (1967).

Moral Philosophy: A Systematic Introduction to Normative Ethics and Meta-ethics , New York: Macmillan.

Garner, Richard T.; (1994).

Beyond Morality . Temple University Press.

Shafer-Landau, Russ (2003).

Whatever Happened to Good and Evil?

, Oxford University Press.

Shafer-Landau, Russ & Terence Cuneo (eds.) (2007).

Foundations of Ethics , Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter (2006a). "Moral Skepticism," The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Edward N. Zalta (ed.). ( link ) Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter (2006b).

Moral Skepticisms , Oxford University Press.

van Roojen, Mark (2004). "Moral Cognitivism vs. Non-Cognitivism," The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Edward N. Zalta (ed.). ( link ) About the queerness argument Brink, David O. (1984). "Moral Realism and the Sceptical Arguments from Disagreement and Queerness", Australasian Journal of Philosophy 62(2): 111–125.

Garner, Richard T. (1990). "On the Genuine Queerness of Moral Properties and Facts", Australasian Journal of Philosophy 68(2): 137–46.

Mackie, J. L. (1946). "A Refutation of Morals", Australasian Journal of Psychology and Philosophy 24: 77–90.

doi : 10.1080/00048404608541486 Rosati, Connie S. (2006). " Moral Motivation ", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

Shepski, Lee (2008). " The Vanishing Argument from Queerness ", Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86(3): 371–87.

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moral_nihilism&oldid=1297076311 " Categories : Amorality Metaethics Morality Nihilism Ethical theories Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2020 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references Use shortened footnotes from December 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 CS1 maint: location missing publisher This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 01:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moral nihilism 15 languages Add topic

