Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and family background Toggle Early life and family background subsection 1.1 Education 2 Coat of arms 3 Marriage and offspring Toggle Marriage and offspring subsection 3.1 Children 3.2 Ana María Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval 3.3 Juan Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval 4 Early career Toggle Early career subsection 4.1 Secretary for Giovanni Andrea Doria, Marquis of Torrilla (1579-1581) 4.2 In the service of the Lord Count of Olivares in Rome (1582-1590) 5 Secretary of State and War for the Dukes of Savoy (1591–1598) Toggle Secretary of State and War for the Dukes of Savoy (1591–1598) subsection 5.1 Appointment as Secretary of State and War 5.2 Background 5.3 Journey from Provence to Madrid 5.4 Medrano and King Philip II of Spain 5.5 French Wars of Religion 5.5.1 Invasion of Monseñor Ladighiera 5.6 Knight of the Holy Order of Saint John of Jerusalem 5.7 The Duke’s campaign for Medrano’s advancement 5.8 Testimony of Iñigo de Mendoza, Ambassador to Venice 5.9 Dismissal and Appointment as Secretary of the Princes of Savoy 5.10 Appointment as Secretary of State and War for the Princes of Savoy 6 Pension Toggle Pension subsection 6.1 Intervention by the 1st Duke of Lerma 6.2 Services to Infanta Catalina Micaela of Spain 7 Service to the Princes of Savoy 8 Confirmation of the Privileges of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem 9 Ecclesiastical patronage Toggle Ecclesiastical patronage subsection 9.1 Convent of San Juan de Acre 9.2 Appointment as Patron 10 Translating statutes for the Order of Saint John 11 Divisa of Valdeosera and Regajal Toggle Divisa of Valdeosera and Regajal subsection 11.1 Valdosera 11.2 Regajal 12 Appointment as Chief Magistrate of Valdeosera (1600) Toggle Appointment as Chief Magistrate of Valdeosera (1600) subsection 12.1 Attendees 12.2 Formal acceptance of office (Madrid, May 20, 1600) 13 Solar de Valdeosera Toggle Solar de Valdeosera subsection 13.1 Valdeosera Archive 13.2 Origin of the Lordship of Valdeosera 13.3 Estate of Valdeosera 14 Republica Mista (1602) Toggle Republica Mista (1602) subsection 14.1 Summary of the Mixed Republic 14.2 Dedication 14.3 Content 14.4 Other works written by Medrano 15 Death and burial 16 Siblings Toggle Siblings subsection 16.1 Lazaro Fernández de Medrano 16.2 Francisco Fernández de Medrano 16.3 Testimony of Pedro Fernández Navarrete 16.4 Diego de Medrano 17 References Toggle the table of contents Tomás Fernández de Medrano Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 16th-century Spanish nobleman and author In this Basque name , the surname is Medrano .

The Most Reverend Master and Patron Tomás Fernández de Medrano Divisero, Mayor and Lord of Valdeosera Coat of arms of Lord Tomás Fernández de Medrano (middle shield) on top of the coat of arms of Valdeosera (1602) Secretary of Prince Giovanni Andrea Doria , Marques de Torilla In office 1579–1581 In the service of Enrique de Guzmán, 2nd Count of Olivares In office 1582–1590 Secretary of State and War for Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy In office 1 August 1591 – September 1598 Secretary of State and War for the Princes of Savoy In office 1598–1606 Personal details Born 16th century Entrena, La Rioja Died 1616 Monastery of San Juan de Acre in Salinas de Añana Spouse Isabel Ibañez de Sandoval Relations Diego de Medrano , Francisco Fernández de Medrano, Lázaro Fernández de Medrano (brothers) Children Juan Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval , Ana Maria Fernandez de Medrano y Sandoval Occupation Crown official , ecclesiastical patron Profession Diplomat , Military Administrator , Government official Military service Allegiance Spanish Empire Branch/service Order of Saint John Rank Knight of the Order of Saint John (without vows) Unit Infantry Genoese navy Battles/wars French Wars of Religion Tomás Fernández de Medrano (d. 1616) was a Spanish nobleman, lord and divisero of Valdeosera and Regajal, author , theologian , and philosopher from Entrena , who served as a prominent adviser , statesman, diplomat , and courtier to Philip II and Philip III of Spain . He also served as a counselor and Secretary of State and War for Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy , and Princess Catherine Micaela of Spain .

[ 1 ] Later, he served in the same capacity for the Princes of Savoy. As lord and divisero of Valdeosera, Medrano was appointed Mayor and Chief Magistrate and of Valdeosera in San Román de Cameros . He was also a Knight of the Sovereign Order of Saint John of Jerusalem , manager for the Grand Prior of Castilla San Juan, and The Most Reverend Master and Patron of the convent of Saint John of Acre in Salinas de Añana . In addition to his other roles, Medrano was the Secretary of the Holy Chapters and Assemblies of Castile . He also served for eight years under Enrique de Guzmán, 2nd Count of Olivares , and as secretary to Prince Giovanni Andrea Doria , from 1579 to 1581. In 1605, he translated and printed a brief from Pope Paul V in Latin and Spanish for King Philip III of Spain and the Order of Saint John.

[ 2 ] He became a key figure in the political affairs of the Duchy of Savoy and the Spanish monarchy. Medrano's writings encompass political theory , moral philosophy , theology , jurisprudence , economics , and governance , uniting classical civic virtue with precepts of law and statecraft to articulate a vision of royal authority and shared civic responsibilities bound by both divine and natural law . He is best known for his treatise República Mista , published at the royal press in 1602 by Juan Flamenco in Madrid and dedicated to the Francisco de Sandoval y Rojas, 1st Duke of Lerma , first valido of Philip III. Although only the first part was printed, it defined early 17th-century ideas of royal authority, with Fray Juan de Salazar's 1617 work adopting Medrano's treatise and Doctrine to present the Spanish monarchy as guided by virtue and reason yet bound by divine and natural law. As an adviser to Philip II and III, Medrano applied these principles in practical statecraft through the Doctrine of Medrar , grounding his vision in Catholic theology and the Spanish monarchical tradition rather than the secular humanism of some Italian contemporaries.

[ 3 ] Early life and family background [ edit ] Tomás Fernández de Medrano, son of Juan Fernández de Medrano, was born in Entrena, La Rioja .

[ 4 ] His father Juan Fernández de Medrano is recorded in a document dated October 20, 1589, stating: Tomás Fernández de Medrano, Secretary to the Duke of Savoy, and his brothers, sons of Juan Fernández de Medrano, with the Velillas of Entrena.

[ 4 ] Medrano, a nobleman from the House of Medrano , traces his lineage to the esteemed lordship and estate of Valdeosera in La Rioja, linked to the Battle of Clavijo , as well as to Almarza de Cameros , a lordship governed by the descendants of Diego López de Medrano y Zúñiga . The Medrano family’s presence in La Rioja dates back to the 11th century . The presence of a castle and lion on the coat of arms of the municipality of Medrano, La Rioja —alongside the goshawk on the Medrano family crest—indicates an ancient and noble lineage. Traditionally, such symbols were associated with individuals of royal descent.

[ 5 ] Philip II of Spain banqueting with family and courtiers, by Alonso Sánchez Coello Tomás Fernández de Medrano resided at the royal court of Spain. A distinguished figure of the Spanish nobility , Tomás belonged to one of the most prominent families of jurists serving the Spanish monarchy throughout the 17th and 18th centuries.

[ 6 ] Status and influence became increasingly tied to proximity to the sovereign, court patronage, and administrative roles, rather than independent territorial rule.

[ 7 ] Education [ edit ] In his República Mista (1602), Medrano states that he studied mathematics under Christoph Clavius , the Jesuit mathematician and architect of the Gregorian calendar reform. He invokes Clavius specifically when criticizing the errors of judicial astrology , citing his mathematical training to distinguish legitimate science from superstition .

[ 3 ] Coat of arms [ edit ] Coat of Arms of Medrano (smaller shield) on top of the coat of arms of Valdeosera (larger shield) as seen in Tomás Fernández de Medrano's República Mista (1602). The Latin script reads: " Protection and Honor. We bless those who have endured.

" [ 3 ] The coat of arms of Tomás Fernández de Medrano, Lord of Valdeosera, combines the grand shield of Valdeosera (outer shield) with the heraldic arms of the House of Medrano (inner shield). The escutcheon of Medrano is described as follows: a shield divided vertically down the middle. The first quarter features a gules field with an argent hollow cross fleury . The second quarter has an argent field with a sable bend running diagonally from corner to corner, bordered in gules and adorned with eight argent crosses of St. Andrew .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Additionally, the badge of Valdeosera features the Latin script " Let us praise glorious men and our ancestors in their generations ." [ 11 ] Marriage and offspring [ edit ] Tomás Fernández de Medrano was married to Isabel Ibáñez de Sandoval, a relative of Francisco de Sandoval y Rojas, 1st Duke of Lerma . Isabel was the daughter of María, a lady-in-waiting to Princess Catalina Micaela of Spain , wife of Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy. As Secretary of State and War to the Duke and Princess, Medrano's close proximity to the Savoyard court enabled him to see Isabel frequently, eventually leading to their marriage.

[ 4 ] The 1st Duke of Lerma requested from the King to grant a financial amount to Isabel Ibáñez de Sandoval, who became a widow before her first marriage was consummated, so that she can remarry.

[ 12 ] On 8 December 1594, the Duke of Lerma already said that Tomás Fernández de Medrano was arranged to marry Isabel de Sandoval from the chamber of the Infanta, his wife.

[ 2 ] Tomás Fernández de Medrano and Isabel Ibáñez de Sandoval married in 1595.

[ 4 ] On 24 April 1596 the Duke of Savoy confirmed this: ' Tomás Fernández de Medrano married Doña Isabel de Sandoval .' [ 13 ] Isabel de Sandoval's sister Magdalena de Sandoval was the governess of the children of Cristóbal Gómez de Sandoval, 1st Duke of Uceda , first-born son of Francisco de Sandoval, 1st Duke of Lerma.

[ 2 ] Medrano's wife Isabel de Sandoval was also related to Gaspar Alfonso Pérez de Guzmán y Sandoval , 9th Duke of Medina Sidonia, his mother Juana de Sandoval was a daughter of the 1st Duke of Lerma, and his sister Luisa de Guzmán y Sandoval married to the newly proclaimed king John IV of Portugal .

Children [ edit ] Coat of arms of the House of Medrano Tomas Fernandez de Medrano and Isabel de Sandoval had two children: Juan Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval (b. 1595), first born son, heir and friar at San Prudencio de Monte Laturce.

Ana María Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval (b. 1608), Lady-in-waiting to Queen Isabel de Borbón . Ana Maria married Rodrigo Martínez de Fresneda, knight of the Order of Montesa .

[ 14 ] Fray Juan declared his sister, Ana María Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval, as universal heir.

Ana María Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval [ edit ] When his daughter, Ana María Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval, a Lady-in-waiting for Queen Elisabeth of France, Queen of Spain , married the knight Don Rodrigo Martínez de Fresneda, Juan de Urbina, one of the witnesses involved in the proceedings, wrote: [They] asked if he knew the parents of Doña Ana Maria de Medrano. He replied that he met Tomás Fernández de Medrano while serving the Duke of Savoy, wearing the habit of Saint John of Jerusalem, despite being married, out of devotion (...) indicating that if he were not of clean and noble birth, he could not have her. He also mentioned that Doña Isabel Ibáñez de Sandoval was treated as a debt by the Duke of Lerma, who recommended her to the Duke of Savoy to grant her a favor, as she was part of the Duchess's chamber.

[ 2 ] Juan Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval [ edit ] His son Juan Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval's will is preserved in the notarial protocols of the Provincial Historical Archive of La Rioja.

[ 15 ] Consequently, the monastery where Fray Juan Fernandez de Medrano had entered was far from being just another monastery. He was a novice at the monastery of San Prudencio de Monte Laturce of the Order of St. Bernard of Cistercians , in the diocese of Calahorra .

[ 2 ] Early career [ edit ] In his early career, Medrano served in Genoa , Rome , and wherever his services were required. A letter from 1607, in the name of Tomás Fernández de Medrano, describes at least 30 years of service to the Spanish Monarchy: His Majesty and his ministers are well aware of the services he has rendered, by sea and land, in peace and war, over the past thirty years. He has always been diligent and conscientious in his posts, and remains so.

[ 16 ] Secretary for Giovanni Andrea Doria, Marquis of Torrilla (1579-1581) [ edit ] Hospitaller galleys capturing an Ottoman vessel in the Malta Channel in 1652.

Medrano served on the galleys of Genoa for about two years (1579-1581) as a secretary to Marquis of Torilla Giovanni Andrea Doria , adoptive son of the great Genoese admiral Andrea Doria (his great-uncle).

[ 17 ] More specifically, in one of his memorials, Tomás, regarding his time on the galleys, says that: I spent some years at sea, near Prince Andrea Doria, with an armada, hunting and capturing enemy vessels.

[ 18 ] Corsair warfare was one of the usual tasks of the knights of Saint John , whose operations base in the Mediterranean was Malta . Their corsair campaigns were usually against Barbary pirates . The Barbary pirates frequently attacked Corsica , resulting in many Genoese towers being constructed. By policing the Mediterranean, they augmented the assumed responsibility of the traditional protectors of the Mediterranean, the naval city states of Venice and Genoa .

[ 4 ] In the service of the Lord Count of Olivares in Rome (1582-1590) [ edit ] Medrano formed a strong relationship with Enrique de Guzmán, 2nd Count of Olivares during the time he spent in Rome from 1582 to 1590.

[ 19 ] Enrique de Guzmán, 2nd Count of Olivares was the father of the most famous Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares , a favorite of Philip IV . The Count of Olivares had served as an ambassador to the Holy See between 1582 and 1591, and Tomás had served with him during that time, occupied serving the Count of Olivares in Rome for eight years (1582 to 1590) in the papers of that embassy .

[ 2 ] The relationship Medrano maintained with the father of the Count-Duke is deduced from the fact that he was the only one who responded positively to Carlos Manuel's demands, granting Medrano an allocation of 2,000 escudos .

[ 20 ] Secretary of State and War for the Dukes of Savoy (1591–1598) [ edit ] Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy , portrait by Jan Kraeck The most important position Medrano held was that of Secretary of State and War for the Dukes of Savoy. His appointment corresponds to 1 August 1591, a few years after the marriage of Princess Catalina Micaela of Spain and the Duke of Savoy. A confirmation of the appointment made on 1 May 1594, at the request of the secretary himself, "because the title he held as secretary had been lost," is still preserved.

[ 2 ] Appointment as Secretary of State and War [ edit ] In a formal letter dated 1 May 1594, Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, praised Medrano as a man of "virtue, prudence, fidelity, secrecy, and skill" in matters of state.

[ 21 ] The Duke emphasized that individuals entrusted with critical diplomatic and military responsibilities must be selected not only for their competence but also for their loyalty and discretion.

[ 21 ] He stated that Medrano had proven himself in various assignments, including delicate missions near the Duke's person and in service to the King of Spain. Acknowledging Medrano's long-standing service, the Duke reaffirmed his appointment as Secretary of State and War for Spanish affairs entrusted to Savoy, granting him the full honors, privileges, and benefits associated with the position.

[ 21 ] The Duke of Savoy commanded his council of the household, and in particular to the majordomo in service, that without any objection, the ordinary ration be given to Tomás Fernández de Medrano from the beginning of the year, for him and two servants, and to ensure that there are no interruptions. He ordered General Gromis to assign the ration immediately. In addition, the Duke of Savoy paid fifty gold Spanish escudo per month for his maintenance near the Duke's person, paid in the Spanish Infantry, effective from 1 August 1591.

[ 22 ] Background [ edit ] A marble bust of Philip II of Spain by Pompeo Leoni , Metropolitan Museum of Art On 1 August 1591 Medrano assumed the significant role of serving as an intermediary between King Philip II of Spain and Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, stationed in Turin . This role was not merely symbolic; Medrano's presence in Turin held vital importance for the relationship between the Monarch of Spain and Savoy, with Spain's protection crucial for the survival of the Duchy. Given the complexities of the situation, Medrano successfully gained the trust of the Dukes, making Charles Emmanuel a key player in Spain's international strategy.

[ 2 ] Journey from Provence to Madrid [ edit ] Medrano was entrusted with a dangerous mission to deal with the Duke of Savoy's political-military affairs in Madrid shortly after his appointment on 1 August 1591, with King Philip II of Spain himself. In a letter to King Philip II, the Duke of Savoy emphasized the urgency of the situation in Provence, stating that the "great and extreme necessity" had compelled him to send Medrano, his secretary of state and war, to court.

[ 2 ] The Duke of Savoy described Medrano as "a person through whose hands everything has passed and who infinitely desires the service of Your Majesty," and instructed that "whatever he proposes... it will be my pleasure for you to give him the same credit as you would to my own person," urging a swift resolution.

[ 2 ] Medrano and King Philip II of Spain [ edit ] In 1591, while en route to discuss matters of state and war on behalf of the Duke of Savoy with Philip II of Spain, Tomás Fernández de Medrano was captured by French forces near Marseille . His capture occurred in 1592, as Medrano was returning to Spain "with an embassy concerning such grave matters as Your Majesty knows," and was seized "in great danger" by the enemy.

[ 2 ] He eventually returned to the royal court in Madrid by early 1592.

[ 23 ] Medrano was secretary to the Duke and his wife, the Infanta Catherine Micaela , Duchess of Savoy, daughter of the King of Spain himself, Philip II . She was born of his marriage to Isabella of Valois , the third of his four wives.

[ 24 ] According to the biographers of the " Prudent King ", Isabella and Catherine Micaela were the apple of the sovereign's eye. The best confirmation of the strong bonds of affection that united the king and his daughters are the letters they wrote to each other over the years, recently edited by Fernando Bouza. In them, Tomás Fernandez de Medrano is quoted on 31 January 1592 by King Philip II : I was very pleased with the news of your health and that of my grandchildren, which you conveyed in your letters from the end of last month and the fifth and sixth of this one. And you are quite right in saying that the Duke takes too many risks too often. Although I have already advised him many times, I will now do so again through Medrano, whom I have sent there, and whose decision to visit you I have highly approved.

[ 25 ] On 12 February 1592, Philip II informed the Duke of Savoy that he had received Tomás Fernández de Medrano, [ 4 ] where he "treated important matters for His Royal Service." [ 23 ] Satisfied with Medrano's service, Philip II of Spain ordered a payment of 1,000 ducats to cover his travel expenses upon his return.

[ 4 ] French Wars of Religion [ edit ] He took part in the Duke of Savoy’s war against France in the final decade of the sixteenth century, known as the French Wars of Religion , serving in the noble squadron near the Duke, both on foot and horseback , and was entrusted with commanding artillery in dangerous engagements.

[ 4 ] Invasion of Monseñor Ladighiera [ edit ] The Duchy of Savoy and the Marquisate of Saluzzo in 1494 In early 1592, Monseñor Ladighiera (Lesdiguières in French), a French general, initiated the invasion of Savoy, marking a significant episode in the Spanish-French conflict of the late 16th century. The conflict unfolded as Philip II supported the Catholic House of Guise against the Huguenots , led by the future Henry IV of France. There were even speculations about Isabella Clara Eugenia, Philip's other daughter, asserting her rights to the French throne as the eldest daughter of Princess Elizabeth of Valois, Philip's third wife.

Medrano and the Duke of Savoy, Charles Emmanuel I, played pivotal roles in this conflict, with Ladighiera emerging as a crucial figure on the French side. Medrano recalls (as he personally attests to this) the efforts of the Duke of Savoy and Infanta Catalina of Savoy in preventing the spread of protestantism and similar sects from entering Italy and their success in recovering the Marquisate of Saluzzo and re-establishing the Catholic faith in Tonon and its surrounding regions, showcasing the power of true religious and Catholic leadership in restoring unity and adherence to the Apostolic See .

[ 26 ] During the French Wars of Religion, his brother Francisco Fernández de Medrano commanded a Spanish garrison from Flanders , under Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma , stationed in Paris. Ladighiera demonstrated his military prowess by inflicting a significant defeat on the Duke's troops in Garzigliana . Francisco de Medrano had distinguished himself, having been severely wounded, [ 27 ] and that for all this and for his relationship with his brother Tomás, the Duke was trying to achieve his progress in a very particular way: by requesting from the king the appointment of the alcaidía of Los Arcos .

[ 28 ] It appears that his brother did not secure the desired position. Nonetheless, this setback did not hinder him from attaining a favorable standing. In 1598, his brother was entrusted with the responsibility of assembling a company of 250 infantrymen in Burgos and its environs. Additionally, his brother Francisco received an appointment as a councilor of the state of hijosdalgo in the city of Logroño .

[ 29 ] Knight of the Holy Order of Saint John of Jerusalem [ edit ] Flag of the Order of St. John Medrano was affiliated with the Order of St. John of Jerusalem , not as a vowed knight—since his married status precluded formal vows—but as a dedicated lay knight. In 1593, with the approval and pleasure of Pope Clement VIII , the habit of Saint John was granted to him manu propria —"from his own hand"—without vows, in recognition of longstanding claims associated with the House of Medrano . This distinction was formally documented in papal bulls, issued in Rome with hanging lead seals, which King Philip II of Spain had ordered to be dispatched.

[ 2 ] In a letter dated 12 October 1593, the Duke of Savoy recounted that his secretary, Tomás Fernández de Medrano, had been sent from Provence to the Spanish court to negotiate urgent matters. During the journey from Barcelona to Madrid, Medrano was ambushed by thieves who stole, among other valuables, the sealed papal bulls—documents conferring the habit of St. John without the obligation of vows, issued by papal grace in recognition of his family's ancestral rights.

[ 2 ] Letters indicate Tomás Fernández de Medrano's maritime experience was the cause, not the consequence, of obtaining the habit. In the Memorial of 1607, Medrano described himself as having been: forged in encounters and skirmishes, battles and clashes, by the obligations of his habit.

[ 2 ] The Duke’s campaign for Medrano’s advancement [ edit ] The Duke strategically appealed to individuals positioned at the intersection of political, military, and ecclesiastical power—royal advisors, influential generals and ambassadors, and even the Pope himself—all capable of advancing Medrano’s cause across the various spheres of influence that governed courtly advancement in late 16th-century Spain. Among the individuals he solicited support from included Juan de Idiaquez, Cristobal de Moura (8 December 1594), or the Count of Chinchon (29 September 1596), high-ranking clergymen such as Cardinal Albert VII, Archduke of Austria (20 October 1595) or Cardinal Aldobrandino (19 September 1596), generals such as Alonso de Idiaquez (October 1595), or ambassadors such as Giuseppe de Acuna (Turin, 24 April 1596) or the Duke of Sessa (Rome, 19 September 1596). He would also write to the sources of all grace: King Philip II (16 October 1596), Prince Philip (16 October 1596), and His Holiness Clement VIII (4 November 1595).

[ 2 ] Testimony of Iñigo de Mendoza, Ambassador to Venice [ edit ] On August 23, 1597, Íñigo de Mendoza, Ambassador to Venice , wrote to Philip II of Spain, commending Tomás Fernández de Medrano: I will do very little in serving the Lady Infanta doña Catalina by testifying before Your Majesty about the truth of what I know. Tomás Fernández de Medrano, secretary of the Duke of Savoy, passed through Italy on his way back from Spain, where he was dealing with the Duke's affairs, when Your Majesty ordered the Marquess of Cerralvo to embark. And since that departure was delayed for more than three months (at first waiting for good weather and later due to the death of the Marquess), I had the opportunity to talk to Tomás Fernández and to communicate to him during all that time that I waited for passage to France for the mission that Your Majesty sent me on. And truly, sir, I recognized in him the soul of a servant who was most passionate and devoted to Your Majesty's service, and on the other hand, a great kindness, and great compassion for customs. And as for having seen and read, he possessed an enviable wealth of knowledge. And in matters of the present, he had a very pleasant understanding, in addition to his skill with the pen, which Your Majesty knows. Since then, during the time I have been in Italy (which is approaching two years), I have been even more confirmed in my initial opinion because I have been in contact and communicated with him, and I see with my own eyes what a great servant he is of Your Majesty and what he deserves for it, and the abilities he has to serve in anything that is entrusted to him. And because it seems to me that by serving the Lady Infanta, I am also serving Your Majesty in bearing witness to this, I dare to do so for any future occasions that may arise. - Íñigo de Mendoza, 23 of August, 1597.

[ 30 ] Dismissal and Appointment as Secretary of the Princes of Savoy [ edit ] Signature du traité de paix de Vervins by Gillot Saint-Evre (1837) A sequence of events would profoundly alter the course of Don Tomás Fernandez de Medrano's life. The initial incident involved the demise of the Infanta Catalina Micaela , Duchess of Savoy, who, on 6 November 1597, gave birth and passed away at the age of 30. The second significant event was the signing of the Peace of Vervins with France on 2 May 1598, marking the conclusion of years of hostilities. The third and final event was the passing of King Philip II of Spain , another momentous death. Faced with these challenges, Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, gradually asserted independence from Spanish influence.

[ 2 ] An initial step in this direction involved eliminating the surveillance and guardianship that the Spanish monarch could exercise through Tomás Fernandez de Medrano. Despite receiving kind words and being appointed as secretary to the infant sons of the Duke of Savoy, Tomás Fernández de Medrano faced dismissal.

[ 2 ] Appointment as Secretary of State and War for the Princes of Savoy [ edit ] Plans for a new position were already underway, as evidenced by two letters dated 28 March 1598 from the Duke of Savoy to the King of Spain, and the Marquess of Denia (future Duke of Lerma).

[ 2 ] His assumed role as Secretary of State and War of the Princes of Savoy likely commenced in 1603, as confirmed by Prince Manuel Filiberto. In a letter to the Duke of Lerma on 8 April 1606, the prince of Savoy acknowledged that Tomás Fernández de Medrano, the Duke's secretary, displayed remarkable patience, attributing it to his compliance with the Duke's will and his numerous talents and merits accumulated over the years.

[ 31 ] On April 8, 1606, Prince Manuel Filiberto of Savoy made efforts to honor Tomás and Isabel: We assure you that the Duke, my lord and father, would greatly appreciate seeing him honored, not only for the affection and respect we all owe and feel for Doña Isabel de Sandoval, his wife, and for him, but also because we are certain that any favor bestowed upon him would reflect his loyalty and dedication to all matters of Your Excellency’s service.

[ 32 ] Pension [ edit ] During Medrano's tenure as Secretary of State and War for the Duke of Savoy, he gained favor for his political acumen, together with his wife Isabel Ibanez de Sandoval, a relative of the Duke of Lerma . Together, they diligently sought new favors, and on 4 November 1595, the Duke petitioned for a pension from Pope Clement VIII for Medrano, recognizing his exemplary qualities and services to the King and Infanta. The Duke of Savoy hoped that the Pope would grant this favor to allow Tomás to enjoy it alongside the habit he had received from the Order of Saint John : For the many good qualities that I recognized in Tomas Fernandez de Medrano, my Secretary of State and War, I brought him into my service on the occasions in Provence. And because in all the opportunities that have arisen in the past five years, in the service of the King my lord, of the Infanta my lady, and of mine, he has always given great satisfaction, we both greatly desire his advancement. And that Your Holiness, in consideration of this and of the long time he spent in Rome with the papers and other things of the Count of Olivares, favorably seen by Your Beatitude, may be pleased to grant him some pension so that he may enjoy it with the habit he has of the Order of Saint John, in accordance with what Monsignor Nuncio (with whom he has dealt) writes to Your Holiness, to whom I humbly beg to grant me this grace and favor, as it is one of the things that I can ask Your Beatitude with the greatest sincerity and affection.

[ 33 ] However, the Duke's request for a pension was not granted. On 9 October 1598 Tomás Fernandez de Medrano himself formalized the request to return to Spain.

Duke of Savoy gave him the desired permission to make this journey, and the money to do so. With his wife and children, he departed for Spain .

[ 34 ] Intervention by the 1st Duke of Lerma [ edit ] Equestrian portrait of Francisco de Sandoval y Rojas, 1st Duke of Lerma .

In Spain, Tomás Fernández de Medrano came under the protection of Francisco de Sandoval y Rojas, 1st Duke of Lerma —the most powerful figure at the royal court—and obtained his pension through the Duke’s intervention. The patronage of the favorite , Francisco de Sandoval y Rojas, 1st Duke of Lerma, naturally followed the marriage of Tomás Fernández de Medrano to Isabel de Sandoval, Lerma's relative. The Duke of Savoy, in a letter dated 24 August 1599, informed the Duke and Marquess of Denia of his efforts for the well-being of Isabel de Sandoval, asking them to show great favor to her and her husband, Medrano. In response to this request and considering past services, the Marquess of Denia made efforts with Philip III to grant Tomás Fernández de Medrano an income of four hundred ducats in Milan on 10 August 1607.

[ 2 ] Although the confirmation from the King of Spain would come a year later in a letter to the Constable of Castile, Philip III granted a pension of four hundred escudos per year in that state to Tomás Fernández de Medrano, Secretary of State and War for the Duke of Savoy and the Infanta Catalina, his siblings, on 26 July 1608.

[ 35 ] Services to Infanta Catalina Micaela of Spain [ edit ] The couple's revenue saw a further increase through the supplementary pension granted to Isabel de Sandoval in recognition of her services to Infanta Catalina and a revision of the one conferred upon Medrano. According to a decree dated 11 December 1601, a sum of 274,200 maravedis annually was allocated to Medrano, the former secretary of His Highness, and Isabel de Sandoval, his wife.

[ 36 ] This provision remained in effect until an equivalent one was to be granted. Notably, an escudo was valued at 350 maravedis , making the initial pension of 400 escudos amount to 140,000 maravedís—nearly half of the recognition outlined in the 1601 decree. The precise distribution of the total sum was detailed as follows: "Fifty gold escudos per month for him at a rate of 13 florins and three grains, and for his wife, 39 thousand maravedis , summing up to a total of 274,200 maravedis ." [ 37 ] Service to the Princes of Savoy [ edit ] Map of the lands belonging to the grand priory of Castilla San Juan published in 1769.

[ 38 ] The princes Philip Emmanuel , Victor Amadeus , and Emmanuel Philibert had been sent on a formative trip to the Spanish court in 1603.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] It was very likely that Medrano took care of their affairs from that date forward. The latter two remained there in 1606. The first had died a year earlier, and both were about to leave Madrid, so they were trying to secure the position of their dependents, including Don Tomás Fernández de Medrano.

Emmanuel Philibert , held the title of Grand Prior and Grand Admiral of Castile in the Order of St. John , to which Don Tomás Fernandez de Medrano belonged. For this reason, in view of the prospect of returning to Turin , the prince made the decision to appoint Tomás Fernández de Medrano, his secretary and knight of his habit (in his departure for Italy) as Manager of the Grand Prior of Castilla San Juan , occupied in this court in all matters of the Religion that are the princes responsibility and Medrano's duty.

[ 41 ] Confirmation of the Privileges of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem [ edit ] In 1605, a brief from Pope Paul V on the privileges of the Order of St. John entitled Brief of Our Most Holy Father Pope Paul V in stated: by Tomás Fernández de Medrano at his own expense, secretary to the Serene Princes of Savoy and the Holy Chapters and Assemblies of Castile on behalf of his King and knights of the Order of Saint John . It is dedicated to the Duke of Lerma, as protector of all religions and in particular, the Order of Saint John.

[ 42 ] Ecclesiastical patronage [ edit ] San Juan de Acre in the town of Salinas de Añana The Most Reverend Tomás Fernández de Medrano was the patron of the Monastery of San Juan de Acre (Saint John of Acre) in the village of Salinas de Añana . Ecclesiastical patronage , notably unknown to historiography , was one of the greatest demonstrations of supremacy and distinction that the nobility of the time could exercise. The appropriation of patronage afterwards was not as common.

María Ramírez de Medrano , Lady of Fuenmayor (another lordship linked to the Battle of Clavijo), founded the hospital, commandery, and convent of San Juan de Acre in Navarrete in 1185. She is an example of early ecclesiastical patronage and land donations by nobility within the Sovereign Order of Saint John in the early 12th century.

[ 2 ] Convent of San Juan de Acre [ edit ] View over Valle Salado ("Salty Valley") at Salinas de Añana One of the most significant indicators of nobility and prestige at the time was the privilege of holding a patronage. The Fernández de Medrano family controlled the Monastery of San Juan de Acre, a convent associated with the female branch of the Order of St. John, located in Salinas de Añana, within the Diocese of Burgos. The monastery—still standing today—was situated outside the town walls, in a strategic location due to its proximity to the valuable salt pans, among the most important in Castile. These salt pans were incorporated into the Crown in 1564, while still preserving the property rights of prior owners, including the convent.

[ 2 ] Appointment as Patron [ edit ] On 22 June 1608, the only four nuns who lived in the oratory, Inés Hurtado de Corcuera y Mendoza, prioress, Manuela Hurtado de Corcuera y Mendoza, María de Xérica and María de Corcuera, met to make a very important decision for their future: Village of Salinas de Añana, La Rioja Because their ancestors and relatives, and those of Don Tomás Fernández de Medrano, a knight of the Order of Saint John, lord of the town and estate of Valdeosera, and secretary of the Serene Prince Grand Prior, by His Majesty's command, made and founded this said convent, where the said secretary and his ancestors are buried in the side chapel of the main chapel and where they have their coat of arms... considering the great good that the said secretary has done to the said convent, all four said prioress and nuns, together and unanimously in one voice, being as they are in their chapter and meeting, which they have held for the said purpose, named and appointed as patron of this said convent and church and house of the lord Saint John of Acre, with everything annexed and belonging to it in the temporal sense, to the said lords Don Tomás Fernández de Medrano and Doña Isabel de Sandoval, his wife, and to their heirs and successors, succeeding each other...

[ 43 ] The convent of San Juan de Acre was made and founded by Medrano's ancestors and therefore received patronage from Tomás Fernandez de Medrano and his wife, who had already established their family pantheon in the side chapel of the main chapel, where they have their coat of arms. In immediate recompense for their commitment, the couple, in appreciation, pledged and bestowed upon the prioresses, nuns, and the convent, an annual income of fifty ducats for two lifetimes and a one-time contribution of a thousand ducats from their personal estate.

[ 44 ] Translating statutes for the Order of Saint John [ edit ] Coat of arms of King Philip III of Spain King Philip III personally wrote to Grand Master Fray Aloisio de Vignancourt , commending Tomás' service. In his letter, Philip III extols Medrano as a man of "great prudence and goodness," noting his loyal service "in papers and other things, with all satisfaction and with much integrity." [ 23 ] He recalls Medrano’s diplomatic mission from France to negotiate with Philip II, where he "treated important matters for His Royal Service," and praises his role as Secretary of State and War to the Duke of Savoy and Infanta Catalina, whom the king calls "my siblings." [ 23 ] The king emphasizes Medrano’s "great zeal in matters of religion," and especially values his translation of the Order’s statutes into Castilian, calling it "of benefit and great utility to the knights and religious of your order." Declaring him "our very dear and beloved friend," Philip III urges the Grand Master to support Medrano and his family’s claims with "all the grace and favor that may be possible," assuring him that to do so would bring the king "particular pleasure and satisfaction." [ 23 ] Following this letter, The Provincial Chapter of the Order of St. John in Castile , under the leadership of Fray Aloisio de Vignancourt, submitted a request for Juan Fernández de Medrano, his son, to be awarded a half-cross (media Cruz), which would grant him a pension and additional distinctions.

[ 4 ] Divisa of Valdeosera and Regajal [ edit ] Valdosera [ edit ] In 1589, Tomás was officially recognized as a divisero (hereditary noble member of the Solar), along with his brothers, after proving their lineage as descendants of the original lords of Valdeosera. During his tenure, Tomás ensured the Fernández de Medrano family maintained a significant presence in the governance of the Solar. His influence extended to reinforcing the hereditary governance structure, protecting the Solar's traditions, and preserving its historical identity. The lordship of Valdeosera remains a symbol of his family’s noble heritage, linking them to Spain’s medieval history and the religious traditions of the Reconquista .

[ 4 ] Regajal [ edit ] On October 20, 1589, Tomás Fernández de Medrano formally took possession of the Divisa Regajal within the Solar de Valdeosera . Several years later, on June 13, 1596, his brother Francisco Fernández de Medrano, who was then serving as Chief Magistrate (Alcalde Mayor) of the Solar, officially transferred and re-registered this title. Francisco was the son of Juan Fernández de Medrano and brother to Tomás, Jerónimo, and Juan Fernández de Medrano: Thomás Fernández de Medrano, Secretary to the Most Serene Duke of Savoy, along with Ensign Jerónimo Fernández de Medrano and Juan Fernández, his brothers, are seated in the Divisa of Regajal as sons of Juan Fernández de Medrano and having proven themselves as rightful lords descended from the said Solar. They succeed in the two celemines of the Fernández and the Villillas. Done in Baldosera on the thirteenth of June, 1596, during the term of Chief Magistrate Captain Francisco Fernández de Medrano, their brother. And he signed it himself, Francisco Fernández de Medrano .

[ 4 ] Appointment as Chief Magistrate of Valdeosera (1600) [ edit ] Coat of arms of the Lordship of the Valdeosera and Tejada Estate During a general assembly on May 1, 1600, Medrano was formally appointed Chief Magistrate (Alcalde Mayor) and Lord of the Solar de Valdeosera. According to the divisas of Valdeosera, he was "one of the most qualified and ancient lords and gentlemen of this lordship and currencies that resides in the court of His Majesty and in his Royal service," appointed so that he "defends, guards and protects the said lordship and currencies." [ 45 ] The official record, which spans six pages, contains the following key excerpt: In the town and Solar of Valdeosera, on the first day of May of this present year of sixteen hundred, gathered together at the sound of the bell, inside the church of the said town of Valdeosera… for the purpose of electing the Chief Magistrate of the said Solar and Lordship… they elected and appointed as Chief Magistrate of the said town and Solar of Valdeosera and its jurisdiction and Lordship, Tomás Fernández de Medrano, Secretary of State and War, who is absent at the Court of His Majesty, and in his place, a lieutenant shall serve...

[ 45 ] Attendees [ edit ] Several notable individuals were present at the assembly, including: Francisco Fernández de Medrano, Tomás’ brother, a Captain of Infantry, who was also appointed Deputy for Logroño.

Diego Ximénez de Tejada, from Funes, Kingdom of Navarre, father of Fra' Don Francisco Ximénez de Tejada y Eslava , later Grand Master of the Order of St. John (1703–1775).

Pedro Pinillos, a resident of Ajamil.

Juan Pinillos, from Rabanera.

Formal acceptance of office (Madrid, May 20, 1600) [ edit ] On May 20, 1600, Tomás Fernández de Medrano formally accepted the position of Chief Magistrate in Madrid. The document was notarized by Gaspar de Aranda, a Royal Public Notary, residing in the Court of His Majesty and originally from the town of Lerma. The official document, summarized, states: In the town of Madrid, on the twentieth day of May of the year sixteen hundred, before me, the undersigned notary, appeared the noble lord Tomás Fernández de Medrano, Secretary of State and War to the Most Serene Duke of Savoy, residing in this Court. He declared that he accepted the office of Chief Magistrate of the said Lordship, Town, and Solar of Valdeosera, as it had been conferred upon him by the said noble knights, lords diviseros of the said Lordship for this present year. And he swore to God, Our Lord, and to the Blessed Virgin Mary, His Holy Mother, and upon the words of the Holy Four Evangelists, and by the sign of the cross, as follows.

Solar de Valdeosera [ edit ] Valdeosera, of the municipality of San Román de Cameros in La Rioja , Spain According to his son Fray Juan Fernandez de Medrano y Sandoval, whom belonged to the Monastery of San Prudencio de Monte Laturce in Clavijo , his full title was " Tomás Fernández de Medrano, of the habit of San Juan, lord, divisero and mayor of the knights hijosdalgo of the lordship, villa, solar and currencies of Valdeosera, counselor and secretary of State and War, of the Most Serene Highnesses of Savoy.

" [ 2 ] Valdeosera is a historic and prestigious noble estate and town, with origins tracing back to the 11th century. Valdeosera is located in the heart of Camero Viejo in San Román de Cameros . The legal foundation that historically connected and continues to connect the group of diviseros in Valdeosera is of Germanic origin. These family groups within the divisa operated in a manner similar to the sippe , a collective of blood relatives centered around a specific individual.

[ 46 ] Belonging to this ancient institution of collective nobility was a rarity in the 16th and 17th century.

[ 47 ] It played a significant role during the Rioja Reconquista and is considered one of the last surviving examples of the Castilian lordships of behetría —those governed by lineage or kin. The estate was officially recognized as a noble institution in the 15th century, first by Henry IV of Castile in 1460, and later by the Catholic Monarchs in 1481. Valdeosera remains one of the oldest noble corporations in Spain, consisting of prominent knights and families of noble Hidalgo blood, known for their right to bear and display arms.

[ 47 ] Valdeosera Archive [ edit ] " Archive of the Solar of Valdeosera " in San Román de Cameros Valdeosera's Archive is located in San Román de Cameros .

[ 48 ] The Lordship of the Villa and Solar of Valdeosera was still held by the Fernández de Medrano family, evident in a letter and book by the Chaplain and Priest, Diego Fernández de Medrano y Zenizeros .

[ 49 ] Diego was the Lord of the Villa and Solar of Valdeosera, de la Torre and of Sojuela , Knight of the Order of Santiago , owner of the House and Tower of La Vega and the Palace of Entrena , [ 49 ] His father had served as Commissioner of Spanish Infantry and Alcaide of the Castles of Villarejo de Salvanés and Fuentidueña (Guadalajara), which belong to the Order of Santiago. Specifically, Diego Fernández de Medrano y Zenizeros urged the Council of Orders to: Try to obtain a decree or order from His Majesty to order and command that no informant dare to remove original papers from the said archive [of Valdeosera] or from any other place where they may be .

[ 50 ] Origin of the Lordship of Valdeosera [ edit ] A work written in 1601 by the Licentiate Salinas entitled " Summary of the Memorable and holy battle of Clavijo, true origin and antiquity of the Lordship and lords of the town, land and currencies of Valdeosera ," [ 51 ] is dedicated to King Philip III of Spain by Medrano's son Friar Juan Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval .

The work by Salinas deals with the battle of Clavijo as the origin of the lordship of the estate of Valdeosera. The battle would have its origin in the refusal of Ramiro I of Asturias to continue paying tribute to the Moorish emirs, with special emphasis on the tribute of 100 virgins . For this reason, Ramiro's Christian troops, led by Sancho de Tejada, would go in search of the Muslims , with Abderramán II in command, but upon reaching Nájera and Albelda they would see themselves surrounded by a large Moorish army made up of troops from the peninsula and levies that would come from the area that currently corresponds to Morocco , with the Christians having to take refuge in the Clavijo castle in Monte Laturce. In the plot of Valdeosera, created according to tradition in the 9th century by King Ramiro, there were 13 "divisas", coinciding with the thirteen offspring of Sancho Fernández de Tejada.

[ 52 ] According to the Licentiate Salinas, Tomás Fernández de Medrano was a true and legitimate descendant of Sancho Fernández de Tejada, famous knight and general of King Ramiro I at the legendary battle of Clavijo .

[ 53 ] In the prologue of the Sumario , Licenciado Salinas writes: The neighborhood I have with the lordship and lords of Valdeosera and having seen the archives of their antiquities and closely touched the virtue and nobility of all in general and in particular of V. M. [Tomás Fernández de Medrano] has obliged me to draw a summary apart from the memorable and holy battle of Clavijo; because it is connected with the origin and antiquity of the Solar where they descend from and are lords of, which is one of the notable and worthy of celebration that there is in Spain. And being V. M. now the mayor of the knight sons of diviseros of him, and being in that court with my lady doña Isabel de Sandoval his wife, come from Savoy, it seemed to me that it should be dedicated to such a principal successor, true and legitimate descendant of the field master and captain general of King Ramiro the first of León, and who now represents his same person in dignity: because as the wise man says: The glory of children are their parents .

[ 53 ] Estate of Valdeosera [ edit ] By the 18th century, the estate of Valdeosera spanned almost 1000 hectares and was home to approximately 11.5 residents. Under the feudal system, the lords of Valdeosera held significant seigneurial rights, receiving rents in the form of 104.7 fanegas of wheat and rye, as well as 36 hens, which together were valued at 1,575 reales.

[ 54 ] Republica Mista (1602) [ edit ] The Mixed Republic (1602) by Tomas Fernandez de Medrano, lord of Valdeosera, dedicated to Francisco de Sandoval y Rojas, 1st Duke of Lerma [ 55 ] República Mista (The Mixed Republic) [ 26 ] is an important political treatise written by Medrano and published in Madrid by Juan Flamenco in 1602.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] Fray Juan de Salazar states that Don Juan Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval, from the house of the Lords of Valdeosera, is the one who assumes the paternity of this book, which appeared in Madrid in 1602 under the label of República Mista . However, he concludes by saying that from what the cover says, the work was written by his father, Tomás Fernández de Medrano.

[ 2 ] A letter in the name of Medrano from 1607 indicates the book he wrote on the Republic (addressed to the Duke of Lerma ), where he treated, among other things, how important it is for Kings and Princes to be religious in order to be more obedient to their subjects, was pleasing to his Majesty.

[ 61 ] Nicolás Antonio unequivocally attributes the authorship of The Mixed Republic to Tomás Fernández de Medrano.

[ 1 ] According to the author himself, The Mixed Republic represents "the first treatise of seven" that he had intended to write. This approach—publishing an initial installment to see its reception—was relatively common at the time. It often served as a preview of more extensive plans or claims, which, in many cases, remained incomplete.

[ 1 ] Summary of the Mixed Republic [ edit ] In the 1601 Royal Decree of King Philip III of Spain , Medrano writes first about the importance of kings and princes being religious in order to be more obedient to their subjects; the second, regarding the obedience owed to them by their subjects and the reverence with which they should speak of them and their ministers, councils, and magistrates; and the third, on the Ambassador's role among the Romans , where he discusses why it is important to reward the good and punish the bad.

[ 26 ] Dedication [ edit ] The Mixed Republic by Tomás Fernández de Medrano is dedicated to Francisco de Sandoval, 1st Duke of Lerma by his son Juan Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval . The Duke of Lerma was the favourite (valido) of Philip III and, as such, governed the destinies of the crown on behalf of the sovereign.

[ 2 ] Content [ edit ] The first volume of the Mixed Republic focuses on the constitutive role of the political order played by religion , obedience and justice and is integrated into the context of the anti- Machiavellian current to the extent that it tries to refute the Florentine's thesis that they attribute to religion a merely strategic role, in no case constitutive of the political order .

[ 62 ] Without naming Machiavelli, his work is a forceful response to his politics, in which he defends the new system of government imposed in the monarchy after the accession to the throne of Philip III: the valido. His father Tomás Fernández de Medrano had close ties to the Duke of Lerma, the first great private and initiator of the phenomenon.

[ 1 ] It includes a 16-page prologue on generalities, defining politics, and the formation of society, including family , municipality , province , and kingdom . In the prologue, Medrano discusses the three forms of good and just political regimes which make up a mixed republic: monarchy, aristocracy, and timocracy, and discusses their three opposites: tyranny, oligarchy, and democracy.

[ 26 ] Medrano's ideas about the mixed republic were influenced by earlier political philosophers such as Aristotle and Polybius, who also wrote about the benefits of combining different forms of government, which prove that the preservation of religion and authority is the foundation of good governance.

[ 26 ] Medrano accepts the theory that any type of republic that is not moderated by others soon degenerates into vice , and for republics to endure in straight government, they must have virtues and properties of the others united in them: For if Kings, Councils, and Magistrates on earth are the image of God , they should also strive to imitate Him in goodness, perfection, and justice, as our superiors imitate Him to the extent of their abilities, in order to induce true piety and virtue to those under their charge with their example (which is the most powerful thing). For just as the heart in the body of animals always remains the last to corrupt, because the last remnants of life remain in it, it seems appropriate that, having some illness entered to corrupt the people, the Prince and Magistrates remain pure and unharmed until the end.

[ 26 ] Other works written by Medrano [ edit ] Consoling prayer to Sermo Carlo Emanuel, Duke of Savoy , made by Tomás Fernández de Medrano, of the Messrs. of Valdeosera and Almarza de Cameros , Secretary of State and war of their highnesses and their council, Turin, Antonio de Bianqui, 1598.

Funeral prayer to the gifts of the most powerful Filipo Segundo: Invictissimo King of Spain and of the New World made by Tomás Fernández de Medrano, Secretary of State and War of the Sereneness and catholic Duke of Savoy, and of the serene princes, his sons, and of his council, Milano, Gratiadio Ferioli.

[ 1 ] Death and burial [ edit ] Tomás Fernández de Medrano died around 1616 and was buried in the family chapel at the Monastery of San Juan de Acre in Salinas de Añana . The Fernández de Medrano family funded the restoration of the collateral chapel at the Monastery of San Juan de Acre in Salinas de Añana, which housed their family burial site and displayed the family coat of arms.

[ 2 ] Siblings [ edit ] In the prologue of the Sumario , Licenciado Salinas mentions the brothers of Tomás Fernández de Medrano: The neighborhood I have with the lordship and lords of Valdeosera and having seen the archives of their antiquities and closely touched the virtue and nobility of all in general and in particular of His Grace Tomás Fernández de Medrano and three soldier brothers that I have known and know in the service of His Majesty (one who died in the expedition to England, another who is a captain of Spanish Infantry and another ensign, of whose value and qualities we have such great proofs).

[ 45 ] Lazaro Fernández de Medrano [ edit ] His brother Lázaro served in the military as an ensign. Lázaro Fernández de Medrano, a resident of Entrena , was registered on May 1, 1596 in the land of Valdeosera, from the Velilla branch, Lords of that town.

[ 2 ] Francisco Fernández de Medrano [ edit ] Tomas had a second brother named Francisco Fernández de Medrano, lord and divisero of Regajal, resident and regidor of Logroño , who fought during the French Wars of Religion under Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma . Francisco Fernández de Medrano married María Ana de Espinosa. Captain Francisco Fernández de Medrano was registered in the census of divisional knights as a captain, and neighbor of Entrena, registered on 1 May 1596, Divisa de Regajal.

[ 2 ] Two sons of the latter are also registered on 1 May 1614: "Don Diego Fernández de Medrano y Espinosa and Don Francisco Fernández de Medrano y Espinosa, his legitimate sons and of María Ana de Espinosa, his wife, Lords of the said Solar and Divisa de Regajal." In 1607, Diego Fernández de Medrano y Espinosa was appointed chaplain of honor, judge of the royal chapel, administrator and deputy of the Royal Hospital of the court and even testamentary executor of Margaret of Austria, Queen of Spain .

[ 2 ] In 1693, Francisco's descendant, Diego Fernández de Medrano y Zapata , a native of Sojuela and resident of Logroño , lord and divisero of Regajal, [ 63 ] Knight of the Order of Calatrava , became the Governor of the Province of Carrión, valley of Atlixco in Puebla , with his seat in the city of Atlixco .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] He was the son of Juan Fernández de Medrano, a member of the Holy Office in Logroño, deputy and lord of the Solar de Regajal, [ 66 ] and Francisca de Zapata y Medrano, who was a resident of Calahorra in La Rioja.

[ 65 ] Testimony of Pedro Fernández Navarrete [ edit ] The licenciado Pedro Fernández Navarrete provided testimony in the file of Ana María Fernández de Medrano y Sandoval, daughter of Tomás Fernández de Medrano. In his testimony, Navarrete not only provides information about Tomás and his brother's councilorship but also adds that: His brother Don Francisco Fernández de Medrano is familiar with the Inquisition of Logroño and that in all serious matters of the Inquisition of that city, the said Captain Francisco is called upon as a qualified person (...) All those mentioned in question are considered principal people, nobles, and hidalgo, and that Captain Francisco de Medrano, who has been a councilman in the sons of the hidalgo estate in this city, is also held in this reputation. He is a brother from both father and mother to the aforementioned Tomás Fernández de Medrano.

[ 67 ] This testimony is from Pedro Fernández Navarrete, consultant of the Holy Office, canon of the Holy Church of Santiago el Real de Logroño (in 1593), and secretary of their Majesties (Isabel de Borbón and Felipe IV) and of their Highnesses the Infante Don Carlos and the Cardinal Infante.

[ 67 ] In the lists of councilors published by José María Bañuelos, a "Captain Francisco de Medrano" appears as a yearly councilor in 1606, another "Captain Medrano" in 1612, 1615, and 1628.

[ 68 ] Diego de Medrano [ edit ] Tomas had a brother named Diego de Medrano , Squadron General and famous Captain and innovator of the Spanish Galleys, he led the Spanish Empire to victory in the conquest of the Azores and was appointed by King Philp II of Spain to command the São João galleys of Portugal during the 1588 invasion of England with the Spanish Armada .

[ 69 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "Tomás Fernández Medrano | Real Academia de la Historia" .

dbe.rah.es . Retrieved 12 November 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab Tellez, Diego (1 January 2015).

"Tomás y Juan Fernández de Medrano: una saga camerana a fines del s. XVI y comienzos del s. XVII" .

Berceo .

^ a b c Medrano, Juan Fernandez de (1602).

República Mista (in Spanish). Impr. Real. p. 160.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Tomás Fernández de Medrano, consejero y secretario de Estado y Guerra de los Duques de Saboya, divisero del Solar de Valdeosera, por D. Luis Pinillos Lafuente, divisero de Valdeosera.

https://cuadernosdeayala.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/CAyala-87.pdf ^ " López de Medrano family heraldry genealogy Coat of arms López de Medrano ". Heraldrys Institute of Rome. Retrieved 4 October 2023.

^ Proyectos, HI Iberia Ingeniería y.

"Historia Hispánica" .

historia-hispanica.rah.es .

^ Hernández, Santiago Martínez (2020).

https://www.jstor.org/stable/27028213 "Between Court and Village: The Evolution of Aristocratic Spaces in Early Modern Spain". Renaissance and Reformation / Renaissance et Réforme. 43 (4): 19–54. ISSN 0034-429X.

^ The Pérez de Araciel de Alfaro by Manuel Luis Ruiz de Bucesta y Álvarez Member and Founding Partner of the ARGH Vice Director of the Asturian Academy of Heraldry and Genealogy Correspondent of the Belgian-Spanish Academy of History Pages 50-51 https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/3991718.pdf ^ "MEDRANO" .

Armorial.org (in French). 24 November 2015 . Retrieved 12 November 2023 .

^ "Escudo del apellido Medrano" .

www.plusesmas.com . Retrieved 12 November 2023 .

^ "Spain, Kingdom. A Very Noble, Ancient And Illustrious Solar Lordship A" .

eMedals . Retrieved 4 December 2024 .

^ " Although I do not do this often, I am always pleased to know about the good health of Your Majesty and my lady Doña Juana, whose hands I have kissed many times. When Her Highness the Infanta was married, she granted us, the Marquis and myself, the service of Doña Isabel de Sandoval. And Your Majesty will know that after her marriage was arranged and her betrothal was made, she became a widow before the marriage was consummated, and I am here trying to get His Majesty to grant her a certain amount that I leave her, so that she can marry again. And for all this we need the assistance of Your Majesty, whom I earnestly request to help her and her mother, who will see how much my intercession benefits them in this matter, because I owe them that for the kinship and love that I have for them. And Your Majesty should also remember that I have always wished to serve you and the obligations I have for this, as well as to command me in many things of your service, to which I will gladly attend.

". 40. Lerma a don Juan de Acuña, embajador en Saboya, 13 de junio de 1594, Ibídem ^ Carlos Manuel de Saboya to Giuseppe Acuña, Spanish ambassador to Savoy, Licenciado Salinas, Sumario..., 1601." ^ 15. El expediente se conserva en el A.H.N., Órdenes Militares-Casamiento-Montesa, Expediente 73.

^ "Provincial Historical Archive" .

^ Copia de algunos papeles ..., s. f., (1609).

^ 47. Véase Bracco, R., Il principe Giannandrea Doria: patriae libertatis conservator, conte di Loano, fondatore di S. Agostino, Genova: Scuola graf. opera SS. vergine di Pompei, 1960.

^ 49. Memorial de Tomás Fernández de Medrano, s. f. (1607), Copia de algunos papeles..., s. f. (1609).

^ 51. Memorial de Tomás Fernández de Medrano, s. f. (1607), Copia de algunos papeles...,
s. f. (1609) ^ 53. Duke of Savoy to the Count of Olivares, March 13, 1595, Licenciado Salinas, Sumario..., 1601.

^ a b c Nombramiento como secretario de Estado y Guerra , 1 May 1594, Licenciado Salinas, Sumario..., 1601 ^ 35. Grant from the Duke of Savoy, March 18, 1593, Licenciado Salinas, Sumario..., 1601.

^ a b c d e 80. Felipe III a Fr. Alofio de Vignancourt, 26 de julio de 1608, Copia de algunos papeles..., s. f. (1609) ^ 17. Understandably, his daughter Ana María also held the same position, in this case, in the household of Queen Isabel de Borbón. On this courtly feminine world, see LÓPEZ CORDÓN, M. V., 'Entre damas anda el juego: las camareras mayores de Palacio en la Edad Moderna' (The game is among ladies: the chief chambermaids of the Palace in the Modern Age), Cuadernos de Historia Moderna, Anexo II (2003), pp. 123-152..

^ 18. Felipe II a Catalina Micaela, 31 de enero de 1592, BOUZA, F. (ed.), Cartas de Felipe II a sus hijas, Madrid: Akal, 1998, p. 184.

^ a b c d e f Medrano, Juan Fernandez de (1602).

República Mista (in Spanish). Impr. Real.

^ 86. Duke of Savoy to Juan de Idiaquez, secretary to Philip II, September 29, 1593, Licenciado Salinas, Sumario..., 1601.

^ "(...) it makes me desire his growth very much. This, together with his being the brother of the secretary Tomás Fernández de Medrano, whom the Infanta my lady and I wish well and desire everything good for, leads me to request from Your Highness and from myself that the alcaidía of Los Arcos, which became vacant near Logroño, be made every possible effort to be appointed by His Majesty (in order to grant me a favor, and to them as well, who deserve it), and that I will value it to the degree that I value the offices that Your Highness does for my own things, from which I await the response" 88. Duke of Savoy to Juan de Idiaquez, secretary to Philip II, September 29, 1593, Licenciado Salinas, Sumario..., 1601 ^ 89. A.G.S., Libros-Registro del Consejo de Guerra, Libro 83, f. 192.

^ 55. Íñigo de Mendoza, embajador en Venecia a Felipe II, 23 de agosto de 1597, Ibídem ^ 69. Príncipe Manuel Filiberto al duque de Lerma, 8 de abril de 1606, Copia de algunos papeles..., s. f.(1609).

^ Prince Manuel Filiberto to the Duke of Lerma, April 8, 1606, Copy of Some Papers..., undated (1609).

^ 44. Duque de Saboya a Clemente VIII, 4 de noviembre de 1595, Licenciado Salinas, Sumario..., 1601.

^ 63. Duque de Saboya a Tomás Fernández de Medrano, 9 de octubre de 1598, Licenciado Salinas, Sumario..., 1601.

^ 80. Felipe III a Fr. Alofio de Vignancourt, 26 de julio de 1608, Copia de algunos papeles..., s. f. (1609).

^ 9 de octubre de 1603, A.G.S., Consejo y Juntas de Hacienda, Leg. 430, exp. 17.

^ 67. 10 of August of 1607, A.G.S., Consejo y Juntas de Hacienda, Leg. 473, exp. 13.

^ Corella, Pilar (1992).

"Aportaciones a la "Descripción del Gran Priorato", de Domingo de Aguirre" (PDF) .

Anales Toledanos (29): 133– 181.

ISSN 0538-1983 .

^ 70. Claretta, C., Prince Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy at the Court of Spain. Historical Studies on the Reign of Carlo Emanuele I, Turin: Stabilimento di G. Civelli, 1872. DANNA, C., (ed.), Unpublished Letters of the Celebrated Author of Ragione di Stato Giovanni Botero, Turin: G. Derossi, 1880, ANSALDI, C., “Giovanni Botero with the Savoy Princes in Spain”, in Bolletino Storico Bibliografico Subalpino 35 (1933), pp. 321-340 ^ Del Río Barredo, M. J., “The journey of the princes of Savoy to the court of Felipe III (1603-1606)”, in Bianchi, P., and Clotilde Gentile, L., The Affirmation of the Savoy Court. Dynasties, powers, elites in Piedmont and Savoy between the late Middle Ages and the early modern era, Turin: Zamorani, 2006, pp. 407-434.

^ 71. Prince Manuel Filiberto to the Duke of Cea, July 10, 1606, Copy of some papers..., undated (1609).

^ 68. Breve de Nuestro Santísimo Padre Paulo PP. V. en confirmación de los privilegios de la Orden de San Juan de Jerusalén, Roma, 1605, Biblioteca Nacional de España, VE/54/67, Sala Cervantes, Fondo Antiguo.

^ 76. Copia de algunos papeles..., s. f. (1609) "Because their ancestors and relatives, and those of Don Tomás Fernández de Medrano, a knight of the Order of Saint John, lord of the town and estate of Valdeosera, and secretary of the Serene Prince Grand Prior, by His Majesty's command, made and founded this said convent, where the said secretary and his ancestors are buried in the side chapel of the main chapel and where they have their coat of arms, and seeing that the religion of Saint John and the Grand Priors have completely abandoned the protection of this said convent of San Juan de Acre and that the church, house and walls of it have fallen (due to age and antiquity), with the help and favor of their relatives, they have made the said church of stone again... considering the great good that the said secretary has done to the said convent, all four said prioress and nuns, together and unanimously in one voice, being as they are in their chapter and meeting, which they have held for the said purpose, named and appointed as patron of this said convent and church and house of the lord Saint John of Acre, with everything annexed and belonging to it in the temporal sense, to the said lords Don Tomás Fernández de Medrano and Doña Isabel de Sandoval, his wife, and to their heirs and successors, succeeding each other, so that as such patrons they may do and dispose of all things annexed and concerning the said monastery and house and its goods in the temporal sense, as said above, as the said prioress and nuns could and as if it were their own property.

^ 76. Copia de algunos papeles..., s. f. (1609) ^ a b c Salinas, Licenciado.

Sumario de la Memorable y Santa Batalla de Clavijo: Cierto y Verdadero Origen y Antigüedad del Señorío y Señores de la Villa, Solar y Divisas de Valdeosera . Madrid: Pedro Madrigal, 1601.

^ "Las Divisas – Solar de Valdeosera" .

^ a b "Solar de Valdeosera" .

^ "What to see in San Román de Cameros, La Rioja | Senditur.com Paths, Routes and Tourism" .

www.senditur.com . Retrieved 31 August 2024 .

^ a b Medrano Ceniceros, Diego; Coloma y Escolano, Pedro (1659–1661).

"Fama heroyca, y voladora del Excelentissimo Señor Don Luis Mendez de Haro, Conde Duque de Olibares, Marques del Carpio, Cavallerizo mayor, y Comendador mayor de la Orden de Alcantra, y Columna, en la que descansa la Magestad de Phelipe Quarto de las Españas el peso del Govierno de sus Reynos, &c. : dedicado a Pedro Coloma, Cavallero de la Orden de Santiago, del Consejo de su Magestad, en el Real de Indias, Secretario de estado, y de la Conferencia general de la paz de los Principes christianos, y Señor de la Villa de Choças, y otros, &/ por Don Diego de Medrano Zenizeros, Clerigo Presbitero, señor de la Villa de Sojuela, de la Villa, y Solar de Valdeosera, de la Torre, y Casa de la Vega en Rioja, y del Palacio de Entrena, & c." Biblioteca Universitat Jaume I. FR-MS9 A .

^ Valdosera: The Solar of the Thirteen Divisions – Representations of its Coat of Arms Monday, May 29, 2017 ^ Linares, Lidwine (2013), Rodríguez, Teresa; Raynié, Florence (eds.), "Los santos matamoros en la memoria de las ciudades: la celebración de un origen mítico" , Dire, taire, masquer les origines dans la péninsule Ibérique: Du Moyen-Âge au Siècle d’Or , Méridiennes (in Spanish), Toulouse: Presses universitaires du Midi, pp.

63– 83, ISBN 978-2-8107-0960-1 , retrieved 24 November 2024 ^ "Sancho de Tejada | Real Academia de la Historia" .

dbe.rah.es . Retrieved 12 November 2023 .

^ a b 24. Licenciado Salinas, Sumario de la Memorable y santa batalla de Clavijo, cierto y verdadero origen y antigüedad del Señorío y señores de la villa, solar y divisas de Valdeosera, Madrid: Pedro Madrigal, 1601.

^ "Los señorios en la Rioja en el siglo XVIII" [The lords in La Rioja in the 18th century] (PDF) .

www.gomezurdanez.com (in Spanish).

^ Fernández de Medrano, Juan (1602).

"Republica mista" .

Republica Mista (in Spanish).

^ Fernández de Medrano, Juan (1602).

"Republica mista, dirigida a D. Francisco de Sandoval Duque de Lerma, ... Parte primera" .

Biblioteca del Banco de España 2019. Signatura: FEV-AV-M-00563 (in Spanish).

^ Fernández de Medrano, Juan (1602).

Republica mista... / por Don Iuan Fernandez de Medrano... ; parte primera . En Madrid : en la Imprenta Real : por Iuan Flamenco, 1602.

^ "Inventarios y Bibliotecas del Siglo de Oro - Ficha de edición" .

www.bidiso.es . Retrieved 18 March 2025 .

^ "Republica mista Madrid en laImprenta Real,porjuan Flamenco1602 | Biblioteca Gondomariensi" .

inventarios.realbiblioteca.es . Retrieved 18 March 2025 .

^ "Republica Mista" .

granatensis.ugr.es . Retrieved 18 March 2025 .

^ 105. Copia de algunos papeles..., s. f., (1609).

^ La Philosophia nella Grande Galleria  | Erika Guadagnin: Capitol IV.  Philosophia Rationalis Naturalis Moralis: the catalog of the 4th archive p.  179-501 https://books.openedition.org/ledizioni/16875?lang=en ^ He took possession of the Divisa Regajal on May 10, 1664 (S.V., B.20, fol. 123 vo)(7).

^ Diaz, Daniel (4 July 2024).

"El Estado sale de compras en Fernando Durán" .

ARS Magazine (in Spanish) . Retrieved 1 September 2024 .

^ a b Tomás Fernández de Medrano, Counselor and Secretary of State and War for the Dukes of Savoy, Divisero of the Solar de Valdeosera.

by D. Luis Pinillos Lafuente, divisero of  Valdeosera page 29.

https://cuadernosdeayala.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/CAyala-87.pdf ^ Don Juan Fernández de Medrano took possession of the Divisa de Regajal on 13 June  1596 (Serie II, Becerro 1, folio 80).

^ a b 93. Testimonio del licenciado P. Fernando Navarrete, A.H.N., Órdenes Militares-Casamiento-Montesa, Expediente 73.

^ 91. BAÑUELOS MARTÍNEZ, J. M., El concejo logroñés en los siglos de Oro, Logroño: IER, 1987.

^ "La Costa da Morte y la Armada Invencible - Adiante Galicia" (in Spanish). 12 February 2015 . Retrieved 2 September 2024 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tomás_Fernández_de_Medrano&oldid=1306000515 " Categories : 16th-century Spanish nobility People from La Rioja 16th-century births 16th-century Spanish writers 17th-century Spanish writers Spanish Roman Catholic writers 16th-century Roman Catholics 17th-century Roman Catholics Spanish Golden Age 1616 deaths Spanish politicians 17th-century Spanish people 17th-century Spanish philosophers 17th-century Spanish theologians Spanish political philosophers Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2023 Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 09:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tomás Fernández de Medrano Add languages Add topic

